The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



In a surprise move, Vladimir Putin announced that he was withdrawing the bulk of Russian forces from Syria, six months after he sent them there to support his beleaguered ally, Bashar al-Assad. The same day, UN-chaired peace talks aimed at bringing an end to the five-year war began in Geneva. A ceasefire that came into force three weeks ago has largely held. See article.

Gunmen attacked three hotels in Grand Bassam, a seaside town 40km from the capital of Ivory Coast. The attack, which left 18 people dead, was claimed by al-Qaeda’s north Africa branch.

South Africa’s deputy finance minister, Mcebisi Jonas, claimed that he was offered the job of finance minister by members of the Gupta family, who have close ties to President Jacob Zuma. The Guptas, who own a wide range of businesses, have denied this.

An audit of Nigeria’s state-owned oil company found that in 2014 it failed to pay $16 billion in oil receipts to the national government.

Another one bites the dust

Marco Rubio pulled out of the Republican presidential nomination race after coming a poor second to Donald Trump in the primary in Florida, Mr Rubio’s home state. John Kasich won the contest in Ohio, his home state, and remains in the race, as does Ted Cruz. On the Democratic side Hillary Clinton thrashed Bernie Sanders in the week’s primaries. See here and here.

Mr Trump’s campaign was dogged again by racially tinged clashes at his rallies. He had to cancel an event in Chicago after protesters fought with his supporters. Mr Trump said later that if the Republican hierarchy tried to wrest the nomination away from him at July’s convention there would be “riots” in the streets.

Barack Obama nominated Merrick Garland, a federal appeals-court judge, to replace the late Antonin Scalia on the Supreme Court. Senate Republicans say they won’t confirm his nomination; they want the vacancy to be filled by the next president, who won’t take office until January. See article.

The frontman



Myanmar’s parliament elected Htin Kyaw as the country’s next president, the first civilian leader after more than 50 years of control by the army. He is close to Aung San Suu Kyi, whose National League for Democracy won elections in November. Ms Suu Kyi is barred by the constitution from taking the job, but says she will be the effective ruler. See article.

A court in North Korea sentenced an American student, Otto Warmbier, to 15 years’ hard labour for crimes against the state. He was found guilty of trying to steal a propaganda banner from a hotel.

At the end of its meeting, China’s rubber-stamp parliament, the National People’s Congress, approved a new five-year plan for the country’s development, which calls for average annual GDP growth of at least 6.5%. The prime minister, Li Keqiang, told reporters that China would press ahead with “structural reforms” to boost market forces and said the government would try to find new jobs for those laid off.

Thousands of miners in the north-eastern Chinese city of Shuangyashan staged protests over unpaid wages. The state-owned company they work for has suffered because of falling demand for its coal as China’s economy slows. See article.

Taiwan’s president-elect, Tsai Ing-wen, named a former minister of finance, Lin Chuan, as the country’s next prime minister. Ms Tsai and Mr Lin will take office on May 20th when President Ma Ying-jeou’s term ends.

Migrant-crisis talks

Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, and her European Union counterparts met to discuss a deal with Turkey, the main transit country for migrants making their way to Greece and beyond. Agreement is near, but controversial: Turkey must take back migrants from Greece; in return the EU must take an equal number from refugee camps in Turkey. In Germany anti-immigrant parties made significant gains in local elections. See article.

A bomb in Ankara killed 37 people, the third attack in Turkey’s capital within five months. A Kurdish militant group claimed responsibility for the attack. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president, called for terrorism to be redefined. There should be no difference, he said, between “a terrorist holding a gun or a bomb and those who use their position or pen to support terror”.

A shoot-out took place at a flat in Brussels, Belgium’s capital, as police hunted for suspected terrorists. The raid was linked to the search for the remaining perpetrators of the Paris attacks last November by Islamic State, which killed 130 people. Four police officers were shot and wounded in the exchange of fire and one suspect, an Algerian living illegally in Belgium, was killed. Two other suspects escaped.

The introduction of a new tax on sugary drinks was the highlight of the British government’s budget. A 330ml can of Coke exceeds by a sixth the recommended daily amount of sugar for a child. Although a similar tax in Mexico has had a noticeable effect on sales, research suggests the benefits in Britain may be bittersweet, as such drinks make up less than 20% of Britons’ added-sugar intake. See article.

They’ve had enough



Protesters in cities across Brazil demanded the impeachment of the president, Dilma Rousseff; at least 500,000 people took to the streets of São Paulo alone. Ms Rousseff’s Workers’ Party and its coalition allies are enmeshed in a bribery scandal and the country is going through the worst recession since the 1930s. But in a defiant mood, Ms Rousseff appointed Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a former president, to her cabinet, meaning any charges he faces can be tried only in the supreme court.

America loosened restrictions on travel to, and transactions with, Cuba ahead of Barack Obama’s visit. Americans will now be permitted to go to Cuba on their own, rather than as part of an organisation for educational purposes.

Colombia’s president, Juan Manuel Santos, and the leader of the FARC guerrilla group, Rodrigo Londoño, said they will miss a self-imposed deadline of March 23rd for signing a peace agreement. The postponement means that the deal will not be signed when Mr Obama is in Havana, where the peace talks are taking place.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21695093-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

Anbang, a Chinese insurance firm, made a $13 billion rival bid for Starwood Hotels, which counts the Sheraton chain among its assets and has already agreed to a takeover from Marriott. Also this week, Anbang made a $6.5 billion offer for Strategic Hotels, which owns the Fairmont in Chicago and 15 other luxury hotels. It is the latest move by a big Chinese company eager to expand abroad as the economy at home cools down.

Not so valiant

Shares in Valeant, a troubled drugs company, fell by half after it warned of a potential default on some of its $30 billion debt-pile and slashed its outlook. The company came under pressure last year when, among other things, it jacked up the price of two treatments for heart disease. Prosecutors and the Securities and Exchange Commission are looking into a variety of its business practices. Last August Valeant’s stockmarket value was $90 billion; it is now $11 billion. See article.

The Bank of Japan left its benchmark interest rate on hold at -0.1%. Haruhiko Kuroda, the central bank’s governor, defended negative interest rates as a useful tool in the battle against deflation, and even suggested that the rate could be brought down to -0.5% if the economy faced headwinds from a financial crisis. At its policy meeting, the Federal Reserve took a cautious view about when it might next raise rates, saying a decision would be based on “realised and expected economic conditions”.

Mario Draghi’s remark that he did “not anticipate” making a cut to interest rates again sent markets into a tizz. The president of the European Central Bank expressed his opinion after introducing a bigger-than-expected package of stimulus measures on March 10th, such as reducing its deposit rate to -0.4% and raising the amount of bonds it buys each month in its quantitative-easing programme from €60 billion ($66 billion) to €80 billion.

Anheuser-Busch InBev issued €13.3 billion ($15 billion) worth of bonds, the proceeds of which will help fund its acquisition of SABMiller. The expansion of the ECB’s bond-buying programme caused a rush of euro-denominated offers this week as companies sought to take advantage of super-low interest rates.

Bottoming floors

Oil markets reacted positively to the International Energy Agency’s comment that prices “may have bottomed out”. A few days later the Qatari oil ministry said that a preliminary agreement between most big oil producers to freeze output had “put a floor under the price”.

The London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse formally announced their intention to merge, which would boost their businesses in derivatives, clearing houses and other financial services. The combined company will be based in London, but the LSE’s chief executive, Xavier Rolet, will step down to make way for Carsten Kengeter, the German bourse’s CEO. ICE, the owner of the New York Stock Exchange, is still pondering whether to make a counterbid for the LSE.

Atiur Rahman resigned as the governor of Bangladesh’s central bank following the electronic theft of $101m from the country’s official account at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which holds the deposits of many of the world’s central banks. It is one of the biggest cyber-heists to date and came to light via press reports in the Philippines, where the criminals who appropriated the money are thought to be based.



Campari, an Italian drinks company, agreed to buy the maker of Grand Marnier in a deal valued at €684m ($761m). Campari, best known for its red-coloured bottled spirit, also owns the Cinzano, Wild Turkey and Skyy Vodka brands. It is taking an initial 28.8% stake in Grand Marnier from the family that controls the company with a view to buying the remaining shares.

Chalk one up for humans. Lee Sedol of South Korea won a match in the Asian board game of Go against Google’s DeepMind AlphaGo machine. He lost the other four, however, in a five-round contest that pitted Mr Lee against an artificial-intelligent system designed by Google’s engineers. Go, a more complex game than chess stretching back thousands of years, was seen as the ultimate challenge for the AI upstarts.

Back-seat driver

The development of self-driving cars entered the slow lane this week when Missy Cummings, a robotics expert, told a US Senate committee that autonomous vehicles were “absolutely not” ready for widespread use. The debate shifted gear when, last month, a Google prototype struck a bus. That low-speed ding might put a dent in Google’s hopes for computers to overtake humans as the primary drivers of cars.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21695094-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21695092-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




Russian foreign policy: A hollow superpower

Barack Obama visits Cuba: Cubama

America’s primaries: What now?

Britain’s budget: The fiddler’s charter

Pandemics: An ounce of prevention





Articles Sections Next

Russian foreign policy

A hollow superpower

Don’t be fooled by Syria. Vladimir Putin’s foreign policy is born of weakness and made for television

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



JUBILANT crowds waved Russian flags; homecoming pilots were given fresh-baked bread by women in traditional dress. Judging by the pictures on television, Vladimir Putin won a famous victory in Syria this week. After his unexpected declaration that the campaign is over, Mr Putin is claiming credit for a ceasefire and the start of peace talks. He has shown off his forces and, heedless of civilian lives, saved the regime of his ally, Bashar al-Assad (though Mr Assad himself may yet prove dispensable). He has “weaponised” refugees by scattering Syrians among his foes in the European Union. And he has outmanoeuvred Barack Obama, who has consistently failed to grasp the enormity of the Syrian civil war and the threat it poses to America’s allies in the Middle East and Europe.

Look closer, however, and Russia’s victory rings hollow. Islamic State (IS) remains. The peace is brittle. Even optimists doubt that diplomacy in Geneva will prosper (see article). Most important, Mr Putin has exhausted an important tool of propaganda. As our briefing explains, Russia’s president has generated stirring images of war to persuade his anxious citizens that their ailing country is once again a great power, first in Ukraine and recently over the skies of Aleppo. The big question for the West is where he will stage his next drama.

Make Russia great again

Mr Putin’s Russia is more fragile than he pretends. The economy is failing. The rise in oil prices after 2000, when Mr Putin first became president, provided $1.1 trillion of windfall export revenues for him to spend as he wished. But oil prices are three-quarters down from their peak. Russian belts have tightened further because of sanctions imposed after Mr Putin attacked Ukraine. Living standards have fallen for the past two years and are falling still. The average salary in January 2014 was $850 a month; a year later it was $450.

Mr Putin was losing legitimacy even before the economy shrivelled. Many Russians took to the streets in the winter of 2011-12 to demand that their country become a modern state with contested elections. Mr Putin responded by annexing Crimea and vowing to restore Russian greatness after the Soviet collapse—“the greatest geopolitical catastrophe” of the 20th century, he called it. Part of his plan has been to modernise the armed forces, with a $720 billion weapons-renewal programme in 2010; part to use the media to turn Russia into a fortress against a hostile West; and part to intervene abroad.

With action in Ukraine and Syria, he has made it appear that Russia is the equal—and rival—of America. That is not only popular among ordinary Russians but also contains a serious message. Mr Putin fears that Russia, in its weakened state, could be vulnerable to what he sees as America’s impulse to subvert regimes using the language of universal democracy. In both Ukraine and Syria, he believes, America recklessly encouraged the overthrow of governments without being able to contain the chaos that followed. He intervened partly because he fears that the revolutions there must be seen to fail—or Russia itself could one day suffer a revolution of its own.

So far his plans have worked. Beguiled by a pro-Kremlin broadcast media, ordinary Russians have been willing to trade material comfort for national pride. Mr Putin’s popularity ratings remain above 80%, far higher than most Western leaders’. But the narcotic of adventurism soon wears off. Since last October, the share of voters who feel the country is heading in the right direction has fallen from 61% to 51%. Russians tired of Ukraine; now Syria has peaked. Sooner or later, the cameras will crave action. Ukrainians are petrified once again.

What does this mean for the West? So far America, at least, has misunderstood Mr Putin’s aims. In the autumn Mr Obama predicted that Syria would be a Russian “quagmire”. Speaking to the Atlantic recently, he argued that Russia’s repeated resort to force is a sign of weakness. That is true, but not (as Mr Obama suggests) because it shows that Mr Putin cannot achieve his foreign-policy goals by persuasion. For him, military action is an end in itself. He needs footage of warplanes to fill his news bulletins. There will be no quagmire in Syria because the Kremlin is not in the business of nation-building.

Mr Obama thinks Russia should be left to its inevitable decline. Like a naughty child, Mr Putin is rewarded by American attentiveness, he believes. Yet, Syria shows how, when Mr Obama stands back in the hope that regional leaders will stop free-riding on American power and work together for the collective good, the vacuum is filled by disrupters like Iran and IS, and by Russia in its search for the next source of propaganda.

So the West needs to be prepared. It is welcome that America is strengthening its forces in Europe. NATO’s European members should show similar mettle by putting troops in the Baltic states—which will require a change of heart in countries, such as Italy, that see any display of resolve as needlessly provoking Russia. If there is trouble, NATO and the EU will need to respond immediately to show that Russia cannot prise open the collective-security guarantee that lies at the heart of NATO.

Carry on Kiev

The biggest test will be Ukraine—a focus of Russian attention and also the country most like Russia itself. If Ukraine can become a successful European state, it will show Russians that they have a path to liberal democracy. If, by contrast, Ukraine becomes a failed state, it will strengthen the Kremlin’s argument that Russia belongs to its own “orthodox” culture and that liberal democracy has nothing to teach it.

Alas, America and the EU have Kiev fatigue. Instead of doing everything in their power to help Ukraine, they expect Ukrainian politicians to prove that they are capable of reform on their own. That is a mistake. They should be offering financial help and technical advice. They should help root out corruption. And they should be patient.

Eventually, deep Russian decline will limit its aggression. For the time being, however, a nuclear-armed Mr Putin is bent on imposing himself in the old Soviet sphere of influence. In Mr Obama’s last year as president, Mr Putin, fresh from Syrian success, could yet test the West one more time.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695003-dont-be-fooled-syria-vladimir-putins-foreign-policy-born-weakness-and-made/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Barack Obama visits Cuba

Cubama

The United States and Latin America can profitably draw closer, but only if the next president agrees

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



CAUTION has been a watchword in the foreign policy of Barack Obama. But in one part of the world he has been adventurous. For any of the nine preceding American presidents, his planned visit to the Cuba of Raúl and Fidel Castro, on March 21st and 22nd, would have been unthinkable (see article). It crowns a bold gambit in which Mr Obama has restored diplomatic relations, frozen for 54 years, and begun to loosen the economic embargo against the island. He is betting that engagement with one of America’s neighbours will do more than isolation to bring its Communist regime to an end.

Moreover, engagement with Cuba will lance a boil that has poisoned relations between the United States and the whole of Latin America. After a period in which China appeared to be displacing America in what some once called its backyard, those links could become increasingly warm and mutually profitable—so long as the next president seizes the opportunity. On the evidence of America’s rancorous election campaign, there is a danger that he or she will not (see article).

How to change Cuba

Mr Obama’s bet is the right one. The American embargo against Cuba is an exercise in futility. It is a cold-war anachronism that hurt Cubans (and Americans) rather than the Castros, who use it to justify their police state and as an excuse for the penury inflicted on the island by communism.

The rapprochement comes as Cuba is changing, albeit at the pace of one of those patched-up 1950s cars that delight tourists to the island. Thanks to reforms Raúl Castro started when he took over as president from his elder brother in 2008, some 1m Cubans (one in five of the workforce) are members of an incipient private sector. Revenue from tourism, some of which goes to small businesses, and remittances from the diaspora are growing, just as aid from Venezuela is diminishing.

Officially, Mr Castro’s reforms are an “updating of socialism”, not an embrace of capitalism, let alone democracy. Mr Obama’s critics conclude that he has given the Castros a free pass. Yet Cuba was never about to become a democracy overnight. Because the regime remains entrenched, political change is more likely to come gradually and from within. In 2018 Mr Castro intends to stand down as president. His likely successor, Miguel Díaz-Canel, was born after the Castros’ revolution in 1959. Cubans will judge him on his ability to improve their lives, which will require more economic reforms. The hope must be that, as Cuba becomes more prosperous and connected, political liberalisation will follow.

Engagement can accelerate this process. Mr Obama is a powerful symbol among the many Afro-Cubans of the opportunities offered by freedom. Contact between two close and related nations through commerce, tourism and the reconnection of families will only feed the desire for change.

There is another motive for Mr Obama’s opening to Cuba. The embargo has been a symbolic irritant in relations between the United States and its neighbours. Over the past 20 years or so, Latin American politicians of all stripes have come to oppose it. All the countries in the region have diplomatic and commercial ties with Cuba. The embargo has been taken as a symbol of American imperialism. Even many Latin American conservatives resent it.

In recent years the United States and Latin America have in some ways drifted apart. Washington has other preoccupations, from the Middle East to Asia. Latin American countries profited from China’s appetite for their minerals, fuels and foodstuffs. The political cycle brought to power a crop of left-wing, anti-American leaders who saw in China an attractive alternative to the rigours of the IMF and the sometimes hypocritical lectures on drugs and human rights from Washington.

This is bad for America. Although no region commands less attention in the foreign policy of the United States than Latin America, no region is more important to the daily lives of Americans. The two halves of the Americas are linked by trade, investment, tourism, family and remittances. Latin America takes a quarter of American exports, a similar proportion to Asia. Mexico, along with Chile and Peru, is a member of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, Mr Obama’s attempt to set the rules for trade and investment in the 21st century.

The opening to Cuba can help heal the rift. It comes as the Latin American left is in retreat, because of the commodity bust and its own mistakes. Mauricio Macri, Argentina’s new president whom Mr Obama will visit after Havana, represents a pragmatic centre-right, well disposed to America.

In his second term Mr Obama has become enthusiastic about the gains from closer ties with Latin America. The administration has launched an effort to reduce drug-related violence in Central America. It has helped Colombia’s government in long-running peace talks with the FARC guerrillas, which take place in Havana. Though a final agreement will not be reached before the March 23rd deadline set by both sides, there may be a symbolic handshake between them while Mr Obama is there. As with Cuba, immigration reform, albeit thwarted, and the downplaying of the failed war on drugs assuage long-standing Latin American grievances.

Don’t stop thinking about tomorrow

There is a risk that Mr Obama’s successor will take a different path. The obvious threat comes from Donald Trump, the Republican front-runner, whose proposal to build a wall along the border, and demand that Mexico pay for it, is an insult to one of America’s most important trade and political partners. The bombastic billionaire’s nativism has influenced other Republican contenders to harden their already uncompromising policies on immigration. The Democrats are less xenophobic than Mr Trump but are tempted by his protectionism.

Mr Obama’s diplomacy leaves a choice for the next president: turn your back on Latin America and feed its resentments and failings, or help it become America’s front yard, a region of increasingly prosperous democracies linked by economic and political ties. The visit to Havana is a welcome step down this path.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695001-united-states-and-latin-america-can-profitably-draw-closer-only-if-next-president/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

America’s primaries

What now?

The Republican Party has run out of good options

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



THE primaries that took place on March 15th were meant to bring clarity to the race for the White House. Although they did not disappoint, neither did they reassure (see article). For the Republican Party, this is the moment when a driver realises that a crash is coming and it is too late to brake. Their opponents have, barring disaster, picked Hillary Clinton to be the Democratic nominee and she is now free to concentrate on the general election. Donald Trump, meanwhile, is likely to scrap and bluster his way to the nomination before the convention, or to go into it with a commanding lead.

For the party of Lincoln this is a disaster. Mr Trump is disliked so intensely by so many Americans that the damage to the party wrought by his nomination could go far beyond failing to win the White House, to hurting Republicans’ chances in House and Senate races. That is why the Republican establishment (or what is left of it) is frenziedly searching for ways, from a brokered convention to supporting a third-party conservative, to stop the man who has mesmerised their party. Unfortunately, there are no good options.

All steamed up

If Mr Trump accumulates the 1,237 delegates that he needs to command an absolute majority in the convention, he will have won fair and square. There will be much to mourn, but little responsible conservatives can do.

The complications begin if the Republicans find themselves in a contested convention. On paper, the rules are simple: on the first ballot, almost all delegates are supposed to observe the preference of the primaries or caucuses in their state. If that round is inconclusive, they can then vote as they choose.

In practice this is a recipe for a savage battle. Aware that his lead could go up in a puff of smoke as delegates desert him in a second round of voting, Mr Trump this week warned of riots if he is deprived of the nomination. Halfway between a prediction and a threat, Mr Trump’s words are one more reason he does not deserve the presidency.

But he is right that the taint of unfairness could poison the nomination. In a contested convention the delegates’ individual actions are central: they not only select the nominee, but they also vote freely on changes to the rules—which they can skew to favour their personal choice. So who picks the delegates? Rules differ from state to state, but the answer is, largely, the very establishment that electors have rejected. As if that weren’t complicated enough, the parties took steps in the 1960s to bind the conventions more closely to the results of the votes in primaries. Were the party to anoint anyone other than Mr Trump or the second-placed Ted Cruz, a divisive ideologue who is detested by his colleagues in the Senate, it would cause outrage. And rightly so.

The hard truth for the Republican Party (and thus, in a two-party system, for America) is that the lack of good options reflects a deep internal schism. The coalition between business, evangelicals, defence hawks and blue-collar voters has broken apart. The anger Mr Trump taps into is not unique to America: from France to Germany to America, between a fifth and a quarter of the electorate are tempted by populist parties. But in Europe that energy is channelled into seats in parliament and possible coalition governments. In America, the pipework narrows to a party’s nominee and then the presidency.

That raises the stakes and makes a resolution harder. The Republican orthodoxy has no answer to the anger of Mr Trump’s supporters. The challenge goes deeper than one man. Republicans have a long journey ahead to work out what sort of party they want.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695038-republican-party-has-run-out-good-options-what-now/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Britain’s budget

The fiddler’s charter

George Osborne presents a sensibly small-bore budget to a nervy nation

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



THIS ought to have been the speech of his life: the first full budget of Britain’s first majority-Conservative government in nearly 20 years, without even the threat of a credible Labour opposition to hold him back. Previous chancellors of the exchequer have used such moments to redraw the fiscal contours of the country in bold new colours. Yet when George Osborne rose to set out his vision on March 16th, some of its contents seemed rather weedy: lower tolls on a bridge to Wales, an air-ambulance for Northern Ireland, repairs to the A66 trunk road from Workington to Scotch Corner.

Britain’s referendum in June on its EU membership—on which Mr Osborne’s own leadership prospects also hang—has put more ambitious reforms on hold, as the government does its best to win over waverers and shun controversy (see here and here). This was an intensely political budget of fixes and fiddles, with more tweaks than any budget in the modern era (see chart). For all that, it wasn’t too bad: Mr Osborne’s proposals, though designed primarily to woo Eurosceptic Tories and annex political ground abandoned by leftward-marching Labour, were for the most part prudent, if puny.

Big multinationals, already on board with the EU Remain campaign, will pay more tax, following the closure of various loopholes and a cap on how much debt-interest they can write off against their tax bills. Small firms, many of which lean towards the Leave side, will benefit from a measure that will lift many out of paying business rates and reduce the bill for others. The self-employed will pay lower national-insurance contributions. Easing the tax burden on small firms while reducing avoidance mixes economic logic with political cunning.

So does the continuation of Mr Osborne’s “devolution revolution”. Manchester, the most go-ahead of England’s regional cities, was already to get control of its health service next month; it will now run more of its criminal-justice system, too. New elected mayors were announced around England. A Bradford headmaster will lead a review of northern schools, to repeat the improvement seen in London. Manchester and Leeds will get a speedy new rail link. The English regions lean towards leaving the EU, so devolving power to them may win back votes—and satisfy one of Mr Osborne’s enduring aims.

The young, another neglected constituency, also received attention in what Mr Osborne repeatedly described as “a budget for the next generation”. It failed that test: Britain’s intergenerational inequality will be significantly narrowed only by a shake-up of the housing market and welfare system, sensitive targets beyond the scope of this tiptoeing budget. New savings accounts with state contributions to supplement young people’s retirement funds will complicate an already mind-boggling system (the accounts have three age requirements and variable tax treatments). But a giveaway to the under-40s was welcome from a party that has hitherto ruthlessly protected pensioners’ privileges while ignoring the young.

Hey, small spender

Mr Osborne’s move towards the centre went only so far. Cuts to disability benefits will raise almost enough money to pay for an increase in the personal tax-allowance, from which the middle class will benefit more than the poor. Richer households will gain the most from the subsidised savings accounts for the young, and from an increase in the already-generous annual tax-free savings limit. This budget was not progressive.

Nonetheless, Mr Osborne’s political instincts are leading him in a sensible economic direction. The budget was overcomplex (a mania for hypothecation means that school sports will be funded by a sugar levy), but its beneficiaries—small businesses, the young and the neglected Britons outside London—were deserving. Next year, supposing the EU referendum is safely won, Mr Osborne should take aim in the same direction, and with heavier fire.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695037-george-osborne-presents-sensibly-small-bore-budget-nervy-nation-fiddlers-charter/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Pandemics

An ounce of prevention

Crises of infectious diseases are becoming more common. The world should be better prepared

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



ONE of the sobering lessons of the Ebola crisis was how ill-prepared the world was for such a deadly disease. It is terrifying to reflect on how the virus’s advance was halted in the teeming city of Lagos thanks only to the heroism of a single doctor and because the place just happened to have the expertise needed to trace all of the first victim’s contacts. Today the world is facing a worrying outbreak of Zika virus, adding to a growing list of diseases that includes SARS, MERS and bird flu.

This is the new normal. New infectious diseases are becoming more common. With more people on the planet, more roads and flights connecting everyone, and greater contact between humans and animals, this is only to be expected. Over half of the 1,400 known human pathogens have their origins in animals such as pigs, bats, chickens and other birds.

Pandemics and pandemonium

When a new outbreak occurs, fear spreads even more rapidly than the virus. Politicians respond, rationally or not, with travel bans, quarantines or trade blocks. Airlines ground flights. Travellers cancel trips. Ebola has infected almost 30,000 people, killed more than 11,000 and cost more than $2 billion in lost output in the three hardest-hit countries. SARS infected 8,000 and killed 800; because it hit richer places, it cost more than $40 billion. Predicting these losses is hard, but a recent report on global health risks puts the expected economic losses from potential pandemics at around $60 billion a year.

As the threat grows, so does the case for beefing up defences against disease. America’s National Academy of Medicine suggests that just $4.5 billion a year (equivalent to about 3% of what rich countries spend on development aid) devoted to preparing for pandemics would make the world a lot safer. The money would strengthen public-health systems, improve co-ordination in an emergency and fund neglected areas of R&D.

Many of the investments to prepare for pandemics would bring broader benefits, too. Stronger public-health systems would help fight such diseases as tuberculosis, which reduces global GDP by $12 billion a year, and malaria, which takes an even bigger toll. But the priority should be to advance vaccines for diseases that are rare today, but which scientists know could easily become pandemics in the future: Lassa fever, say, Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever or Marburg.

Better sharing of data would help (see article). More important is funding and a review of who has liability if firms rush vaccines or drugs to market. The initial development and early-stage testing of vaccines for the most likely future pandemics would cost roughly $150m each. Drug firms have little incentive to invest in a vaccine that may never be used. For these firms even later-stage testing when a pandemic breaks out is tricky. The drug industry spent $1 billion on Ebola and took on liability risk, yet never made a profit. The same companies may not be so willing next time. To encourage drug firms to play their full part during an emergency, governments need to set out how they will share the burden.

Since the financial crisis, banks have been required to hold more capital in order to lower the risk of economic contagion. The world spends about $2 trillion annually on defence. Investing in health security is a similar form of insurance, but one with better returns.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695036-crises-infectious-diseases-are-becoming-more-common-world-should-be-better-prepared/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




Brexit, concussion, Turkey, online dating, Bernie Sanders, language: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

Brexit, concussion, Turkey, online dating, Bernie Sanders, language

Letters to the editor

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



Nothing compares to EU

Your leader suggested that “Scotland…is again agitating for a divorce” (“The real danger of Brexit”, February 27th). This is simply not the case: the nationalists are agitating, but Scotland is not. A YouGov poll in February this year showed that only 10% of Scots believe another referendum should be a priority for the next Scottish government, and that only 36% would support a referendum in the next five years. Even Brexit is not a valid reason to break up the United Kingdom. EU membership for a breakaway Scotland would be uncertain, and leaving the UK would make no economic sense.

Recent research by Scotland in Union shows that Scotland currently exports between three and four times as much to the rest of the UK as it does to elsewhere in the EU. In the event of Brexit, the risk of trade barriers between Scotland and the rest of the UK and the potential for reduced freedom of movement across the border, would support Scotland remaining within the UK.

ALASTAIR CAMERON

Director

Scotland in Union

Glasgow

Those in the “Out” camp should have no illusions that Britain will be better off on its own. Despite their noise, they have failed to understand the possibility of a vote to leave in England but a vote to stay in Scotland. If, as seems almost certain, the SNP continues to dominate the Scottish government after the parliamentary elections in Scotland in May, many of those who voted against independence in 2014 will vote in favour of it should another independence referendum take place. Scotland will then seek an independent future within the EU.

STEPHEN SMITH

Hawick, Scotland

I remain baffled that the political classes are not able to grasp that the overriding reason for disillusion among European citizens, evidenced inter alia by the rise of separatist movements in many countries—not just Britain—is its huge democratic deficit. For example, presidents of the European Union are not elected: they are appointed after political horse-trading. Imagine what would happen if the president of the United States were to be appointed without the American people having a say. David Cameron may have won a few benefits for the people of Britain but he missed the opportunity to start a process which would have given an effective democratic voice to the people of Europe.

TOM MOSS

Camberley, Surrey



As an undecided British voterI was interested to read your case for remaining in the EU (“The Brexit delusion”, February 27th). Did I understand correctly? However imperfect the current arrangement, if Britons voted to leave then those in charge of the EU would contrive to ensure that our lives on the outside would be more miserable than on the inside. Is this really supposed to win us over? Does the EU exist to serve the welfare of Europeans or just to perpetuate its own existence? I fear you may have inadvertently highlighted the strongest reason for getting out.

TIMO HANNAY

London





Knock knock

Your article on concussions in sport which seems tacitly to support the proposed ban on tackling in rugby for children, feels very out of line with your newspaper’s general ethos (“Schools and hard knocks”, March 5th). The Economist is generally wary of state intervention and is very quick to point out the law of unintended consequences.

I learned how to tackle safely at the age of eight. I am still playing full contact rugby union 30 years later. I attribute my longevity in part to the excellent coaching in my youth. Do you really expect that the generation of children who might be subjected to this ban on tackling will simply “figure out” how to tackle and be tackled (by larger, meaner chaps) when they turn 18 and graduate to the full contact game? Surely this is an unintended consequence which is worth pointing out.

JONATHAN GOODE

Director of Rugby

Bay Street Rugby Football Club

Toronto, Ontario





Turkish delight

* As the founder of the European Union affairs ministry that Charlemagne wrote about I couldn’t resist the urge to respond (February 20th). President Erdogan considered Turkey’s ambitions in the EU important and created the ministry to focus on the necessary reforms while trying to reduce the number of cabinet positions.



It is not Turkey’s fault that some in the country claim that the “EU’s name means betrayal”. Our European allies should understand that Turkey’s citizens will not allow their country to act as a bumper between the EU and the Middle East. Turkey is a democracy not a sultanate or kingdom and public opinion does matter. It is Turkish democracy and citizens of our country that have elected and re-elected Mr Erdogan and the Justice and Development Party (AKP). In comparison with some of the new members of the EU, Turkey is much more prepared to join the club.



Turkey is (and always has been) committed to increasing the living standards of its citizens by implementing the necessary EU reforms—even if some EU leaders choose to ignore this. Turkey may not be perfect but it is much better than when the AKP first came into power.



EGEMEN BAGIS

Former Minister of EU Affairs & Chief Negotiator of Turkey

Istanbul, Turkey





Where is the love

Free exchange discussed in depth the economics behind digital dating (February 13th) but did not mention any of the scientific studies on this topic. Online dating has shifted the ground for the entire romantic process, from selecting a partner to asking someone out. More than 10m Americans are estimated to date digitally, and as an industry in 2013 it reached $2 billion in revenue with over 2,500 dating sites in the United States.

Many seeking dates online are doomed from the start due to poorly chosen screen names, badly worded profiles and messages, all scientifically shown to be ineffective in attraction and persuasion. Using a little science they can settle on a screen name of proven attractiveness, add a slight head tilt to the main profile picture, balance the profile text to a 70:30 magic ratio of who one is to what one is looking for, all with humour and truth, and then see it all swiftly move from online chatting to meeting in person.

SAMEER CHAUDHRY

Assistant clinical professor of medicine

University of Texas



KHALID KHAN

Professor

University of London





* I was surprised the app Hinge was not mentioned in your article on online dating. As someone who has tried them all, Hinge is by far the best at selecting because it matches through friends of friends on Facebook. This ensures common interests and built-in background checks through shared acquaintances. It is also the only app where I’ve met a handful of suitors who work for your magazine.



HOLLY DUNLAP

London





Political indignation

* In “Slow Bern” (February 20th) you describe Bernie Sanders as “rickety”, have him speaking in a “croaky New York whine” while giving a “crotchety” speech to students at Morehouse College. Those of us in Vermont who have known Mr Sanders since the early 1980’s might describe his as energetic (he keeps up with those half his age during the rigors of a national campaign), bereft of the soothing accents of new presenters, and principled and trustworthy. His time as mayor of Burlington saw that city revitalised, its waterfront opened to the citizens, and its downtown pedestrian mall become a model for other cities.



Maybe not Noble prize sorts of actions but part of his consistent message: that government should work for people other than those in the top tier of wealth and income.



STUART FRIEDMAN

Montpelier, Vermont





Le ou la?

I thoroughly enjoyed your recent Johnson column about the demise of the circumflex (February 27th). It amazes me that a well-educated French-speaker can immediately tell from a few lines of an e-mail (or a tweet) whether the sender is an alumnus of Grande École or a col bleu. I understand why the Gallic literati would want to cling to this surreptitious grammatical secret handshake. (As you have previously noted, to become an elected official in France is almost unimaginable unless you are a published author, capable of showing mastery of the written word.)

For someone for whom French is not his mother tongue, I would humbly suggest to the French Academy that while dropping the superfluous “i” in oignon and scrapping the always-elusive-to-find-on-the-keyboard circumflex, are a good start, they should instead start with the lower-hanging fruit of irrational genders of nouns. While I can be persuaded of the logic that France is inherently feminine and deserves the definitive article “la”, and Canada is clearly a country brimming with Mounties and masculinity, hence “le” Canada, in what world of undue complexity would the breast and the vagina, the sine qua non of femininity, both be nom masculin?

JORDAN HARPUR

Montreal, Canada





Innuendo bingo

Now that I have at last read the word “fart” in your newspaper, (“Letters”, March 5th) I feel at liberty to ask our cousins in America, what exactly are the connotations, for them, of the word “trump”?

DAVID ALLEN

Boston Spa, West Yorkshire

* Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21694978-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Russia’s wars: A strategy of spectacle





Articles Sections Next

Russia’s wars

A strategy of spectacle

His willingness and ability to act abroad gives Vladimir Putin a big boost at home

Mar 19th 2016 | MOSCOW | From the print edition



DMITRY KISELEV, anchor of Vesti Nedeli, a weekly television show, and Russia’s chief propagandist, has had much to say about victory in recent weeks. The Syrian ceasefire that began on February 27th, he told his viewers, was “definitely a Russian victory”, made possible by Russia and America, two great powers, taking joint responsibility for the world’s biggest crisis. The Americans had been convinced “to work with us and forget about their exceptionalism” both by Russia’s diplomacy and by its display of military might: the precision of its bombs, the efficiency of its pilots and the range of its missiles—“which, by the way, can carry nuclear explosives.”

His words were music to the ears of Larisa Kirillova, a pensioner from Kursk. Yes, her pension is no longer rising while food prices are soaring; yes, her daughter has lost her job: but Russia is once again a great power. “Of course things are tough, but we are encircled by enemies and will bear this crisis,” she says resolutely.

On March 13th, walking along the flightline at Khmeimim, the base in Latakia from which the Russian air force has been launching its Syrian operations, Mr Kiselev rejoiced in “the victory of good over evil” and the mix of Russian firepower and acumen that had brought it about. “Russian planes are beautiful and splendid...Our strikes are more precise and efficient than [America’s]. We are making deals with the moderate opposition faster and deliver humanitarian aid more quickly. While the Americans are only coming to, we are already making friends, feeding and [medically] treating them.” The only thing that could have made the message plainer would have been a banner in the background saying “Mission Accomplished”.

The next day, as peace talks were set to get under way in Geneva (see article), Vladimir Putin went on television to announce the withdrawal of Russian troops from Syria: “The task set for the Ministry of Defence and the military forces has been accomplished.” Bashar al-Assad has been bolstered (though not to the extent that he might have wished), America has been exposed as ineffective and dithering, troublesome Turkey has been sidelined. But though those are all welcome achievements for Mr Putin, there is another overarching one.

When Russia started its bombing campaign in September, Barack Obama warned that Syria was “not some superpower chessboard contest, and anybody who frames it in that way isn’t paying very close attention to what’s been happening on the chessboard.” But if Mr Obama did not see it that way, Mr Putin did; and though what would come about on the chessboard mattered to him, the simple fact of playing mattered more.

The purpose of Russia’s action in Syria was not just to shore up the regime of Mr Assad, nor to resolve the largest humanitarian crisis of the century so far. Indeed, to the extent that that crisis is a problem for the European Union (EU), Russia is all for it. Mr Putin wanted to force the West to recognise that, for all that it may deplore Russia’s actions in Ukraine and seek to isolate it with sanctions, Russia is a global power—the player on the other side of the board. “The process of asserting itself as a great power is more important than the result it achieves,” says Maria Lipman, the editor of Counterpoint, a journal.

Mr Obama believes that Mr Putin’s adventures in Ukraine and Syria betray a fundamental misunderstanding of how power works in foreign policy. “Real power means you can get what you want without having to exert violence,” Jeffrey Goldberg recently quoted him as saying in the Atlantic magazine. But for foreign policy to bolster Mr Putin’s domestic agenda by satisfying people like Ms Kirillova, exerting violence is crucial. It is not just a means for getting what Mr Putin wants, but a goal in itself. Just so long as it is seen on a screen.

Yadda Yalta yadda



Mr Putin’s first two presidential terms, which ran from 2000 to 2008, were sold under the banner of political stabilisation and economic growth. The third, begun in 2012, has brought neither of these things (see chart 1). Russia is not becoming any more stable and it is getting distinctly worse off. The economy contracted by 4% last year. Disposable incomes have been falling since 2013. Thus the need for this current term to be reconfigured as a wartime presidency, its successes presented with polish by men and women like Mr Kisilev.

The underpinning of this policy requires the world to be read in a number of seemingly contradictory ways. America must be seen as both a model for modernisation and a source of evil to be resisted. Russia must be seen as both unconstrained and beleaguered—a duality that harks back to the years of Stalinism, which saw the Soviet Union both as a beacon leading the world into an inevitable communist future and as a fortress besieged by enemies and shot through with spies.

The Soviet Communist Party once ruled that no international issue could be resolved without Soviet participation or against its will. Mr Putin lacks the firepower or economic resources of the Soviet era, but lays great stock in the geostrategic position it aspired to, and which it surrendered with its collapse. He wants to return to the times of the Yalta and Potsdam agreements when America, the Soviet Union and Britain divided Europe into Soviet and Western spheres of influence.

And the Russian people want that, too. One of the greatest hopes the public had for Mr Putin when he first became president in 2000 was that he would restore Russia to the position the Soviet Union had once held. According to polls carried out at the time, people cared about this considerably more than they cared about the recovery of savings lost in the early 1990s, social justice or the fight against corruption. Only the rule of law and stopping the war in Chechnya came close.

It is not, after all, just America which believes itself a special nation. Soviet citizens were assured that they had a special place in the world and its history. But by 1991 half the Russian population felt that their country had reached a dead end. Journalists spoke slightingly of a homeland that had suffered one of the deepest traumas in its troubled history. The almost masochistic pleasure many took in national self-deprecation was the obverse of earlier and future exceptionalism.

Small wonder that by 2000 many craved a restoration, and that they remain grateful to Mr Putin for providing it (see chart 2). In 1996 36% of Russians were proud of their country’s political influence in the world; at the end of last year the figure was 68%. Pride in the military surged from 40% to 85% over the same period.



Lev Gudkov of Levada Centre, a pollster, says the growth in pride and self-worth is inseparable from anti-Americanism: “Russia’s collective identity is a negative one: people are consolidated only in the face of a perceived threat from the outside enemy.” Unwilling and unable to influence Russian domestic politics, people are easily induced to focus their anger on America and the West. In doing so, Mr Gudkov argues, they project on to America the qualities of their own country’s ruling class: cynicism, disrespect for human rights, greed and corruption.

This attitude towards the West allows Russians to absolve themselves of responsibility for any wrongdoing and assume the role of a victim. Some 80% of Russians, while saying that they feel no personal animosity towards the West, blame its hostility for the confrontations that pit it against their country. The Kremlin portrays the annexation of Crimea and the bombing of Syria as defensive; according to Russian propaganda it was America that staged the coup in Ukraine in order to claw it away from Russia. The best way to stop the advances of the EU and NATO towards Russian borders is to try to undermine and rupture both alliances.

You furnish the pictures...

It was in the aftermath of the economic crisis of 2008-09 that this anti-Americanism became the main staple of the regime. The popularity of Mr Putin fell in the wake of the crisis—and though GDP growth soon returned, his previously sky-high ratings did not. In late 2011 and early 2012 tens of thousands of middle-class citizens took to the streets demanding a modern, European-style state.

The annexation of Crimea in early 2014 turned things around. It distracted people’s attention from their daily lives, in which the state was a menace, to a historic narrative where the state is a source of Russia’s greatness. Television news ratings, which had been falling for almost a decade, perked up; Mr Putin’s popularity soared to new heights. “His mandate today is far bigger than the job of the president; he is the embodiment of Russian statehood,” says Ms Lipman.

It is thanks to this role as the avatar of a resurgent nation that Mr Putin is staying popular during one of the worst economic crises in modern Russian history. As recently as the first air strikes in Syria, many believed that the current recession would be short-lived and bearable, like its predecessor. Not so. Though recession hit only in the third quarter of 2014, the economy had begun to slow at the end of 2012, when oil prices were still high and Crimea was still part of Ukraine. Natalia Zubarevich, an expert on Russian regions, argues that bad institutions and poor governance have brought about a slow, grinding downturn that risks turning into a long-term degradation. The model of economic growth fuelled by the redistribution of growing oil rents has run its course.

The latest oil-price shock, coupled with Western sanctions which have cut Russia off from Western capital markets, made matters worse. Foreign direct investment fell by a staggering 92% last year. “A country in which investment has fallen for three years in a row is a country that is squeezing its future,” says Ms Zubarevich. “There is a feeling, among the elite, that while the train of history runs ahead, Russia is left behind,” says Ekaterina Schulmann, a political scientist.

The brunt of the crisis of 2008-09 was borne by business; the public was sheltered by spending increases. This time the population has suffered. Large firms are under strict instructions not to lay people off, but they have cut hours and salaries. The high share of imports in Russian consumption means that the devaluation of the rouble hurts everybody. In dollar terms the average monthly salary in the year to January 2015 fell from $850 to $450.

Yet this does not mean that Russians are about to take to the streets. The urban middle class has not been moved to public protest in the style of 2011-12. “When everything is being squeezed, a Soviet instinct kicks in: people survive in small groups, bonding with friends and relatives,” says Ms Zubarevich. The fact that it is relatively easy for the successful to leave the country provides the system with a safety valve.

There have been some sector-specific protests by lorry drivers and doctors. But so far the protesters are appealing to Mr Putin more than they are attacking him. Recent polls show that most Russians are happy to give up Western goods and travel to America and Europe for the sake of Russia’s standing in the world. But they are not prepared to lose their jobs, or to see their salaries and pensions frozen. And that is the way the economy is heading.

The Kremlin is making contingency plans. The riot police have been exempted from pay cuts and last December Mr Putin signed a law allowing the FSB, the state security agency, to open fire on crowds. Yet, for all his authoritarianism, Mr Putin is not a bloodthirsty dictator, but a cautious former KGB officer. He prefers mass manipulation to brutal repression.

...I’ll furnish the war

The country’s state television channels have been his favoured tool to that end. As part of the process the president has made himself, in the words of Fiona Hill of the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, a “TV personality”. Mr Putin has dressed up (or stripped down) to compete in judo matches, fly a microlight with migrating storks and recover sunken treasure on prime time. War leader is a weightier role—but not one of an entirely different sort.



Kirill Rogov, an independent political analyst, argues that support for Mr Putin’s regime depends on television’s ability to draw the public away from their everyday experiences and into its news agenda. When people switch off the news, look around them and see the economy in a bad way, by and large Mr Putin’s ratings fall, too. The annexation of Crimea and the war in Ukraine saw the news and the president bounce back again (see chart 3). People who had previously distanced themselves from politics were mesmerised by dramatic imagery, martial music, well staged and edited action.

Russian television does not simply cover wars that are driven by foreign policy. It takes foreign adventures as raw material from which to generate events that stoke domestic passions and reinforce the government narrative. For example, fake stories such as the one about “fascists” crucifying a Russian boy in eastern Ukraine helped to mobilise the population there against the Ukrainian government in 2014. A recent bogus story about a Russian girl being raped by migrants in Germany led to anti-migrant rallies by ethnic Russians in Berlin; it became a contentious issue between Russia and Germany, generating yet more footage for Russian television.

Domestic news is given short shrift, since people’s personal experiences would allow them to see through official lies. What there is is dominated by orderly meetings of Kremlin officials. Death and destruction for the most part only occur abroad. The 31 miners and five rescue workers who perished in Vorkuta in February were barely covered on the nightly Russian news; the macabre story of an Uzbek nanny brandishing the severed head of a four-year-old girl outside a Moscow metro station received almost no mention on the state channels. Had the coal miners died in Ukraine or the girl been decapitated in Germany, Russian television would have spent days bombarding the audience with special reports, talk shows and investigations.



For now they have the spectacle of warriors returning from Syria; jubilant crowds waving flags; women in traditional dress offering pilots bread and salt. This pageantry does not necessarily mean that Russia has disengaged completely: some Russian forces will stay at their base in Latakia and may continue to offer support to Mr Assad. But it does mean that there will now be slots to fill on the nightly news, and that makes Russia’s neighbours nervous. Soon after reporting the exit from Syria, Russia’s main news channels aired footage of renewed fighting in the Donbas, leading some in Ukraine to wonder whether the withdrawal may prove a redeployment.

In truth, though, any of the former Soviet republics with a sizeable ethnic Russian population could be at risk. As a secret-service operative, Mr Putin excels in concealing his intentions. This tactical nous, Ms Hill argues, has allowed him to stay one step ahead of his opponents at home and abroad. From the war against Georgia in August 2008—the original template for Russia’s strategy of spectacle—to the operation in Syria, Russia’s adventures have repeatedly caught the West by surprise.

In February Mr Obama announced plans to quadruple military spending in central and eastern Europe—including the Baltic states—to $3.4 billion. That makes deterrent sense. But Mr Putin’s ultimate goal is not to have a full-scale war with NATO. The sort of conflicts he needs to stay in power do not require him to fight over territory; just to keep the ratings up and feed the public’s appetite for a story in which they deservingly come out on top.

Such conflicts, though, do have a limitation: Mr Putin cannot afford to sustain big losses. The Syrian footage focused on aircraft soaring high above any risks; when a few Russian soldiers were killed in Ukraine, the Kremlin did everything it could to cover it up. It is these concerns, rather than fear of further sanctions, that have kept Russia from moving deeper into Ukraine or risking a serious confrontation with Turkey. They have doubtless been a factor in not hanging around in Syria, either. However proud and grateful television may make the Russian people feel to Mr Putin, they are not prepared to sacrifice the lives of their children and loved ones for him. As Ms Kirillova from Kursk says, “We can tolerate anything, as long as there is no war.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21694997-his-willingness-and-ability-act-abroad-gives-vladimir-putin-big-boost-home-strategy/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




Super Tuesday III: Beware the ides of March

They could have stopped Trump: How non-voters blew it

The Supreme Court: Going nowhere fast

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

Indiana’s refugee order: Exodus, continued

Refugees in the north-east: The green light

Exit Marco Rubio: Marcomento mori

Lexington: The view from the rustbelt





Articles Sections Next

Super Tuesday III

Beware the ides of March

Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump tear up Florida and the Midwest

Mar 19th 2016 | LEAVITTSBURG, OHIO | From the print edition



THE ides of March—the 15th of the month, on which five big states voted at around the midpoint of the primary calendar —was bound to be a day of reckoning. In Florida, Ohio, Illinois, Missouri and North Carolina, Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump faced perhaps their last serious impediments to securing, respectively, the Democratic and Republican presidential tickets. Yet they breezed through. Mrs Clinton won all five states and, absent calamity, will be the first female presidential candidate. Mr Trump won four, losing only in Ohio to its popular governor, John Kasich. Though the rabble-rousing tycoon still has work to do; he looks almost unstoppable. The reckoning for his party, and perhaps America, will be dreadful.

As a clue to the identity of America’s next president, Mrs Clinton’s achievement was more momentous. It was also more crushing and, unlike Mr Trump’s, beyond the candidate’s own expectations. Having lost to Bernie Sanders in Michigan, where the snowy-haired senator seemed to impress blue-collar workers with his hostility to free trade, Mrs Clinton’s campaign was braced for more defeats across the midwestern rustbelt: most fearfully, in Ohio.

An important swing state, where Mr Sanders had surged into contention from nowhere, Ohio looked primed to aggravate deep doubts about Mrs Clinton’s candidacy. A veteran operator, mistrusted by most voters, she is an awkward fit for an electorate seething with anti-establishment rage. Had Mr Trump, who is as protectionist as Mr Sanders, won the Buckeye State, the doubts about Mrs Clinton could have turned to panic about her general-election prospects. And among the grim former steel-, rubber- and car-making towns of northern Ohio, to be sure, there was plenty of backing for those worries on polling day. “Thirty years ago, General Motors made every car in America, today they’re all made in Mexico,” said David Duffy, an unemployed stone mason in the decrepit town of Leavittsburg, with its peeling clapboard houses and broken roads, to explain why he had just voted for Mr Sanders. Exit polls suggested the economy was the biggest concern for Ohio’s Democrats—yet Mrs Clinton won the state by 14 percentage points.

Most Democratic voters in Ohio also said that international trade had cost America jobs. Yet whereas Mr Sanders grabbed most of those who held that view in Michigan, more than half in Ohio plumped for Mrs Clinton. This suggested her loss in Michigan may have been less to do with trade than was thought: her campaign effort was plainly too lax in that state. It also suggested, by contrast, that her robust response to the defeat in Michigan, mingling low blows against Mr Sanders with a big push for blue-collar votes, was effective. In Leavittsburg former workers at a nearby General Motors factory cited, as a reason for having picked her, Mrs Clinton’s largely erroneous claim that Mr Sanders had opposed a bailout of the car industry. Yet her success in Ohio, and across the primaries, chiefly reflected her consistent lead among her party’s most reliable supporters: registered Democrats and African-Americans, both of whom she won by massive margins.

Having bagged 371 delegates on March 15th, Mrs Clinton is now halfway to securing the 2,382 delegates she would need for the nomination. Mr Sanders lags more than 300 behind—nearly three times the biggest margin Mrs Clinton trailed Barack Obama by in the 2008 Democratic contest. And that understates her advantage: she has so far won endorsements from 467 of the 712 “superdelegates” whose votes will count at the party’s convention in July. Given that the Democrats, unlike, from now onwards, the Republicans, allocate all delegates as a proportion of the vote-share, Mr Sanders would need a barely imaginable run of thumping victories to catch up.

In her victory speech, delivered in Florida—which she won with huge support from non-whites—Mrs Clinton barely mentioned her Democratic rival. Instead she turned her scopes on Mr Trump. “Our commander-in-chief has to be able to defend our country, not embarrass it,” she thundered to a crowd of activists whose euphoria betrayed their former nerves. “When we have a candidate for president call for rounding up 12m immigrants, banning all Muslims from entering the United States, when he embraces torture, that doesn’t make him strong, it makes him wrong.” It is early days. But for the many who wonder what could fire up Democratic voters with an enthusiasm for Mrs Clinton which many lack, this was an answer. Ladbrokes, a bookmaker, has cut its odds on her winning a third consecutive term for her party; it gives her a 69% chance.

Swatting rivals aside

Mr Trump has similar odds of winning the Republican nomination. That reflects his dominance of the Republican field, but also his failure to land, most obviously in Ohio, the knockout punch that Mrs Clinton has. Mr Trump now has 673 delegates—263 more than his closest rival, Ted Cruz. To win an overall majority, of 1,237, ahead of the Republican convention in July he would need to win 60% of the remaining delegates, which is a big ask; he has so far won 45%.

Yet he has two things in his favour. The first is his ability to win votes across the Republican coalition. Mr Kasich’s main supporters are moderate Republicans—yet Mr Trump won that group in every state outside Ohio. Mr Cruz’s hope lies with evangelical Christians, yet 53% have a positive view of Mr Trump, a thrice-married, self-declared debaucher and former casino owner. His second reason for cheer is a run of big winner-take-all contests, including in Arizona on March 22nd and Pennsylvania on April 26th, where he is ahead in the polls. These could boost his delegate tally precipitously.

In none of those contests, moreover, will the tycoon face the novel coincidence of anti-Trump forces that he has just swatted aside. In Florida his main opponent, Marco Rubio, was a local senator whose shining talents and touching back-story had made him a beacon of optimistic conservatism (see article). Mr Rubio was endorsed by 14 current and former governors and 27 senators—the sort of friends who attract big money. Before its primary, Florida’s airwaves were assailed by anti-Trump ads—the state received 88% of a battery of such ads aired there and in Ohio and North Carolina. One, put up on behalf of the billionaire industrialists Charles and David Koch, featured interviews with students who claim to have been swindled by Mr Trump’s real-estate college, Trump University, which is the subject of a fraud investigation. Another featured female actors reciting some of the names Mr Trump has called women: “dog”, “fat pig”, “bimbo”.

The tycoon’s opponents also took hope from a belated wave of anti-Trump outrage in America’s media, after a spike in violence at his rallies. A reporter for Breitbart, a news website, filed charges against Mr Trump’s campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, whom she accused of manhandling her in Florida; a 78-year-old white Trump fan was arrested for punching a black protester at a rally in North Carolina. Mr Trump said he might pay the thug’s legal bills, underlining his role in inciting the violence. At a recent rally in Las Vegas he had yelled that he wanted to punch a protester in the face. When, on March 11th, Trump fans, including pensioners giving Nazi salutes, clashed with anti-Trump protesters at the scene of an abruptly cancelled rally in Chicago, some compared it to America’s last major spasm of political clashes, in Chicago in 1968.

That was absurd. Those serious clashes, at a Democratic convention in the city, were against the backdrop of anti-war protests and rioting after the assassination of Martin Luther King. The Trump-related kerfuffle appears, by contrast, to have been stage-managed by a clever reality-TV star with a lifelong commitment to proving there is no such thing as bad coverage: Mr Trump claimed the rally was called off by the police, who tartly replied that that was nonsense. His habit of lying has also received heightened attention: he fibs every five minutes, according to Politico.

Even by Mr Trump’s standards, this had looked like poor preparation for the primaries. None of it mattered. Mr Rubio was blown away in Florida; an hour after the polls closed, he quit the race. Mr Trump even won a majority of Floridian women. Why on earth don’t more Americans object to his thuggery?

The fruits of gridlock



America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

Most do. Exit polls suggested that 25% of Republican voters definitely would not back him in a general election—a number that might make Ladbrokes’s odds on Mrs Clinton seem worth a flutter. For the rest, there is no easy explanation for what appears to be a straightforward moral failure; yet voters in Ohio offered a clue. Asked what they felt about the violence at Mr Trump’s rallies, some assumed the question related to Democratic protesters. “I have my concealed-carry weapon, so I’m not worried,” said Rob Meeker, a fireman in Leavittsburg. “What violence?” said Sue, an interior designer in a affluent suburb of Akron, who claimed to have voted for Mr Trump after a hard study of the issues.

Grandstanding and gridlock in Washington; right-wing radio louts who thrive on the partisanship this foments; the shrinkage of the media of record—all these institutional failures have contributed to the gradual growth among parts of the electorate of confusion and misinformation that quickly turns to anger. That is not the only reason for Mr Trump’s success; many of his supporters have real economic fears. Yet it is perhaps the one that best explains the breadth of his appeal.

Shattered by Mr Trump’s victories, the Republican establishment is now casting about for any last means to block him. None looks promising. Mr Cruz might conceivably have won a two-way contest against Mr Trump; Mr Kasich’s victory and subsequent commitment to fight on have robbed him of that possibility. And Mr Kasich’s own prospects are frail. They rest entirely on a hope that, in the event that Mr Trump fails to win a majority before the convention, the Republican Party’s dealmakers will conspire to give him the ticket. Many would consider such a move outrageous. It would be to pick a candidate who has so far won a single primary over one who has so far won 20. The result of such a stitch-up, predicts Mr Trump, for what that may be worth, would be a riot.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695080-hillary-clinton-and-donald-trump-tear-up-florida-and-midwest-beware-ides-march/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

They could have stopped Trump

How non-voters blew it

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



Voters who disdain Donald Trump have had the power to stop him but, as is often the way in the primaries, most have chosen to stay at home. Turnout in the Republican contest around this stage is at its highest since 1980, but still averages just 17% of eligible voters, according to Pew. Mr Trump’s margin of victory in the states where he has won is dwarfed by the potential pool of voters who sat it out. Even where a primary is closed to Republican voters, the apathetic far outstripped the enthusiastic. If more anti-Trump Republicans, and Democrats and independents in states that have open or semi-closed primaries, had turned out, they could have checked his momentum. Mr Trump would have picked up his fair share of that voter reservoir, but so far even the vast majority of Republicans have not voted for him.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695076-how-non-voters-blew-it/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Supreme Court

Going nowhere fast

Obama nominates Merrick Garland; Republicans vow to block him

Mar 19th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

It’s from McConnell: “In your dreams”

IN A move that will test the mettle of recalcitrant Senate Republicans, on March 16th Barack Obama tapped Merrick Garland, a respected and politically moderate judge, to fill the late Antonin Scalia’s seat on the Supreme Court. Mr Obama presented Mr Garland as a “serious man and exemplary judge”: one of “America’s sharpest legal minds…who brings to his work a spirit of decency, modesty, integrity, even-handedness and excellence”. The nominee had been vetted but passed over for the highest bench by Mr Obama twice before.

According to Tom Goldstein, an expert court-watcher, Mr Garland is a choice from central casting. He earned undergraduate and law degrees from Harvard, clerked for a renowned liberal justice, William Brennan, was made partner in an elite law firm in a blazing four years and, during a mid-1990s stint in the Justice Department, oversaw the trials of the Unabomber and the masterminds of the Oklahoma City bombing. Since 1997 he has served on the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, America’s second-most-influential tribunal, and has been its chief judge for three years.

With a record that includes a decision in 2003 siding with the government against detainees at Guantánamo Bay, Mr Garland is no liberal firebrand and, in normal times, would probably be a bipartisan shoo-in for a seat on the Supreme Court. Orrin Hatch, a Republican senator, praised his qualifications two decades ago and reiterated his support when Mr Obama was hunting for nominees early in his presidency. Last week Mr Hatch called him “a fine man”, but predicted Mr Obama would make a bolder choice to energise the base of the Democratic Party.

In his announcement, Mr Obama acknowledged that the political climate is “noisier and more volatile” than ever. If Senate Republicans refused to consider Mr Garland, he said, they would betray “our best traditions”. Yet he was clearly worried that they may do just that. “I hope they’re fair,” the president added.

The Republicans quickly tossed cold water on those hopes. “The American people may well elect a president who decides to nominate Judge Garland for Senate consideration,” said Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, after the announcement, but in the meantime, the Senate would not budge. This was a matter of “principle”: voters “should have a say” in filling the vacancy, and the Senate should hold off until the next president takes office in 2017.

Behind this paean to the will of the people is a concern that Mr Garland, though 63 and a centrist, would tip the balance of the Supreme Court away from the narrow conservative majority once anchored by Mr Scalia. With decisions pending on affirmative action, public unions, abortion, religious liberty and immigration, the eight remaining justices may elect to put off rulings for re-argument when their bench is once again complete.

Will Senate Republicans hold the line? Although a CNN poll shows that 58% of Americans want Mr Obama to fill the vacancy, most of the intensity is on the blockers’ side. Confirming an Obama nominee would be seen by many conservatives as close to treason. Some Republican senators facing tough re-election races say they will meet Mr Garland privately, giving themselves cover without breaking the blockade against confirmation hearings. Other Republicans suggest that—should they lose the White House—confirming a centrist such as Mr Garland in the “lame duck” session after the general election might be less risky than waiting for a new Democratic president to make a more left-wing pick. For now, it seems unlikely that the Republicans will budge.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695085-obama-nominates-merrick-garland-republicans-vow-block-him-going-nowhere-fast/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The campaigns

Heard on the trail

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



Vive le roi

“You can always tell when the king is here.”

Donald Trump’s longtime butler on his boss. The butler also revealed that Mr Trump wears a red baseball cap if he is in a bad mood, but cheers up if “Hail to the Chief” is played by a bugler as he enters his Mar-a-Lago estate. New York Times

When hell freezes over

“There’s no way I would team up with Donald Trump. No way. Forget it.”

John Kasich gets fairly vehement about his political future. Fox News

Values voter

“If, for example, he were to go out on Fifth Avenue and shoot somebody, I would not be willing to support Donald Trump.”

Ted Cruz sets his limits

Working girl

“This is not easy for me…I am not a natural politician, in case you haven’t noticed, like my husband or President Obama, so…I just have to do the best I can.”

Hillary Clinton confronts her flaws during the latest Democratic debate

Setting the pace

“It equates to roughly one mis-statement every five minutes.”

Politico fact-checked a week of Mr Trump’s speeches and statements

Scoop

“Did you watch the end of Downton Abbey?”

An open mic catches what Chris Matthews of MSNBC really wants to ask Hillary Clinton

Pigmentation-envy

“My dad was born in Poland…Nobody has ever asked me for my birth certificate. Maybe it has something to do with the colour of my skin.”

Bernie Sanders ponders his own birther question

Don’t panic

“Even if Donald Trump turns out not to be such a great president…we’re only looking at four years.”

Ben Carson endorses Mr Trump. “The Steve Malzberg Show”

A many-splendoured thing

“It’s a love fest. These are love fests…and we love each other.”

Mr Trump denies that there is violence at his rallies

Stages of grief

“I still, at this moment, continue to intend to support the Republican nominee. But [it’s] getting harder every day.”

Marco Rubio feels the pain. It all got too much on March 15th



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695086-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Indiana’s refugee order

Exodus, continued

The governor seems to be losing his fight to keep Syrian refugees away

Mar 19th 2016 | INDIANAPOLIS | From the print edition



ON AN unseasonably warm evening in March, three giggling teenage girls wearing the hijab, and one whose dark hair is uncovered, pull out bicycles at a rental station along the Indianapolis Cultural Trail. They race off on the landscaped eight-mile pathway, which winds past the city’s arts institutions and government buildings through patches of green lawn, waterways and public art. The twilight bustle on the trail, the ride-sharing stations for electric cars scattered around downtown and the ethnic mix of people in the streets all contribute to the impression of hospitality among Hoosiers, as Indiana’s people call themselves. The courts are now being asked to determine how widely it should be extended.

Indiana’s Republican governor, Michael Pence, has made it clear that refugees from one mostly Muslim country are not welcome in the state. On November 16th, three days after the terrorist attacks in Paris, Mr Pence suspended the resettlement of Syrian refugees “to ensure the safety and security of all Hoosiers”. As many as 30 other Republican governors (and one Democrat), including those of Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois, Michigan and Texas, subsequently made similar moves. None seemed to question whether their ban on Syrians was lawful or constitutional.

Mr Pence was the first governor to be taken to court over his refugee order by the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), on behalf of Exodus, a local non-profit resettlement agency. On February 29th Tanya Walton Pratt, a federal judge, ruled that Mr Pence’s order to cut federal funds for the resettlement of Syrian refugees in his state was unconstitutional and “clearly discriminates against Syrian refugees based on their national origin”. In her 35-page ruling Ms Walton Pratt referred to the 14th Amendment, which stipulates that no state shall deny any person in its jurisdiction “the equal protection of the laws”, including civil-rights laws.

After the initial bombast of his and the other governors’ announcements, Mr Pence had to confess that he cannot prevent Syrian refugees who have been admitted to America—after at least 18 months, and often much longer, of screening by intelligence agencies—from entering Indiana. Previously, he had withheld the portion of federal funds for the resettlement of Syrian refugees that the state controls; now, after the court ruling, he may not do so any more. If nativism were not so en vogue at the moment, the governor, who wants to be re-elected, might have left the matter there. But Mr Pence announced almost immediately after the judge’s ruling that he had instructed Indiana’s attorney-general to seek an immediate stay and appeal of the court decision. On March 8th the appeal was filed.

Most other governors seem to have quietly dropped the matter of their ban on Syrian refugees. One exception is Texas, where Ken Paxton, the state attorney-general, has filed a lawsuit to block the federal government from resettling Syrian refugees on its territory. In early February a district judge denied Mr Paxton’s request for the second time. Mr Paxton’s office is now “evaluating” what to do next. Until the ruling on the governor’s appeal by a circuit court in Chicago, which is expected in a few months’ time, Mr Pence cannot withhold any funds from Exodus.

Around 80% of the refugees settled in Indiana are Burmese. More than 10,000 of them live in Indianapolis, where they have revived a whole neighbourhood on the south side of the city with small shops and restaurants. The state’s Syrian refugees may be about to perform a similar service—despite the governor’s continuing efforts to stop them.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21694832-most-other-governors-seem-have-quietly-dropped-matter-indianas-governor-losing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Refugees in the north-east

The green light

A Syrian family arrives in New Jersey

Mar 19th 2016 | JERSEY CITY | From the print edition

Paradise after Homs

“IT WAS a difficult decision to leave Syria, but [one] I had to make,” says Ahmad Abdulhamid. “At any time, a missile could drop on my house. At any time they could take away my children.” Homs, his home city, had been reduced to rubble, with thousands killed. So on March 31st 2013 he, his wife and their three boys, then all under nine, left Syria. He paid smugglers to take them to Jordan.

There, they registered with the UN’s refugee agency. After more than two years of screenings and investigations from many agencies, including the FBI and the Departments of Homeland Security and Defence, and after thorough medical examinations, the family heard they had been cleared. They arrived in Jersey City, now with a new baby girl, the day before the fifth anniversary of the start of Syria’s civil war.

Not all get the green light. “Syrian refugees are screened far more extensively than other[s]”, says Mahmoud Mahmoud, who runs the Jersey City office of the Church World Service. CWS is one of nine non-profits which arrange housing and support for displaced people. They also provide language classes, financial advice and help to find jobs. After 90 days, the refugees must fend for themselves. Some also get assistance from churches and charities. Rutgers Presbyterian Church, based in nearby Manhattan, furnished the Abdulhamids’ new flat and donated clothes, toys, schoolbags and halal food.

President Barack Obama intends to accept 10,000 refugees this year, angering many governors. But other politicians are more welcoming. Bill Pascrell, a New Jersey congressman, along with 37 other lawmakers, sent a letter to Mr Obama last week urging him to accept more. The United States has taken in fewer than 3,000 refugees from Syria since 2011.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695084-syrian-family-arrives-new-jersey-green-light/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Exit Marco Rubio

Marcomento mori

In truth, the telegenic senator from Florida never stood a chance

Mar 19th 2016 | MIAMI | From the print edition



HE MADE a myth of himself until the end. After being whacked by Donald Trump in his home state of Florida, 46% to 27%, Marco Rubio insisted it was wonderful that the son of Cuban immigrants, with no connections or money, had been able even to run for president. But he couldn’t make second place sound like a triumph, as he had previously tried to, as if by a process of suggestion victories would magically begin to materialise. As a small crowd chanted his name, yelled “No” and took selfies, Mr Rubio bowed out.

The post-mortem had begun even before his campaign’s demise. Its failure was attributed to his loopy malfunction in the televised debate in New Hampshire; or to his delay in attacking Mr Trump, a reticence unwisely followed by a roll in the gutter with the front-runner, when, with his puerile gibes, Mr Rubio implicated himself in the one-off spectacle of a presidential candidate bragging, on air, about his penis. Analysts mentioned his competition for donors and backing with Jeb Bush, another Floridian, and his role in a doomed, bipartisan push for immigration reform in the Senate in 2013, a pragmatic stance regarded as heretical by many conservatives.

Yet in retrospect the notion that Mr Rubio had a serious shot at the nomination, and somehow wrecked it, looks naive. He initially pitched himself as a moderniser, able to broaden his party’s appeal through his endlessly repeated back-story, with its saccharine ode to America, his oratory and telegenic smile. His relative expertise in foreign affairs would offset his youth. Along the way that strategy morphed into a claim that he was best-placed to stop Mr Trump. Party bigwigs bought it—if endorsements were convention delegates, Mr Rubio would have long been home and dry—but voters were less impressed. Though occasionally his campaign seemed poised to ignite, as after his second-place finish in South Carolina, it never did.



Mr Trump thrashed him not only in Florida but also in Nevada, where Mr Rubio spent a chunk of his childhood. His team’s assumption was that, as other candidates dropped out, the anti-Trump vote would consolidate around him. Instead his support drained away. Outlasting Mr Bush, in a face-off that once appeared pivotal to the contest, now seems a distinctly pyrrhic achievement. In the other four primaries on March 15th, Mr Rubio polled in single digits. Overall he won only in Minnesota, Puerto Rico and Washington, DC.

He flopped for a reason bigger than any of his own missteps: the “tsunami”, as he put it, of anti-establishment fury that found its incarnation in Mr Trump, and which, despite his Tea Party credentials, Mr Rubio was unable to tame and confessed that he only half-understood. (In Miami, some of his fans were less diplomatic: Mr Trump’s supporters, one lamented, articulating the private outrage of many mainstream Republicans, had “dirt for brains”.) In defeat he congratulated himself on the positivity of his message and on his aim, as president, to “love all the American people, even the ones that don’t love you back.” In truth he had tried to straddle both the sunny uplands and the valley of despair, portraying America as a once-and-future great nation that was on the cusp of socialist disaster. It didn’t work.

Looking exhausted, his much-travelled family by his side, he defaulted to the uplands. He said he was “still hopeful and optimistic about America”, even if that faith did not resonate in this election, before closing with a paean to God, who ordered every person’s life (and evidently didn’t want him in the White House—at least, not yet). Whether he has cause for optimism in his own political future is unclear. Devotees in Miami want him to run for Florida’s governorship in 2018—he is leaving the Senate—by when the stain of this humiliation by Mr Trump may or may not have faded. “They told us we had no chance,” Mr Rubio had gushed after his bronze medal in the Iowa caucuses. They were right.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695077-truth-telegenic-senator-florida-never-stood-chance-marcomento-mori/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

The view from the rustbelt

Even workers protected by trade tariffs feel angry and neglected

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



AMERICA feels sick at heart this year. Can conventional politics cure that malaise, or will voters turn to those peddling radical remedies, from trade wars to high border walls? That question weighs heavily in midwestern states, where factories propelled millions of post-war workers into middle-class prosperity. Though rustbelt states like Ohio, Michigan and Illinois helped Barack Obama win the White House, this year many midwestern voters seem drawn to fiery candidates who offer the sharpest contrast with the president’s cool, headmasterly style: from Donald Trump on the right to Senator Bernie Sanders on the left.

More traditional politicians, starting with Hillary Clinton, the Democratic front-runner, are moving to placate unhappy voters by promising “fair trade”, using import rules to punish unfair competition by such rivals as China. Mrs Clinton, who lost the Michigan primary to Mr Sanders earlier this month, took Ohio on March 15th after tacking to the left on trade: at an Ohio Democratic dinner shortly before the primary she promised to oppose the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a flagship trade bill supported by Mr Obama.

A day before the Ohio primary Lexington travelled to Findlay, a frayed-at-the-edges town of 41,000 people which is home to one of Ohio’s larger tyre plants. The smell of cooking rubber hangs over its streets. Twice under Mr Obama, anti-dumping tariffs of up to 88% have been slapped on imported Chinese tyres at the prodding of the United Steelworkers union (USW), to protect jobs at plants including the Cooper Tire & Rubber factory in Findlay. Mr Obama cited the tariffs in his state-of-the-union message in 2012, declaring: “Over a thousand Americans are working today because we stopped a surge in Chinese tyres.”

Such tariffs are rare, making Findlay’s tyre-builders an unusually well-protected minority. Their plant offers a glimpse of what might happen if a President Trump (or Sanders) fulfils his promise to use tariffs and taxes to keep manufacturing jobs in America. Economically trade barriers are a bad and harmful idea, but what Findlay offers is a case study in the politics of trade.

An evening shift-change saw lines of men leave the Cooper plant, lunch-boxes in hand. Most felt that tariffs on China had helped them: one called them a “game-changer” that had saved jobs and prompted extra shifts. But, strikingly, praise for the president was mostly dwarfed by anger at the state of the country. Some workers said they were Democrats but felt underwhelmed by Mr Obama. Others, Republicans, expressed suspicion verging on contempt for the president. Mr Obama is “the worst fucking piece of shit in this country, he should move to China”, spat a bearded worker in a camouflage hunting jacket who declined to give his name, turning back to add, pre-emptively: “And I’ve got black friends, so it isn’t that.” Another worker, Josh Wilkerson, a Trump supporter, said that anti-China tariffs were good, but he shared his colleague’s belief that, mostly, “Obama is for the people who don’t work.”

Several workers accused Democrats of scorning traditional values. Jerry Eatherton said that tariffs on Chinese tyres have “helped a ton”, and voted for Mr Obama’s re-election in 2012. But this year he will support “anybody except Hillary”. Mr Eatherton is a hunter who feeds his family with venison and other game. Mrs Clinton, he avers, would like to take away the gun with which he puts “food on my table”. Several workers were for Mr Sanders (who on primary night won Hancock County, of which Findlay is the seat). A number declared Mr Trump “scary” and backed Governor John Kasich of Ohio, a Republican who won his home-state primary (Mr Kasich’s line on trade is Clintonesque in its nuances). Yet Mr Trump has won other rustbelt primaries in Illinois and Michigan, and dominates nationwide in exit polls among white voters without a college education.

In dozens of interviews at the tyre plant, one person backed Mrs Clinton: Rod Nelson, president of the Cooper plant’s union branch, Local 207L of the United Steelworkers, and that was in the “realist” belief that she will be the Democratic nominee. At Lexington’s request, Mr Nelson gathered ten Cooper workers for a group interview. Asked to sum up Mr Obama, the men replied variously that he was a good man, a disappointment, a “great speech-giver”, a victim of Republican obstruction in Congress and a man who had failed to rein in the super-rich and their influence over politics. The president was praised for bailing out the car sector and other industries soon after taking office. He was thanked for tariffs on China, but his support for the TPP caused baffled dismay. Mr Nelson ventured that perhaps the president is using trade as “a diplomatic tool” to win allies.

Make the foreigners pay

Above all, tariffs on Chinese imports were described as too late to save thousands of jobs in American tyre factories. The men in the union hall want a new approach to capitalism, in which foreign trade partners must pay living wages and heed global environmental norms. Jeff McCurdy, a warehouse worker, described colleagues struggling to raise families on salaries of $14 an hour. “Their kids aren’t even getting the healthy food they need...and they wonder why people are pissed off,” he asked. The men in the USW hall distrusted Mr Trump’s America-first bluster, noting that his “Trump” branded clothing is made abroad. They accused him of wooing some of their colleagues with fear: at a recent union meeting a member stood up to say that the billionaire will “keep the Muslims out”.

The lesson from Findlay is that there are no short-cut solutions to the anger of blue-collar workers. Findlay’s tyre-builders have had the direct attention of a president and international tariffs signed on their behalf. Still they feel—passionately—that the economy is stacked against them, and want larger changes to capitalism than mainstream politicians can deliver. What then?





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695075-even-workers-protected-trade-tariffs-feel-angry-and-neglected-view-rustbelt/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Barack Obama in Cuba: Hello, Barry

How Latin Americans see the United States: Dugout diplomacy

The United States and Latin America: Harmony now, discord later

Bello: Of soldiers and citizens





Articles Sections Next

Barack Obama in Cuba

Hello, Barry

The promise and perils of a historic visit. The first of three stories on the United States and Latin America

Mar 19th 2016 | HAVANA | From the print edition



“THIS country will rock when he arrives,” predicts Leo, a taxi driver in Havana. He is not talking about Mick Jagger and the Rolling Stones, who will perform in the city on March 25th for an audience of perhaps 400,000 fans. He means Barack Obama, who four days earlier will become the first sitting United States president to visit Cuba since Calvin Coolidge in 1928. When Leo was 14 years old, in the 1980s, his teacher ordered him and his classmates to throw eggs and shout abuse outside the home of a schoolmate whose family had emigrated to the United States. “Now, thank God, the hate is over,” he says.

Mr Obama’s trip is a symbolic culmination of a process of rapprochement that he and Raúl Castro, Cuba’s president, began in December 2014. Since then the United States has eased the half-century-old trade and travel embargo on Cuba, removed the country from its list of state sponsors of terrorism and restored diplomatic relations, cut in 1961. On March 15th America’s government eased restrictions further, allowing Americans to travel to Cuba on their own for “educational” purposes and Cubans to be paid salaries in the United States. Mr Obama argues that such interchange will do more to hasten the liberalisation of Cuba’s repressive socialist regime than continuing to isolate it.

When he arrives, he will find modest grounds for hope. Cuba is visibly changing, in part because of economic reforms begun by Mr Castro before his accord with Mr Obama. But the changes so far have done more to enhance the lifestyles of a few than to bring freedom and opportunity for most Cubans.

They are most palpable for the half-million Cubans who have registered as self-employed, especially those who cater to tourists. Guesthouse owners, restaurateurs and taxi drivers are profiting from a rise of close to 80% in the number of American visitors (excluding those of Cuban descent) in 2015. A further rise is sure when commercial airlines begin scheduled flights later this year. Some 300 restaurants and bars have opened in Havana over the past two years, says the owner of a paladar (owner-managed restaurant).

A decade ago, when Raúl Castro’s brother, Fidel, was still in charge, the few Cubans with money dared not show it. That, too, has changed. Now the well-heeled like to pay for a sense of exclusivity, says the Italian owner of a bar in Havana. “Cubans just love a VIP area.” At the rooftop bar of the Fábrica de Arte Cubano in the district of Vedado, a vast hipster complex conceived by X Alfonso, a Cuban musician, gin and tonics cost $14 apiece. Young Cuban tipplers outnumber the tourists.

For foreign investors hoping to launch something more ambitious than a bar, and for their prospective employees, conditions are less plush. The government is “updating” its socialist economic model cautiously. When the regime permits foreign firms to do business, its officials are often clueless about how to make it happen. American trade delegations seem “confused” by their meetings with the government, says one European diplomat. A group visiting the sugar monopoly found the experience so odd they thought they had gone to the wrong building.

The regulations for doing business in Havana are “mind-boggling”, says a foreign entrepreneur. Some of these are designed to ensure that the benefits flow to the government rather than to workers. Investors in joint ventures pay salaries in convertible pesos, equivalent in value to American dollars, directly to the government. The government then pays the workers a fraction of the value in “national” pesos, and pockets the difference.

No satisfaction

You might think such fleecing would leave the government with cash to spare. But foreign businessmen whose firms supply it say they have trouble getting paid; two have been waiting since November. Some European and Canadian companies have long planned to sell their Cuban operations to Americans as soon as they are finally permitted to invest. “It’s part of the business plan,” says a Canadian executive. New hotels have been built to American safety specifications for that reason.

During his visit Mr Obama may announce a Cuban investment by one or more American companies, perhaps in energy, telecoms or hotels, under a waiver issued by the Treasury Department. An experienced investor has prepared his greeting: “Welcome to our pain,” he says.

Political reform is even more tortuous. Cuba’s government has released many long-time political prisoners; in what looks like a change of tactics it has increased the harassment and short-term detention of dissidents. It has modestly expanded citizens’ access to the internet. But Mr Obama’s opening to Cuba has so far yielded meagre political benefits. “All the movement has been on the US side,” says a European diplomat. “The Cubans have done remarkably little.”

Reform could accelerate at the Communist Party’s seventh congress, to be held in April. Some analysts expect the party to give citizens a choice among (currently handpicked) candidates for seats in the National Assembly, whose modest powers may be expanded. It might also devolve some power from the central government to the regions. Bigger changes may follow in 2018, when Raúl Castro, who is 84, will step down and probably hand power to Miguel Díaz-Canel, the first vice-president, who is nearly 30 years younger. Little is known of Mr Díaz-Canel, who would be the first leader from outside the Castro family in nearly 60 years (it is known that he is a fan of the Rolling Stones).

Mr Obama no doubt hopes that the very fact of his visit will speed up political reform. He is more popular on the island than either of the Castros, according to a poll conducted last year. “He looks like us,” many Cubans proudly proclaim; at least a third of Cubans have African ancestry, like Mr Obama. As well as taking in a baseball game (between Cuba’s national team and the Tampa Bay Rays), he will meet dissidents and may give a televised speech. He has promised to lobby Raúl Castro for freedom of speech and assembly. “Without democracy there is no possibility that things will get better,” says José Antonio Fornaris, of the Association for a Free Press, a pressure group on the island.

Mr Obama’s biggest contribution may be to deny the regime its main excuse. “All totalitarian systems need an external enemy to sustain themselves,” says Dagoberto Valdés, editor of Convivencia, a Cuban magazine. He thinks that the recasting of America as friend rather than villain will force Cubans to “focus on resolving problems among ourselves”. It will take a real rocker, though, to convince Adrián, a mechanic, that change is coming. Fidel Castro had banned the Rolling Stones as agents of capitalist decadence. Adrián says that he will believe that Cuba is changing when he hears the opening strains of “Satisfaction” ring out across Havana.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21695058-promise-and-perils-historic-visit-first-three-stories-united-states-and/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

How Latin Americans see the United States

Dugout diplomacy

Where yanquis are popular, where they are not and why

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



READ the horror stories about the dozens of times the United States has sent troops into Latin America, and you might assume that the region is consumed with resentment against the imperial hegemon of el norte. In fact, Latin Americans are quite well-disposed towards the yanquis these days. The most recent international survey by Latinobarómetro, a Chilean polling firm, found that 65% of respondents had a good or very good opinion of the United States (see chart). And the countries that seem to have the most cause for grievance feel least aggrieved: the two most pro-American nations in the region are the Dominican Republic (which the United States occupied from 1916 to 1924 and invaded again in 1965) and Guatemala (whose president was toppled in a coup organised by the CIA in 1954).

Does that mean that the United States should send the Marines back as goodwill ambassadors? A closer look at the past 20 years of polling suggests not. There are more plausible explanations for variations in Latin Americans’ friendliness towards their northern neighbour. The region-wide view of the United States has oscillated considerably, from a low of 38% approval in 1996 to a high of 74% in 2009. Virtually all of these ups and downs seem to reflect just three factors: changes in foreign direct investment (FDI) from the United States and in GDP per person in Latin America, and the United States’ decision to go to war in Iraq and then to pull out. The more that American firms invest in Latin America, and the wealthier its inhabitants grow, the fonder respondents become of the gringos.

These averages conceal wide differences between countries. In 2015 just 44% of Bolivians liked the United States, whereas 83% of Dominicans did. The strongest predictor of these gaps is distance: South Americans tend to dislike Uncle Sam, whereas residents of Central America and the Caribbean feel more warmly. Apparently, the easier it is for Latinos to get to know the United States, the more they like it. The next most important factor, unsurprisingly, is remittances, which make up more than 15% of the GDP of El Salvador and Honduras, for example. There is no better advertisement for the United States than emigrants sending cash back home.

National politics also seem to affect the United States’ popularity. People governed by leftists, such as Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez or Bolivia’s Evo Morales, are more hostile than those led by conservatives such as Alberto Fujimori in Peru in the 1990s or Álvaro Uribe in Colombia in the early 2000s. Latin Americans also seem to hold the United States responsible for one of their region’s chief woes. Countries with high murder rates, which tend to accompany drug shipments flowing north, are less friendly to Americans than one would otherwise expect.

Even after taking all these variables into account, Dominicans’ extreme fondness for the United States remains unexplained. Perhaps the answer lies in a passion their island nation shares with its giant neighbour. Whereas soccer reigns supreme across most of South America, baseball is both the American national pastime and a veritable religion in the Dominican Republic, whose small population supplies a startling number of Major League baseball players. The path to a Latin American’s heart, it seems, is paved not with guns and bombs but with bats and balls.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21695061-where-yanquis-are-popular-where-they-are-not-and-why-dugout-diplomacy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The United States and Latin America

Harmony now, discord later

After Barack Obama’s trip to Cuba, regional relations may deteriorate

Mar 19th 2016 | MIAMI AND WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition



FIVE years ago, if Barack Obama had announced a trip to Havana, Cuban-American demonstrators would have filled Miami’s streets, suggests Carlos Gimenez, the mayor of Miami-Dade County. Now that Mr Obama is about to pay the first visit to Cuba by a sitting president since 1928, on March 21st and 22nd, the dominant mood in Miami is one of resignation, says the mayor, an urbane, silver-haired Republican who left Cuba as a boy the year after Fidel Castro took power.

True, the “pretty universal” sentiment among Florida’s 1.4m Cuban-Americans is that Mr Obama has extracted too few concessions from the government of Raúl Castro, Fidel’s brother, in exchange for relaxing restrictions on travel and trade. But the normalisation of ties with the communist island is now seen as “inevitable”. In the Little Havana district of Miami crowds no longer gather to celebrate rumours that Fidel has died, Mr Gimenez marvels. The exiles who lost homes and businesses to the revolution have either grown old or died. The “fervour has gone”.

But not among contenders for the Republican nomination in the American presidential race. Ted Cruz of Texas, a Cuban-American senator, is sharply critical of Mr Obama’s Cuba policies (as was Marco Rubio, a fellow Cuban-American senator, who dropped out of the race on March 15th). For them, the opening to Cuba is evidence of the president’s feckless, despot-coddling, blame-America approach to foreign policy. John Kasich, the moderate Republican left in the race, is also a sceptic. Mr Cruz says that he would cut off diplomatic relations with Cuba, which were re-established last July after a 54-year break.

That promise, like much of the rhetoric produced by the presidential election campaign, is ominous for the United States’ relations not just with Cuba, but with Latin America as a whole. More than in most regions, the behaviour of the United States toward Latin America reflects its domestic concerns. Most of the candidates, including the Republican bigot, Donald Trump, and the Democratic protectionist, Bernie Sanders, have made promises that would damage in different ways the progress that Mr Obama has made on Latin America. Even Hillary Clinton sounds lukewarm about Mr Obama’s trade initiatives.

After neglecting the region for much of his presidency, Mr Obama has recently attempted something of a reset. Arturo Valenzuela, an assistant secretary of state in his first term, says that the administration has sought to end a “Manichean” approach, in which the United States divided its southern neighbours into countries that were “with us or against us”. Tensions over George W. Bush’s invasion of Iraq and war on terror worsened relations and played into the hands of anti-American governments. Confrontations with Cuba fed a “symbiotic relationship” between hardliners within the Castro regime and anti-Castro right-wingers in the United States, Mr Valenzuela argues.

Rather than feud with critics of the United States, Mr Obama tried to ignore them or, as in the case of Cuba, engage with them. In an interview with the Atlantic magazine, he argues that his willingness at regional summits to sit through anti-American rants helped to “right-size” such opponents as Hugo Chávez, the late Venezuelan leader, “rather than blow him up as this ten-foot giant adversary”.

Now, some of the United States’ most unsparing critics are being weakened or sidelined by a combination of term limits, unpopularity and self-destructive economic policies. In Argentina, which Mr Obama will visit after Cuba, a centre-right pragmatist, Mauricio Macri, replaced an anti-yanqui populist, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, after elections last November. Chávez’s successor, Nicolás Maduro, clings to power, but Venezuela’s economy is suffering from a lethal mix of recession, shortages and inflation, and his party lost control of the legislature last year.

In Cuba, Mr Obama is betting, change will come through diplomatic relations, increased trade and investment and personal bonds forged by American teachers, students and other travellers. It will not happen “overnight”, he has repeatedly warned. Even if Congress does not swiftly repeal the 1996 law at the heart of the current embargo, the Helms-Burton Act, case-by-case licences will allow entry to American investors, whose adherence to transparency and anti-corruption laws could provide a model for Cuba. The rapprochement with the Castro regime will in turn undercut leftist narratives about American imperialism, removing one irritant from relations with the entire region.

Mr Obama has tried to reduce others. He has used executive powers to shield millions of undocumented migrants from deportation and to focus expulsions on those who had committed serious crimes. That mostly affects the country’s 57m Hispanics, and their relatives in other countries—even if they had hoped for more. On narcotics Mr Obama shifted the government’s emphasis from interdiction to reducing demand at home, de-escalating the drug war, which is fought most ferociously on foreign soil. When Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, indicated that he wanted the relationship with the United States to focus less on drugs and more on trade, Mr Obama went along. In the past year the two countries have opened the first new railway bridge between them for more than a century. In sum, after decades of cold-war confrontations, followed by “Washington consensus” blandishments on economic reform, Mr Obama has tried to make pragmatism the basis of his country’s relations with Latin America.

Republican headbangers

That is not the message from the presidential election campaign. To the extent that Latin America features at all it is as a source of unwanted immigrants and cut-price competition. Mr Trump’s fantastical talk of building a wall on the border with Mexico, paid for by the Mexican government, is a symptom of a larger malaise.

At Trump rallies, Mexico has become an avatar for globalisation itself. The businessman calls the North American Free-Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with Mexico and Canada a disaster. He has described how, as president, he would call the bosses of such firms as Ford and demand that they move manufacturing jobs back from Mexico to the United States, or face import tariffs of up to 35%. Mexican politicians are “laughing at us” and “killing us economically”, Mr Trump tells roaring supporters.

On Cuba Mr Trump sounds more liberal than his rivals. The embargo, he suggests, might be negotiable. “After 50 years, it’s enough time, folks,” said Mr Trump in a presidential debate on March 10th. He would “probably” close the new American embassy in Havana until he could reach a “really good deal”.

The billionaire’s nativism has forced his Republican rivals to the right. Mr Cruz, a son of an immigrant, talks of foreign labour as a threat to American workers and jobs. He accuses Democrats of viewing “illegal immigrants as potential voters” and many Republicans of seeing illegal workers as useful “cheap labour”. Such rhetoric has been noted across the region.

Blending sincere outrage with partisan point-scoring, Republicans justify opposition to the rapprochement with Cuba in terms of human rights. As a senator Mr Rubio has blocked the confirmation of a new American ambassador to Mexico for many months. He accuses Mr Obama’s nominee, Roberta Jacobson, of failing to emphasise human rights and democracy when negotiating with Cuba and Venezuela in her current post as the top State Department official for the Americas. Mr Cruz calls the idea of expanded trade with Cuba an example of Mr Obama allowing billions of dollars to flow to “nations that hate us”.

The Democratic candidates pay less attention to Latin America, but they, too, might damage Mr Obama’s legacy. Mr Sanders was an early foe of NAFTA and would probably halt American participation in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a proposed trade deal among a dozen Pacific Rim nations, including three Latin American ones, if it is not ratified this year. Mrs Clinton has backed away from her earlier enthusiasm for the TPP. As Mr Obama’s former secretary of state, she is the candidate likeliest to continue what he started. But Mr Obama’s trip to Havana may be the last big American overture to its neighbours for some time.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21695079-after-barack-obamas-trip-cuba-regional-relations-may-deteriorate-harmony-now-discord-later/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

Of soldiers and citizens

Latin America’s armed forces have accepted democracy but remain a law unto themselves

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



ON MARCH 24th 1976 a military junta ousted Isabela Martínez, Argentina’s president and the widow of Juan Perón, and took power in order to “put an end to the lack of government, the corruption and the scourge of subversion”. What followed was state terror, aimed not only at murderous left-wing guerrilla groups but also at harmless dissidents. At least 8,960 people were killed.

In Buenos Aires memories of the coup remain raw. Barack Obama planned to be in town on the anniversary, and wanted to show his support for democracy and human rights by visiting a torture centre that is now a museum of memory. That annoyed activists—at the time, the United States had endorsed the coup. Mr Obama will play golf in Patagonia instead.

Few would have imagined so at the time, but it was to be the last time an army seized power from a freely elected government in Spanish-speaking Latin America (in 1980 Bolivia’s army took power to prevent one from taking office). Tanks in the streets were a fixture of the region’s politics for much of the 20th century: the 1976 coup was the sixth in Argentina since 1930. Yet it is now hard to imagine the armed forces taking over almost anywhere.

With surprising speed, they have lost political clout. There are caveats. In Honduras in 2009 the army acted on orders from the Supreme Court and the Congress to expel the elected president, Mel Zelaya, who had allied with Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez. But it did not take power itself. In Paraguay in 2012 the military endorsed the lightning impeachment of Fernando Lugo, an ineffectual left-winger.

In only two countries—Cuba and Venezuela—does the army still play an important political role. Cuba’s president, Raúl Castro, was long the country’s top general; the armed forces control at least half of the economy. In Venezuela Chávez turned the army into a branch of his political movement. Under his successor, Nicolás Maduro, military officers hold many government posts and the armed forces have amassed a business empire. But while generals still mouth regime slogans, there are signs that the army is retreating to a more institutionalist stance.

Most countries now have civilian defence ministers; some have exerted control over defence policy, through white papers and the like. In Colombia, soldiers who commit serious crimes are tried in civilian courts. Ecuador’s president, Rafael Correa, last month sacked the high command after they protested over money.

The task of curbing military prerogatives remains unfinished. In Brazil the armed forces staved off, until recently, a truth commission’s inquiry into their dictatorship of 1964-85; their amnesty remains largely intact. Mexico was long unique in excluding the army from political power. But the generals have exacted a price for sending troops to help the government crack down on drug gangs. They resist trials by civilian courts, and neutered President Enrique Peña Nieto’s plan to turn up to 50,000 troops into policemen.

That was a setback. In a region largely free of wars between countries, governments have not worked out what their armies are for. Guerrilla insurgencies in Colombia and Peru are winding down. The main security threat in the region is from organised crime. Several governments have followed Mexico’s lead in deploying troops against gangsters. Ill prepared for the job, they often end up killing innocents. More constructively, armies are responding to natural disasters, which are happening more often because of climate change. Then there are UN peacekeeping missions, to which the region is becoming a more frequent contributor.

Yet many armies are oversized for such limited roles. “Latin America has not had a particularly threat-based approach to defence spending,” says Antonio Sampaio of the International Institute of Strategic Studies (IISS), a London-based think tank. Faster economic growth in the 2000s brought a swelling of defence budgets. To bolster its image as a rising world power, Brazil embarked on a spending spree, which included purchases of submarines and advanced jet fighters. Now budgets are under pressure again: in real terms, defence spending in the region fell by 2% last year, according to IISS. But at 1.2% of GDP it is higher than it needs to be.

In Argentina, military prestige never recovered from the dictatorship and defeat in the Falklands war of 1982. Elsewhere, polls show that the armed forces enjoy greater trust than politicians. That should not mean that they are left to run their own affairs. Latin Americans are crying out for better-resourced police forces. It is high time for an adjustment in security priorities and spending.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21695083-latin-americas-armed-forces-have-accepted-democracy-remain-law-unto-themselves-soldiers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Reforming India: Bouquets and brickbats

Pakistan’s Mughal heritage: Short cuts

A new president in Myanmar: Changing lanes

The politics of protest in Vietnam: Gatecrashers

Japan’s male-only emperor system: Imperial lather

Propaganda in North Korea: Doctored Strangelove





Articles Sections Next

Reforming India

Bouquets and brickbats

Though the pace of change is not what Narendra Modi promised, he has been lucky with the economy

Mar 19th 2016 | DELHI AND MUMBAI | From the print edition



HAPPILY for its members India’s Parliament convenes for just three sessions a year, for an undemanding 100 days in all. In early spring the finance minister traditionally launches a session devoted to the budget. Arun Jaitley, the current minister, tossed spring flowers aplenty from his saffron-coloured briefcase on February 29th. There were promises to double farm incomes within five years, to raise wages for state employees and to spark new investment, all in a “pro-poor yet pro-market” bouquet of fiscal responsibility.

Mr Jaitley is lucky to have an economic tailwind. Lower global oil prices have helped India. Its companies are vibrant. A growing domestic economy with huge potential makes some of the broader concerns about the world economy such as a slowdown in China and among Western consumers less relevant to India. Still, some of Mr Jaitley’s budget promises look less rosy now, after being roughly handled by India’s opposition and press.

An apparent big boost for crop insurance turns out to have been accomplished largely by shunting funds between ministries, from finance to agriculture. Additional outlays for a rural-jobs scheme for the poor may be welcome, yet before he came to power nearly two years ago, the prime minister, Narendra Modi, condemned the same programme as a monument to failure. Some analysts contend that Mr Jaitley’s claim of robust economic growth of 7.6% is based on flawed statistical modelling. And others say that Mr Modi agreed to stick with a budget deficit of 3.5%, which is restrained by Indian standards, in order to save up for a bigger splash next year, when the more crucial state elections loom.

In a democracy as sprawling and vibrant as India’s, sniping about such things is to be expected. So is a vigorous government response. Jayant Sinha, the junior minister for finance, is impatient with critics. He admits that many of the changes brought about by his government are small or not yet fully articulated. But such initiatives as a programme to open bank accounts for every household (which has already added some 212m accounts); or a hydrocarbons-exploration law that could promote a surge in investment to wean India off costly energy imports; or new bankruptcy rules that will make it easier for failed companies to be closed down; or a broad, yet-to-be-unveiled health insurance scheme aimed at the poor: all promise big returns. Taken together, he insists, such policies are transformational.

That is overstating it but at least Mr Jaitley’s budget will pass. The ruling coalition has a comfortable majority in the Lok Sabha, Parliament’s lower house, and India’s constitution insulates “money bills” from meddling by the Rajya Sabha or upper house, dominated by the opposition.

Meanwhile, the main reason Mr Modi’s government deserves credit, says one economist, is not any vision or drive but simply for appearing far less corrupt than its Congress-led predecessor, and for being reassuringly stolid at a time of deep global uncertainty. The government may be its own worst enemy, say other backers of its liberalising economic agenda, by injecting too much jumlebaazi—“word play” or “catchphrase” in Hindi, ie, hype—into the debate, thereby raising unrealistic expectations of land and labour reform and much more.

On the airwaves, on posters and in government-sponsored print adverts, such promotions as Make In India, and Start Up India Stand Up India, with Mr Modi’s picture always prominent, have made a big splash. Yet when the prime minister declared at a recent IMF-sponsored event in Delhi, the capital, that India had opened “all sectors” to foreign investment, or that it had reached “the highest rank” in last year’s ease-of-doing-business index compiled by the World Bank, participants politely scratched their heads.

India has opened more fields to foreign capital, including recently allowing wholly foreign-owned companies into food-processing industries. But it has generally done so in a piecemeal and often grudging fashion. As for the ease of doing business, a closer look at the index reveals that although India has moved up four places in the 2016 list, it still ranks only 130th out of 189 economies. A tangled bureaucracy, knotty laws and ponderous courts mean that while India ranks eighth in protecting minority shareholders, it trails in 178th place for enforcing contracts and in 183rd place for securing construction permits.

The “licence raj” that began to be dismantled 25 years ago remains only half-demolished. Public-sector banks, burdened with a huge stock of bad loans to stalled infrastructure projects and ailing heavy industries, still make up seven-tenths of the banking system. The finance ministry, charged with privatising state assets, dares not touch such chronic loss-makers as Air India, which employs 28,000 voters.

Yet no amount of government tinkering or talking up is going to turn the Indian elephant into a tiger any time soon. With the central government collecting the equivalent of just 11% of GDP in taxes, it lacks transformational capacity. A commendable, long-term devolution of power from the centre to individual states means that these now spend some 1.7 times what the national government does. Some states have used this growing clout effectively. Others lag far behind, giving India huge discrepancies in economic performance between regions and states (see chart).



Transformational capacity would surely be boosted by a long-planned goods and services tax. It would improve government revenues and market efficiency by unifying a patchwork of sales and other taxes. Yet politics is stymying its introduction. Mr Modi blames the opposition’s obstructionism in Parliament, but his own party behaved just the same way before it came to power. Critics say that it should now be readier for political horse-trading. Its hot-headed Hindu-nationalist supporters, meanwhile, keep handing ammunition to the opposition, allowing it to change the subject from everyday economic issues to emotive questions of sectarianism or human rights.

Raghu accentuates the positive

Yet calmer voices are occasionally heard. Raghuram Rajan, who heads India’s central bank and is an advocate of prudent national finances, remains upbeat. “All too often our public debates generate more noise than illumination,” he says. He also warns of the danger of fixation on slow progress with certain reforms, such as privatisation, even as the overall trend remains positive. When the world’s financial markets are in turmoil, India’s strong growth prospects are something to be thankful for. “We are in a sweet spot,” he says. “Let’s not waste the opportunity.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695035-though-pace-change-not-what-narendra-modi-promised-he-has-been-lucky/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Pakistan’s Mughal heritage

Short cuts

Chinese-style modernisation draws perilously close to brilliant 17th-century landmarks

Mar 19th 2016 | LAHORE | From the print edition



A SLEEK steel ribbon could soon slash through the centre of the capital of the Pakistani province of Punjab, cutting the length of a commuter’s trip across Lahore to just 45 minutes from anything between two and five hours today. Just 6% of the 27 kilometres (16.8 miles) of the proposed Orange metro line would be underground; the rest would sail on pylons across the city’s skyline. Lahoris agree that the new line, a first for Pakistan, would transform their city. But they are bitterly divided about whether that would mean its salvation or the ruin of its considerable charm.

Punjab’s pushy chief minister, Shahbaz Sharif, younger brother of the prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, treats the metro as an urgent priority. His office makes a virtue of the fact that the line will be just a biscuit toss away from some of Lahore’s architectural gems: no better way to study them. The project appals conservationists.

For centuries Lahore was the heart of Mughal Hindustan, known to visitors as the City of Gardens. Today it has a greater profusion of treasures from the Mughal period (the peak of which was in the 17th century) than India’s Delhi or Agra, even if Lahore’s are less photographed. The walled old city is anchored at one end by the red sandstone and white marble bulbs of the huge Badshahi mosque, and fixed at the centre by the polychrome mosque (pictured) of the great Mughal vizier, the Wazir Khan. Hidden jewels are strewn throughout, such as the royal hammam. Farther afield is the “house of wonders” (ie, colonial museum) where Kipling’s “Kim” began. Tucked down a cobblers’ lane is an exquisite shrine built for the wet nurse of Shahjahan, the fifth Mughal emperor.

Conservationists claim law on their side. In January the Lahore High Court granted a stay against the government’s plans, ordering it to stop felling trees and otherwise preparing the ground for the metro. It was argued that building beside at least 11 sites would violate antiquities laws, which forbid construction within 200 metres of a protected area. This week the court gave the advocate-general a deadline of March 21st to make his case against the stay. UNESCO has joined the fray, albeit gently, by asking the government to draw up an assessment of possible damage. It is worried especially about the fate of the Shalimar gardens, built in 1641 by Shahjahan as the Taj Mahal was going up in Agra. The gardens’ foundations will be undercut if track is laid too close.

The Punjab government wants to avoid any more delay. Late last year its director of archaeology, who refused to approve the Orange line, was sacked and replaced with a more supple archaeologist. Mr Sharif is keen that Chinese style and efficiency be brought to the line. Indeed the construction is powered by loans from China’s Exim Bank, with rolling stock from China’s Norinco, a diversified arms-trading company. Some grouse that Exim’s loan was accepted in preference to even cheaper money offered by the Asian Development Bank for an underground metro. But that would have taken years more to install, while Mr Sharif says his metro should be running by the end of 2017. He faces provincial elections the following year.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695034-chinese-style-modernisation-draws-perilously-close-brilliant-17th-century-landmarks-short-cuts/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

A new president in Myanmar

Changing lanes

Aung San Suu Kyi’s party prepares to move from opposition to government

Mar 19th 2016 | NAYPYIDAW | From the print edition

Htin Kyaw and Sister Suu

ANOTHER month, another milestone in Myanmar’s democratic transition, with the country’s first free presidential election on March 15th. The system is that the upper and lower chambers of parliament each nominate a presidential candidate, as does the powerful army. Parliament votes, the winner becomes president and the two losers automatically become vice-presidents. The sizeable majority that Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy (NLD) won in November’s parliamentary election meant that its nominee, Htin Kyaw, an economist and longtime confidante of Miss Suu Kyi’s, was a shoo-in.

Yet much like the parliamentary election, the presidential one, although free, was hardly fair. Had the views of Myanmar’s citizens been taken into account, Miss Suu Kyi would surely have got the job. But the constitution that was drawn up in 2008 by the junta then in power bars from the presidency anyone with a foreign spouse or children. Miss Suu Kyi’s children are British citizens, as was her late husband. The junta seems specifically to have intended to keep her out, even though at the time she was still under house arrest. She is thought recently to have sought to have the rules changed, but the army would not budge.

No matter, it seems: Miss Suu Kyi has said that she will be “above the president”. Mr Htin Kyaw knows his place. After he was affirmed as president, he said that this was “Sister Daw Aung San Suu Kyi’s victory”. She is thought likely to assume the post of foreign minister, calling the shots from there. It is the only position available that would enable her to sit on the powerful 11-member National Defence and Security Council, which will remain packed with army appointees.



Myanmar in graphics: An unfinished peace

Once the government takes office on April 1st Miss Suu Kyi says that her priority will be to forge a lasting peace with an array of ethnic armies that for decades have been battling the central government, mostly in the country’s borderlands. This may be why the NLD’s choice as vice-president, Henry Van Thio, is a member of one of Myanmar’s ethnic minorities, a Chin from the north-west and also a Christian in a predominantly Buddhist land. Yet to some the appointment smacks of tokenism. Mr Van Thio is an unknown who spent years living abroad and has little background in the country’s complex ethnic politics.

As for the other vice-president, Myint Swe is a hardliner who remains on an American sanctions blacklist. The chief minister for Yangon, Myanmar’s business capital, Mr Myint Swe is the nephew of the wife of a former junta leader, Than Shwe. He was head of military intelligence at the time of the monk-led “saffron revolution” in 2007, when the regime gunned down dozens of unarmed protesters.

Mr Myint Swe’s appointment might be a reminder to Miss Suu Kyi not to press for big changes too quickly. The army still wields immense power. In particular, it controls the defence, frontier and home-affairs ministries. That will not change after April 1st. How the strange accommodation between the NLD and the state’s darker forces will work in practice remains unclear, and raises concerns. For example, what happens to Miss Suu Kyi’s drive for peace if it leads to concessions being offered to ethnic groups that the army does not like?

Equally unclear is whether Miss Suu Kyi will be able to abandon the habits that served her in opposition, such as centralising her authority, restricting information, relying on a small group of advisers and demanding absolute loyalty. The NLD and its leader spent decades bravely fighting for political power. Now they must learn how to wield it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695087-aung-san-suu-kyis-party-prepares-move-opposition-government-changing-lanes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The politics of protest in Vietnam

Gatecrashers

By running for parliament, political outsiders challenge one-party rule

Mar 19th 2016 | HANOI | From the print edition



ONE of Vietnam’s political gadflies, Nguyen Quang A, posted a letter this week to the chairman of Vietnam’s National Assembly. Mr Quang A wrote that he had collected 5,000 signatures from among the public, including from famous writers, senior Communist Party officials and a retired general, and that he was now putting himself forward as a candidate for the rubber-stamp parliament. The odds of his bid succeeding, Mr Quang A acknowledges, are “nearly zero”. The assembly has a candidate-vetting process known as the “five gates” to keep out undesirables like him who “self-nominate”. Still, he is happy that his protest candidacy is a rare challenge to the party.

Vietnam’s constitution pays lip service to democratic principles, but the country of 93m people is a repressive one-party state. In it, ordinary folk have little say over who their leaders are. Almost every top official in Vietnam is a Communist Party member. Since 2002 a few hundred Vietnamese have nominated themselves for the National Assembly, but only seven have been successful—and nearly all of those had deep ties to the party powerful in politics or business. Nguyen Dinh Cong, a retired university lecturer who quit the party last month in disgust over its jailing of dissidents, its stuffy Marxism-Leninism and its refusal to allow multi-party elections, says that polls in Vietnam are “just for show”.

Yet this year’s self-nominating candidates, with a deadline this week to register for a parliamentary election scheduled to take place in late May, are testing the limits like never before. Nearly 100 candidates have put themselves forward from Hanoi, the capital, and Ho Chi Minh City, the commercial hub, alone. Some 15 of these are, like Mr Quang A, outspoken democracy activists. They include a former executive at a state-owned broadcaster and the vice-chair of an independent if unofficial journalists’ association. Other self-nominators, though not dissidents, are far removed from the party top brass. For instance, Mai Khoi, a pop singer from Ho Chi Minh City, is campaigning, including on Facebook, as a would-be parliamentary voice for Vietnam’s woefully underrepresented youth.

Rogue candidates have little chance of surviving into May. Yet it will be hard for the Communist Party to silence them entirely, mainly because of their prominence in social media; Mr Quang A, for one, has over 22,000 followers on Facebook, which in Vietnam is not blocked as it is in neighbouring China. Their supporters, too, are increasingly willing to challenge officialdom, as happened last year when a campaign on Facebook managed to halt a municipal effort to chop down thousands of Hanoi’s trees.

What is more, barring protest candidates from running for the National Assembly may have the effect of earning them an audience with Barack Obama, when the American leader visits Vietnam in May to promote the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an American-led trade pact that was signed in February but faces Congressional resistance. He would probably love to be seen meeting some of the authoritarian regime’s most outspoken critics.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695082-running-parliament-political-outsiders-challenge-one-party-rule-gatecrashers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Japan’s male-only emperor system

Imperial lather

The United Nations fails to stick up for the rights of empresses

Mar 19th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



THE progenitor of Japan’s imperial line, supposedly 2,600 years ago, was female: Amaterasu, goddess of the sun. But for most of the time since, all emperors have been male. This has exercised the UN’s Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. Recently it concluded that Japan should let women inherit the Chrysanthemum throne, too.

It is not clear what Emperor Akihito, who is 82 (and has a hugely popular wife), thinks about this. But the Japanese prime minister blew his top. Shinzo Abe leapt to the defence of a male-only line, saying it was rooted in Japanese history. The panel’s meddling, he said, was “totally inappropriate”. Cowed, it withdrew its recommendation that the law of succession be changed.

Polls suggest that most Japanese would welcome a female monarch. A decade ago a looming succession crisis triggered a robust discussion, led by Junichiro Koizumi, then prime minister and Mr Abe’s political mentor, on whether to allow a woman to ascend the throne. But the birth of Hisahito, a boy prince, ended the debate. A draft law was quietly shelved.

Mr Abe does not share Mr Koizumi’s iconoclasm. An arch-traditionalist, he wants the male-only system preserved to protect the imperial bloodline. But in other ways he has been an unlikely champion of diversity since he came to power (for the second time) in 2012. He has cajoled Japanese firms into promoting more women and urged them to make it easier for them to come back to work after having children.

There is a long way to go. Japan is bottom of the rich world in most rankings of sexual equality. For the past month Mr Abe has struggled with the political fallout from a much-read blog post by a working mother angry at a chronic shortage of day-care places. Still, Mr Abe’s efforts appear to be getting somewhere. From April big companies will have to declare their plans for promoting women. The hope is that this will shame firms that overlook female talent. As for the proportion of board members who are women, it has inched up by a percentage point in the past year—to 2.7%.

The UN committee notes this progress but laments foot-dragging on other issues. Japanese women are still meant to need spousal consent for abortions, it says, even in cases of rape. Divorced women must wait months before remarrying thanks to an archaic rule designed to remove uncertainty over the paternity of unborn children. For most Japanese women, the question of whether or not some future princess can become empress is hardly pressing. But Yoko Shida, a constitutional scholar, says it matters nonetheless. It is, she says, a symbol of discrimination.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695073-united-nations-fails-stick-up-rights-empresses-imperial-lather/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Propaganda in North Korea

Doctored Strangelove

Staged photographs are combed for clues

Mar 19th 2016 | SEOUL | From the print edition

Kim Jong Un gives on-the-spot missile guidance

“THE whole point of the Doomsday Machine is lost if you keep it a secret,” Dr Strangelove tells the Soviet ambassador in Stanley Kubrick’s satire on cold-war fears of nuclear conflict. The point is not lost on North Korea, which has recently been repeating its threat to nuke the White House until “not even ashes are left”. To bolster the warnings the official news agency churns out pictures of the dictator, Kim Jong Un, in military set pieces: Mr Kim giving launch orders at a satellite centre (with an ash tray in view); Mr Kim in a fur hat guiding a simulated ballistic missile re-entry; Mr Kim in the conning tower of a steaming submarine (South Korean intelligence recently reported that one of the North’s submarines had sunk, for unclear reasons). Most striking of all, on March 9th Mr Kim (pictured) was next to a silver orb, presented on courtly red velvet, that North Korea claimed was a miniaturised nuclear warhead—though it is highly unlikely to have the capability for that.

Weapons wonks pore over such images for clues as to North Korea’s actual capabilities. Melissa Hanham of the James Martin Centre for Nonproliferation Studies, an American think-tank, says that includes gauging parts using the size of other objects in the image, and collating shots from different angles to glean a three-dimensional picture. James Pearson of Reuters enlarged a map in view on a desk in a recent photograph, overlaid it with Google Earth’s imaging and tilted it to give a more useful, overhead perspective—revealing one North Korean missile target to be a nuclear plant in South Korea.

Last year Ms Hanham surmised that a pesticide plant Mr Kim visited was probably making anthrax. Yet, she says, the images may have been meant as a “little wink” to America, which had recently been found mistakenly to have sent live, rather than inactivated, anthrax to a South Korean military base for training.

North Korea puts out more propaganda imagery than ever, often with things like the Young Leader’s cigarettes airbrushed out. But where Pyongyangologists used to pinpoint Mr Kim’s whereabouts through his outings and his dynasty’s famous “on-the-spot guidance” at factories, farms and plants, now he is pictured inside anonymous military command buildings and tents: at once everywhere—and nowhere.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695078-staged-photographs-are-combed-clues-doctored-strangelove/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Labour unrest: Deep in a pit

UN covenants: Suppressed in translation

Banyan: This insubstantial pageant





Articles Sections Next

Labour unrest

Deep in a pit

Large protests by miners augur ill for the government’s reform plans

Mar 19th 2016 | SHUANGYASHAN | From the print edition



“COMMUNIST Party give us back our money”, “We want to live, we need to eat!” Such were the slogans daubed on banners that were displayed on March 12th during a protest by thousands of coal miners in the dingy streets of Shuangyashan, a city in Heilongjiang province near the border with Russia. The demonstrators gathered outside the headquarters of Longmay, the largest mining company in the north-east and Heilongjiang’s biggest state-owned enterprise (SOE). They demanded wages which they said they had not received for at least two months. Some protesters blocked railway lines; others scuffled with police wearing riot gear. Internet censors deleted pictures of the unrest (such as the one shown) as they spread across social media.

The protest was one of the biggest by workers at an SOE for many years. It was an indication of the problems that China’s government will probably face as it seeks to cut excess capacity among SOEs like Longmay and reduce their enormous losses. In February the labour minister, Yin Weimin, said that 1.3m coal workers and 500,000 steel workers could lose their jobs over the next five years.

Other estimates say 3m-5m people may be thrown out of work in these industries as well as in aluminium production and glassmaking. That is far fewer than the tens of millions who lost their jobs during SOE restructuring in the late 1990s. But the economies of some cities, including Shuangyashan, are driven by a handful of large SOEs. In these, downsizing will be traumatic and possibly turbulent.

Labour unrest is rising everywhere as economic growth slows (see chart). Many firms, like Longmay, are reacting to financial distress by paying wages late or not at all. According to China Labour Bulletin, a Hong Kong-based NGO, there were 2,700 strikes last year, twice the number in 2014. In the two months leading up to China’s lunar new-year holiday in early February, there were over 1,000 strikes and protests, 90% of them related to the non-payment of wages. Three days after the protest in Shuangyashan, an almost equally large one began at Tonghua Steel in neighbouring Jilin province, also over wage arrears.



In Shuangyashan (its name, meaning Double Duck Mountains, refers to the shape of two nearby peaks), the authorities have tried to soothe the protesters by giving them overdue pay. Some mine workers say they have now begun receiving their salaries for January, and that they have been assured their pay packets for February will be coming soon. But the government remains nervous of further unrest. On March 15th police were still ubiquitous, on the streets of Shuangyashan as well as outside a nearby mine. In the city centre, a row of women who said the men in their families all worked in mines sat holding placards offering their services as cleaners or house painters. “We have no money to eat. What do they expect us to do?” said one woman angrily before being told by police to stop talking. A man who identified himself as a government official followed your correspondent everywhere.

The protests in Shuangyashan were particularly embarrassing for the party, occurring as they did during the 12-day annual session of China’s parliament, the National People’s Congress (NPC), which ended on March 16th. Every year during the NPC session, officials try even more strenuously than usual to prevent street unrest, lest it tarnish the image of political unity and national prosperity that they want the NPC to project (see article). Party bosses in Heilongjiang will get their knuckles rapped by leaders in Beijing for failing to anticipate this outbreak, which followed months of grumbling among Longmay’s workers about lay-offs and overdue pay. In September, the company said it would shed 100,000 of its 240,000 staff.

Remarks made during the NPC by Lu Hao, Heilongjiang’s governor and its deputy party-chief, appeared to ignite the unrest. On March 6th Mr Lu said Longmay’s 80,000 coalface workers had not gone unpaid in any month, nor had they been “shortchanged a single cent”. This prompted outrage in Shuangyashan, where many people said that some miners were owed up to six months’ wages. To avoid heavy punishment, protesters in China normally stop short of attacking senior leaders by name. One of the miners’ banners, however, proclaimed: “Lu Hao talks rubbish with his eyes wide open”.

Mr Lu, who at 48 is China’s youngest provincial governor, had been regarded as a rising star—a possible candidate, even, for elevation to the ruling Politburo next year. He is thought to be a protégé of President Xi Jinping. Whether he will remain a favourite is now in doubt. Global Times, a newspaper in Beijing, called Mr Lu’s performance (without naming him) “regrettable”. Mr Lu said he had been misled. Longmay, he clarified, had not only failed to pay workers, but was also in arrears on its taxes and contributions to social welfare.

Shuangyashan’s problems may be extreme, but they are familiar to many political leaders—not least in the north-east. The region is home to many of the large state-owned firms that have found themselves saddled by vast amounts of spare capacity thanks to a slump in demand. The coal and steel industries are among the worst affected. Output of both fell by 6% in the first two months of the year but demand is falling faster. Total debt in China, at 240% of GDP, is alarmingly high; SOEs have the biggest share of it. Many are not earning enough to service existing debts, so they are borrowing more to pay them off.

Ducking out?

The government appears to recognise that the only way to break the debt cycle is to close or slim down loss-making firms. At the end of the NPC, the prime minister, Li Keqiang, repeated his commitment to “structural reform”, and said the government would strive to find new jobs for those laid off. The labour ministry says it is setting up a fund worth 100 billion yuan ($15 billion) to help redundant workers find new employment. Some Chinese economists worry that this will not be enough and that the government will lose its stamina for tough reform.

The north-east weathered the SOE shake-up of the 1990s with the help of dollops of central-government aid. It is likely to need a lot more. A sign over the exit of a work site near Shuangyashan reads: “The Number Three Mine will have a more beautiful tomorrow!” This week may have been slightly better than the previous one for miners who got their pay, but for many residents the future is hardly alluring.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21695091-large-protests-miners-augur-ill-governments-reform-plans-deep-pit/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

UN covenants

Suppressed in translation

How Chinese versions of UN covenants gloss over human rights

Mar 19th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



“THE Chinese dream is the Chinese people’s dream of human rights.” That was not uttered by one of China’s beleaguered dissidents, who are now suffering the most intense crackdown on human-rights activists that the country has waged in many years. They were, in fact, the words of a foreign ministry official, in a speech this month marking the 50th anniversary of the UN’s adoption of two covenants on the protection of a wide range of political, cultural and other freedoms. As a signatory to the documents, China has little choice but to parrot their language, even though it often shows little regard for what the covenants mean.

China signed the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) in the late 1990s in an effort to improve its image abroad, which was badly tarnished by the bloody suppression of the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989. The government has embraced neither document with enthusiasm, but in 2001 its rubber-stamp legislature ratified the more palatable of them, the ICESCR. It has yet to take that step with the meatier ICCPR. In November a court in the southern province of Guangdong sentenced an activist, Sun Desheng, to two-and-a-half years in prison for the crime of touring the country holding up banners calling for ratification of the ICCPR, and circulating photographs of them on the internet. It also jailed another dissident, Guo Feixiong, for six years, partly for organising the banner campaign.

So squeamish is China about both covenants that it prefers to use its own, alternatively phrased, translations of them rather than the official Chinese-language versions approved by the UN in 1966. China’s seat in the General Assembly was then held by the (also, at the time, human-rights averse) government in Taiwan. The unofficial versions began circulating in 1973, a couple of years after the Communist government in Beijing took over the seat. China does not dispute that the versions of 1966 are valid. But its diplomats and scholars usually quote the unofficial ones.

There are significant differences between the two sets. “In far too many cases the revised drafts do violence to the plain meaning,” write James Seymour and Patrick Yuk-tung Wong of the Chinese University of Hong Kong in a recent paper on the topic. Where the authentic versions say governments “must make every effort” to observe rights, the alternative ones say only that they “should promote” them. The right “to serve in public office” is downgraded to a right to “participate in public affairs” (ie, choosing which Communist Party-approved candidate will serve in a toothless local legislature). There are also omissions in the unofficial versions, for example of a stipulation that members of the ICCPR’s human-rights committee “serve in their personal capacity” (China would balk at allowing its delegates to do so, lest they feel emboldened to criticise their own government). There are also formulations in the unofficial texts that are entirely invented, such as one requiring that “international remedies” be exhausted before any human-rights case is brought before the committee.

Scholars argue over the importance of these discrepancies, but there is no denying that they were introduced in a most irregular manner. Mr Seymour says the alternative versions may have been produced by Chinese diplomats who were not aware at the time that UN-approved translations already existed. But he also believes China has been deliberately promoting the unofficial versions in the years since. “It was probably very innocent in the beginning and then it took on a life of its own,” he says. In public, the UN has avoided wading into the issue of rival translations; privately, one UN official calls it “a rather delicate matter”. Both sets can be found on the sprawling UN website. That may be helpful for Chinese diplomats seeking wiggle-room, though they would prefer to be pinned down to neither.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21695095-how-chinese-versions-un-covenants-gloss-over-human-rights-suppressed-translation/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

This insubstantial pageant

The National People’s Congress is neither an effective parliament nor good theatre

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



IN A country that has changed nearly beyond recognition in a generation, it is perhaps reassuring that some things remain much the same. Every spring the forbidding, cavernous pile of the Great Hall of the People on Tiananmen Square plays host to a timeless ritual. The nearly 3,000 delegates to the National People’s Congress (NPC) gather for a brief annual session (it lasted 12 days this year, ending on March 16th). This is what the constitution calls the “highest organ of state power”. Yet its members behave like well-trained extras in a drama scripted elsewhere. Rather than evolving, as once seemed possible, into a forum where China’s problems are discussed and different views are aired, the NPC is becoming less open and more controlled. In that respect at least, it reflects what is happening in the country more broadly.

As they have since the first NPC convened in 1954, delegates stay heroically awake as turgid speakers drone on; they applaud enthusiastically on cue; and they approve, without exception, the laws, budgets and government reports put before them. The synchronised pouring of tea into leaders’ cups, aligned with geometric precision, is as immaculate as ever. Of course, the delegates themselves have moved with the times. They remain predominantly male, but over the decades their Mao jackets have given way to Western suits and they have become disproportionately rich. Spittoon use has dwindled. Delegates were banned from smoking in public in 2013. And, under the austere anti-corruption drive waged by the Communist Party’s leader, Xi Jinping, who took over the previous autumn, they are best advised to shun lavish banquets for frugal room-service fare. Being an NPC delegate is even less fun than it used to be.

The biggest change may have been in 1986, when electronic voting replaced shows of hands. Since then “no” votes and abstentions have been watched for hints of dissent. A peak of rebelliousness was scaled in 1992, when only two-thirds of delegates voted for the plan to build the massive Three Gorges dam on the Yangzi river. Whatever the constitution says, the NPC has always been subordinate to the party. But at times it has seemed to have acquired power of its own—in the 1980s, for example, when its head, or speaker, was Peng Zhen, a fierce party elder with an unusual fetish for constitutional propriety. During pro-democracy protests across China in 1989 some even dreamed that Mr Peng’s successor, Wan Li, seen as a liberal, might convene an emergency session of the NPC to broker a peaceful resolution.

No one harbours fantasies about the independence of the present NPC. It nodded through the nine documents presented to it this year, including not just the budget and prime minister’s report to the nation, but a new five-year plan. One new law, regulating charities, was much debated and amended—but not in its fundamentals. It scraped through with the votes of 92.5% of delegates, compared with 97.3% for the five-year plan. The atmosphere of disciplined conformity was enhanced this year by the removal of comfortable seats from the foyer of the Great Hall of the People, where delegates in the past would sit and chat with each other, and even, on occasion, with journalists.

Nor did much of interest punctuate another annual ritual, the closing press conference by the prime minister, Li Keqiang. He defended the government’s GDP growth target, which for the first time in recent years is a range, from 6.5-7.0%. He noted, accurately enough, that it would be impossible for him to say China could not reach it. Anxious to accentuate only the positive, he also said China would reform its steel and coal industries without mass unemployment. Yet the government had already given a number for those who would lose their jobs in the next five years: 1.8m.

China’s press, which tends to be even more circumspect than usual during NPC sessions, is especially concerned this year to find only good news to report. Last month President Xi visited the leading newspaper, news agency and television station, to remind journalists that their organs’ “surname” is “party”. Subsequently, a list of 21 sensitive topics of special concern to the censors was leaked. They range from North Korea to smog to a new fad for wearing lapel badges bearing Mr Xi’s beatific visage. An article quoting a member of the committee that advises the NPC, complaining about the constraints on free expression, was censored. So was an article reporting this. Meanwhile, the party has launched yet another ideological campaign. Assuming his people have already mastered his “Four Comprehensives” policy and his “Five Development Concepts”, Mr Xi now wants them to start counting on their toes as well. The press is promoting a new “Four Consciousnesses” movement. They span “ideology, the whole, the core and the line”. It seems yet another way of saying absolute loyalty to the party and its leader is the order of the day.

Such stuff as dreams are made on

Obscurantist propaganda by numbers; a Potemkin parliament; a stifled press; even lapel badges of the great helmsman: it all reeks of the bad old days. But the transformation of the China outside the Great Hall of the People cannot be wished away. At Mr Li’s press conference a Chinese reporter was able to ask a question (about the portability of medical insurance) based on 10m responses to an online survey. And delegates can at least raise concerns from the real world. Old-style press censorship is easy; but all those docile delegates have access on their smartphones to the mockery and anger it provokes on the internet. Suppressing online dissent is an endless game of whack-a-mole.

The NPC’s unruffled, unaltered façade is an unconvincing distraction from the ferment affecting a society in the grip of wrenching economic and social change. Mr Xi’s instinct, it seems, in the face of the anxiety, dissent and even protest this provokes is to take refuge in the party’s old certainty: unity is strength. But restricting even further what is permissible for a tame parliament and tightly policed press looks less like unity than weakness.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21695074-national-peoples-congress-neither-effective-parliament-nor-good-theatre/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Africa’s ports: The bottleneck

Nigeria’s currency crisis: Can you spare a dollar?

Politics and patronage in South Africa: All the president’s friends

Russia’s Syria surprise: Putin the peacemaker

Tension in Saudi Arabia’s Eastern Province: After the execution

Iraq: The unquiet cleric





Articles Sections Next

Africa’s ports

The bottleneck

New investment alone will not fix Africa’s ports. Governments need to deal with pilfering officials, too

Mar 19th 2016 | MOMBASA | From the print edition



AT THE entrance to the Port of Mombasa, just in front of where machinegun toting policemen check visitors’ permits, is a shipping container mounted on a plinth. It was erected last year to commemorate the port processing 1m containers (or TEUs; twenty-foot equivalent units are the industry standard) in a year for the first time. It is a boast about how much the port, east Africa’s biggest, has improved in recent years. And at the other end of the bay, a brand new container terminal juts out into the water, a smooth new road leading from it. On a hillside nearby, Chinese workers in straw hats look over the valley where a new railway is being built from the port to Nairobi.

All this gives a solid sense of progress. Yet behind the scenes, not everything is going well at Mombasa. Though the builder, Toyo, a Japanese company, has handed over the new terminal to the government, a tender has not yet been agreed to run it. Instead, the port’s management is in chaos. Last month the head of the Kenya Ports Authority (KPA) was sacked along with six other senior officials. Corruption has soared of late, grumble Kenyan businessmen. “The port of Mombasa is completely rotten,” says one chief executive.

What is true of Mombasa is true of ports across Africa. From Nigeria to Djibouti, decrepit and inefficient container ports are being expanded with money from the World Bank, governments (particularly those of China and Japan) and logistics firms such as Bolloré (a big French company which operates 14 port concessions across the continent). That offers the potential to transform African trade. Yet corruption and poor management may mean the gains will be squandered.

Good ports are perhaps more important to Africa than any other region. On a continent bereft of good roads and productive factories, fully 90% of trade happens by sea. Ports also corrall trade where it can be regulated and taxed: in Kenya, for example, some 40% of government revenue is generated by the customs department. Ports are also the means by which much contraband, from drugs to ivory, escapes to the rest of the world.

Onshore pirates

Yet many African ports are dire. And most are tiny. In 2013 sub-Saharan Africa’s largest, Durban, in South Africa, processed just 2.6m containers––a thirteenth as many as Shanghai, the world’s busiest port. And they cost a fortune to use. According to the World Bank, in 2011 shipping a container from Africa was typically twice as time-consuming as getting one shipped from India and about six times as slow as doing it through an American port. On average, containers sit waiting in African ports for three weeks before being taken to their final destination—compared with a week in other emerging markets.

This makes Africa poorer. The World Bank’s figures suggest that delays in ports add roughly 10% to the cost of imported goods, more in many cases than tariffs. For exports the harm is worse. In northern Mozambique, the banana industry could be 20 times larger if Nacala—a natural deep-water port—were as cheap as those in Ecuador, reckons Jake Walter of TechnoServe, an NGO. Instead, perhaps 80% of containers leave Africa empty.

Poor transport links aggravate matters. At Mombasa, the old British-built narrow gauge railway can only take 5% of the containers that are offloaded, says Haji Masemo, a spokesman for the KPA. This means that the port suffers a constant traffic jam of lorries trying to get out. In Lagos, Nigeria’s commercial capital, the terminals are both practically in the city centre, so it can take an entire day for a lorry to get from the terminal to a warehouse.

Much of the delay and cost is caused by bureaucracy and lack of competition. At Mombasa, as well as the KPA, importers have to deal with the Kenya Police, the revenue authority and the standards bureau, all of which can delay a shipment. Arguments over the valuations of products or the tariffs applicable can last for weeks. Neither the authorities nor port operators have much incentive to speed things up, because users generally have few alternatives, and are often paying for storage while they wait.

Then there is corruption. Philip de Burgh of Gray Page, a maritime investigations firm, recounts how a client was exporting copper cathodes from Congo through Dar es Salaam in Tanzania. When the containers were opened in China, it was discovered that the copper had been replaced by rocks. In November Rwanda’s mining minister made a formal complaint about the damage being done to his country’s industry by corruption in Tanzania. Sandra Sequeira of the London School of Economics found that 53% of shipments through Maputo, Mozambique’s main port, were eased by bribes, usually to customs officials.

New port infrastructure should help with congestion but only if roads and railways are upgraded, too. New terminals are being built as far afield as Nigeria, Ivory Coast, Cameroon and Togo. However, graft and inefficiency are proving harder to tackle. Kenya is not alone in sacking officials. In December Tanzania’s new president, John Magufuli, dissolved the board of the port authority and sacked the permanent secretary of the transport ministry. But Tanzania has sacked three port chiefs in three years; Kenya has been through half a dozen in a couple of decades. High-profile defenestrations do not do much to change the incentives faced by officials.

Simpler fixes—such as moving documentation online—would probably prove more effective. But port workers have powerful lobbies, and changes to rules are not as glamorous as expensive new projects. At Mombasa, officials talk proudly about the next stage of their construction plans: a wholly new mega-port at Lamu, a pretty town on the northern coast. Maritime analysts say that the idea is barmy—the roads are terrible and the area nearby is home to a fierce Somali insurgency. But it seems that for politicians, it is easier to cut ribbons than corruption.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695054-new-investment-alone-will-not-fix-africas-ports-governments-need-deal/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Nigeria’s currency crisis

Can you spare a dollar?

How to make a hard-currency shortage worse

Mar 19th 2016 | ABUJA | From the print edition



THE mutterings of discontent are growing louder in Nigeria’s street markets. The price of a bag of rice has surged by 12.5% in the past month. Supplies of bread have dwindled after bakers turned off their ovens to protest about the rising cost of flour. The rich lament that milk is missing from supermarket shelves. The poor complain about the price of garri (cassava flour). A fish importer estimates that 70m Nigerians can no longer afford his wares.

Such are the symptoms of Nigeria’s foreign-exchange crisis. Africa’s most populous nation exports oil and imports nearly everything else. As oil prices have collapsed, Nigeria’s foreign earnings have tumbled with them, putting huge pressure on the naira, the local currency. Yet President Muhammadu Buhari refuses to allow the naira to devalue, fretting that this would fuel inflation. Economists point out that a weaker currency would simply reflect that Nigeria is poorer now than it was when oil was above $100 a barrel. He ignores them.

Since Mr Buhari came to power in May, the central bank has kept the official exchange rate artificially strong and restricted the supply of dollars. It refuses to release any for imports of a range of goods including meat, margarine and toothpicks.

The policy is not working: inflation hit 11.4% in February and growth has fallen to 2.1%. Factories are closing down for lack of supplies and the managers of those still running spend much of their time trying to find things to sell abroad to raise dollars, such as gold jewellery or gum arabic. Most have been pushed into the black market, where they pay about 60% above the official rate unless they are lucky enough to get some of the $200m or so released each week by the central bank. That the bank has the power to hand out subsidised greenbacks naturally invites corruption. An executive at a big importer says its budgets now include a 30% “premium” to be paid to central bank officials to get dollars.

Yet Mr Buhari seems unlikely to change his mind. So senior members of his party are now pushing for some form of dual exchange rate. This would leave the naira’s official value unchanged, satisfying the president, while legitimising a parallel market that would supposedly be used for non-essential imports. In practice most currency flows would soon be made at this new market rate. This solution is far from optimal—the central bank window would be a continued source of corruption and patronage—but better than the status quo.

Without some flexibility on the currency, expect food shortages to worsen.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695065-how-make-hard-currency-shortage-worse-can-you-spare-dollar/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Politics and patronage in South Africa

All the president’s friends

A family close to the heart of power

Mar 19th 2016 | JOHANNESBURG | From the print edition

No laughing matter

THE Gupta family estate spans a leafy block in Saxonwold, a genteel suburb of Johannesburg. Security guards mill about the gated entrance to a cluster of mansions; the main house, with its soaring white columns, has the bearing of an official residence. The family, led by brothers Atul, Ajay and Rajesh, came from Saharanpur, in northern India, to South Africa from 1993 onwards. They have since built a business empire with interests in mining and media, along with a close friendship with President Jacob Zuma.

Quite how far their reach may stretch was underscored on March 16th when the deputy finance minister, Mcebisi Jonas, alleged in an official Finance Ministry press release that members of the Gupta family had offered him the position of his boss, the respected finance minister Nhlanhla Nene. He says he rejected the offer. Mr Nene was sacked in December and replaced by an unknown backbencher, who was himself fired a few days later. At the time many saw the move as an attempt to rein in Mr Nene, who had stood up to powerful allies of the president and resisted some of Mr Zuma’s projects, such as an unaffordable plan to buy nuclear power stations costing 1 trillion rand ($63 billion).

The claim by Mr Jonas, which has been denied by the Gupta family, sheds new light on this incident. It follows other claims relating to the influence exercised by the Gupta family, including one by Vytjie Mentor, a former MP for the ruling African National Congress (ANC), who wrote on Facebook that she too had been offered a ministerial post by members of the family.

The Guptas’ friendship with Mr Zuma is well known: neighbours say they have often seen the presidential motorcade arrive at the compound. Mr Zuma’s family members, including one of his wives, have worked for Gupta-owned companies and hold plum directorships with them. Duduzane Zuma, one of his sons, has a stake in a company that is buying a coal mine in partnership with the family.

The Gupta brothers firmly deny exploiting political connections to land favourable deals, but their influence has caused deep divisions in the ANC. With every new revelation, Mr Zuma’s hold on the party is likely to weaken.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695057-family-close-heart-power-all-presidents-friends/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Russia’s Syria surprise

Putin the peacemaker

Russia’s president appears to turn from hard power to diplomacy

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

Ta ta for now

THERE is nothing Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, likes more than taking everyone by surprise. Except, perhaps, demonstrating that his country is an independent actor on the world stage that has to be taken seriously. Thus, the announcement from the Kremlin on March 14th that Russia was partially withdrawing its forces in Syria was vintage Putin. His message was that Russia’s military objectives had been achieved and it was now time to support peace talks in Geneva that were due to resume on the same day. Better still, from Mr Putin’s point of view, he left everyone else guessing about his real intentions and what he might do next.

A number of things can, however, be construed from Mr Putin’s démarche. The first is that Russia is not pulling out its forces completely. It will retain its naval presence in Tartus; at least a dozen fast jets will continue to fly from its air base near Latakia; about 1,000 military advisers and special forces will stay; and the recently-installed S-400 air defence system covering the north-west of the country will also be kept in place. Should the fragile “cessation of hostilities” that Russia and America brokered last month fall apart, it can re-escalate very quickly. But for now, Russia can cut the $3m a day cost of its military operation, while preserving much of the leverage it has bought.

The second is that Mr Putin’s claim that his forces had “fulfilled their main mission in Syria” was revealing. Gone was any attempt to cling to the fiction that the intervention had been primarily aimed at hitting Islamic State (IS) rather than to preserve the imperilled regime of Bashar al-Assad, the Syrian dictator. The 9,000 or so sorties that have been flown by Russian planes since October shifted the military balance in favour of the regime. Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoygu, boasted that his forces had helped the government regain control over more than 400 “populated areas” and 4,000 square miles (10,000 sq km) of territory.

But while the survival of the regime was the objective, it is now clear that Mr Putin was never inclined to give Mr Assad the kind of military blank cheque needed for him to take back all or even most of the country. Mr Assad’s bullish talk of recent weeks and his unwillingness to engage seriously with the UN-sponsored Geneva peace process appear to have gone down badly in the Kremlin. Whether that means, as some suggest, that Mr Putin is ready to abandon Mr Assad so long as he has a say in who succeeds him, is less certain. But Mr Assad has been reminded not to try being the tail that wags the dog.

That leads to a third conclusion. John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, and Sergei Lavrov, his Russian opposite number, are known to have discussed the possibility of a federal structure for Syria as the only way to bring peace. The outlines of a partition that would be acceptable to Russia are already visible.

Underpinned by Russian and Iran, the minority Alawite sect to which Mr Assad belongs would control territory in the west, running roughly from Latakia in the north down to Damascus in the south; an autonomous Syrian-Kurdish region in the north-east, known as Rojava, would be established; the rest of the country would be left to the Sunni opposition, who would be helped by Western and Russian air power to expel IS from its stronghold in Raqqa.

Unfortunately, the facts on the ground do not yet support such a simple solution. One of many obstacles to such a carve-up is that some big cities, such as Aleppo and Homs, remain highly contested. In the past few weeks, pro-regime forces have more or less encircled Aleppo. But a fourth conclusion is that Russian and Iranian military advisers may not have much confidence in the ability of the Syrian army, depleted by five years of conflict, and a gaggle of Shia militias to conduct a successful offensive against the strongly-defended city. The Iranians have quietly also been pulling out some of their military personnel as their battlefield losses have mounted.

What all this means for the talks in Geneva being orchestrated by the UN envoy Staffan de Mistura is too early to say. Iran and Saudi Arabia are still at loggerheads; the conflict between Turkey and the Kurds becomes ever more bitter. And above all, despite Mr Putin’s implicit message to both Mr Assad and the opposition that neither of them can expect to get all they want, there is scant sign from either of a readiness for compromise.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21694996-putin-appears-turn-hard-power-diplomacy-russians-show-their-hand/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Tension in Saudi Arabia’s Eastern Province

After the execution

The kingdom’s Shia are angry

Mar 19th 2016 | AWAMIYA | From the print edition



AWAMIYA, a town of some 30,000 in Saudi Arabia’s Shia-dominated Eastern Province, had been simmering ever since its cleric, Nimr al-Nimr, called on his followers to join the Arab spring in 2011. When the security forces responded that year with live ammunition, and incarcerated hundreds of youths, it only fired him up him more. “If we don’t get our dignity we cannot be blamed for seeking independence,” a video clip shows him saying. And when on January 1st this year the Saudi authorities executed Nimr and two fellow Shia on charges of treachery and inciting terrorism, Awamiya started to put his aspiration for self-rule into practice.

The town’s walls today carry the message. “Long live al-Nimr” and “Death to the Al Sauds” are some of its milder slogans. Nimr’s portrait hangs from billboards and balconies alongside the Imam Hussein’s, an ancient symbol of Sunni oppression. Lamp posts are laced with black ribbon. Apart from the heavily garrisoned police station, whose approach road is strewn with rocks, tyres and barbed wire, the town is bereft of a government presence. Booksellers openly sell copies of Shia liturgies banned elsewhere in the kingdom. The cemetery is full of women crouched in mourning aside the colourful shrines of the town’s 23 “martyrs”, piled high with flowers, flags and memorabilia.

Some 10% of Saudi citizens are Shia. How angry and alienated they are, outside Awamiya, is unclear. The town has been an exception ever since Nimr’s grandfather led an uprising after the Al Sauds captured eastern Arabia in 1913; it opposed the treaty other Shia notables signed with Abdelaziz, the founder of Saudi Arabia, in 1932. Most Shia follow more mainstream clerics, such as Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani in Najaf in Iraq, and Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ali Khamenei.

But the authorities are taking few chances. At the exits off the highway skirting Shia towns, security personnel man checkpoints and inspect papers. They say they are protecting the Shia from Islamic State’s suicide bombers, who have struck six Shia mosques since late 2014. But since Nimr’s death, many Shia suspect their purpose is more to keep turbulent Shia under control. Most Shia would rather be protected by their own. On Fridays across the Eastern Province, young men in luminous jackets park cars and forklifts in the alleyways leading to mosques. Shia communal leaders, who kept away from Nimr when he was alive, have trooped to his mourning tent and hailed him as a hero and martyr.

Saudi Arabia’s military support for Sunnis fighting Shia in other countries has further inflamed matters. The kingdom’s decision to sever ties with Iran upset local Shia, who have been banned from visiting Iran’s holy sites. Activists protest on social media. “Expression has become a capital offence,” says Nissima al-Sada, an activist who was barred from running in December’s local elections. Reprisals are getting violent. Gunmen have shot dead several policemen, and earlier this year torched a bus belonging to Aramco, the state oil firm.

Nimr’s death has made compromise harder, but it is not too late to pull back from the brink. For all the talk of King Salman’s close ties with conservatives, state media sternly condemned IS’s attacks on Shia mosques. A lessening of tensions in Syria, too, might soothe tempers back in Saudi Arabia. Even Nimr’s brother supports a strong Saudi presence in the town, provided Shia are treated equally. “We want to be loyal Saudis,” he says. “We tell the government: deal with us politically, not militarily.” Lifting the death sentence that hangs over a reported nine more Shia might be a good start.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21694960-kingdoms-shias-are-angry-tension-and-revolt-saudi-arabias-eastern-province/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Iraq

The unquiet cleric

A new challenge for an embattled prime minister

Mar 19th 2016 | BAGHDAD | From the print edition

Ready to storm the Green Zone

THE biggest challenge faced these days by Iraq’s prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, arguably does not come from Islamic State, even though it has occupied a third of his country. It comes instead from one of his own Shia political partners: Muqtada al-Sadr, a cleric who has escalated his political demands into a threat to storm government offices.

Mr Sadr, whose fighters battled American and Iraqi government forces between 2004 and 2008, has re-emerged from a period of political silence to champion the rights of the common Iraqi—insisting that Mr Abadi root out corruption, fire many of his ministers and appoint a new cabinet of technocrats.

To drive home his demands, the young cleric launched a show of force on March 4th with a huge protest outside the fortress-like Green Zone, where government offices and diplomatic missions are located. When security officials declared the night before that the protest would not be allowed, Mr Sadr sent fighters with rocket-propelled grenades into the streets. The authorities backed down. But although the protesters then demonstrated peacefully under the watchful eye of Mr Sadr’s own security forces, the cleric has told them to be ready to storm the Green Zone if he gives the word.

For many of the poor, jobless and angry young men who make up Mr Sadr’s base of support the message is attractive. “Everybody hates the Green Zone in the street—it’s a symbol of corruption and a symbol of occupation. People think there are treasures inside,” says a well-placed official, who predicts that Iraqi security forces would refuse to fire on fellow Shias if they did storm the gates.

On the other side of the concrete blast walls, razor wire and bomb-sniffing dogs that protect the Green Zone is an Iraqi prime minister struggling to fulfil promises made a year ago to reform ministries and arrest corrupt politicians, but with little power to do so. “Abadi is a weak leader even within his own Dawa party,” where he is overshadowed by Nuri al-Maliki, the former prime minister, says Saad Eskander, a historian of Iraq. “It’s not in the Shia or Sunni interest to abandon this man, but at the same time they are unwilling to support him to carry on meaningful reforms.”

Mr Abadi has been unable to fire ministers he wants to see the back of, thanks to the fragmented nature of his political mandate. But it is the unfulfilled promise to tackle corruption that hangs most ominously over his head. Despite regular promises to arrest dirty officials, there have been no high-profile seizures, which Iraqis believe would inevitably include senior political figures.

“Every day they arrest minor civil servants who took $25,000 but those who made $15m, where are they?” asks Mr Eskander. He says Mr Abadi has also failed to reverse any of the controversial temporary appointments made by the former prime minister.

The protests have given Mr Sadr a chance to reclaim the spotlight as a national leader and room to claim the high ground. He has taken to wearing the white cloak of a martyr, saying he is willing to be killed for his fight for the rights of Iraqis. He recently detained one of his own party’s most senior officials on corruption charges. Rather than handing him over to a tainted judicial system, Mr Sadr has said he is keeping him under house arrest in Najaf for the next three months while he collects evidence.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695039-new-challenge-embattled-prime-minister-unquiet-cleric/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




Higher education: Class apart

Merkel under pressure: The lady’s not for turning

Fighting in Ukraine: Bite the bullet

Queuing for cash: Worth their wait in gold

Charlemagne: The bystander





Articles Sections Next

Higher education

Class apart

A growing number of European students are opting to pay for their education

Mar 19th 2016 | BAD HONNEF AND MILAN | From the print edition



“SOME of my friends think I’m a snob,” admits Christopher Karp, a 20 year-old aviation-management student. Mr Karp attends the business school at the International University of Applied Sciences (IUBH) in Bad Honnef, a spa town in Germany. Rather than enroll in a free public university like his friends, Mr Karp borrowed money from his parents to study for a degree at IUBH. He has no regrets. Classes are small. Lecturers know the industry he wants to enter; many work for Lufthansa, an airline. He doesn’t even mind the shorter holidays. “We pay a lot of money for our studies and we want to make sure we receive a good education,” he says.

Globally, one in three higher-education students is in the private sector, according to Daniel Levy, an academic at the State University of New York. In Europe the figure is only one in seven. But the share is set to rise. According to Parthenon-EY, a consultancy, between 2011 and 2013 the number of students enrolled in private higher education grew at a faster rate than those in the public sector. In Turkey the private sector increased by 22% over that period, compared with 14% in the public sector; in Germany by 13% versus 7%; in France by 3% versus 1% and in Spain by 6% compared with no growth in the public sector at all. In Britain, the number of higher-education students attending an “alternative provider” has climbed from 142,000 in 2009 to around 200,000 now.

Disruption is nothing new for European higher education. In the 16th century Martin Luther, a scholastic entrepreneur of sorts, said universities would be “the great gates of hell” if they did not teach scripture. But the appeal of studying in old buildings, combined with free tuition and regulatory barriers to entry, have sheltered the public sector from competition.

This is now starting to change. One reason is that private providers, including ones out to make a profit, are increasingly attractive to those who might have once gone straight into a job after school. Many do not take well to straight academic life. Nearly half of French students who pass their baccalaureate exam and enter university do not pass their second year. These sorts of students are starting to “buy differently”, says Matthew Robb of Parthenon-EY. They want courses that offer a clear progression to a career.

Companies are also turning to private universities, further boosting their growth. IUBH offers a “dual studies” hospitality degree, paid for by hotels, whereby students spend alternate weeks on campus and at work. Even its standard degree features a 22-week internship. Other private university groups offer tailored MBAs in sectors such as the wine business, which distinguish them from their more traditional rivals. “We cannot compete with Harvard but we can do better than chambers of commerce,” says Bertrand Pivin, a partner in Apax, a private-equity fund which owns INSEEC, a French business-school group.

International students are also swelling the ranks of private providers. There are 4.5m international higher-education students worldwide, a number that is expected to rise to 7m-8m by 2025. America’s State Department wants to double the number of American students abroad from 300,000 to 600,000 by 2020. European countries are popular destinations, both for students from other parts of the continent, and those from elsewhere.

It’s fashionable abroad

The Istituto Marangoni fashion school in Milan (pictured), which with its modernist furniture is as chic as one of the boutiques near the campus, is opening outposts in Florence and Shenzhen this year, adding to those in Paris, London and Shanghai. In Milan foreign students account for 70% of those enrolled, with Chinese students the biggest group. Many are well-off: annual fees start at €13,600 ($15,400) for a degree-level qualification, rising to €32,000 for a “fashion elite” course.

Some European governments are starting to welcome private colleges. The Italian government should start to accredit degrees from the Istituto Marangoni this year. In Britain, the government will soon say how it intends to ensure that good alternative providers thrive and dodgy ones die. After Germany ended its eight-year experiment with tuition fees at public universities in 2014, the government has become more open to the idea of entrepreneurs stepping in, argues Patrick Geus, who teaches at IUBH.

More countries are likely to follow, as many will have to start spending less on universities. “France is completely broke,” says Mr Pivin of Apax. This will create an incentive to offload more costs on to students, creating opportunities for investors from outside Europe, he thinks. Investors in education are also keen to diversify after scandals in private universities dented the American market, says Andrew Rosen of Kaplan, an education company. Some providers were accused of recruiting students with little regard for their academic ability or financial situation. Classes at a university founded by Donald Trump allegedly focused largely on persuading students to sign up for more expensive courses.

America offers lessons for Europe. The decline of for-profit higher education is one reason Barack Obama could oversee a fall in the share of 18- to 24-year-olds attending university, argues Mr Rosen. It need not be like this. Students can benefit from being treated as consumers. But regulation is needed. Providers should be transparent about admissions and employment data. Failing private colleges should be shut down. Across Europe, students are looking beyond traditional options when deciding their future. Governments should be equally open-minded.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695002-growing-number-european-students-are-opting-pay-their-education-class-apart/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Merkel under pressure

The lady’s not for turning

Angela Merkel will stay in power, if she wants to

Mar 19th 2016 | BERLIN | From the print edition



ON MARCH 17th, as The Economist went to press, Angela Merkel was on her way to Brussels for a summit that may define her legacy as German chancellor. At her initiative, the 28 member states of the European Union were to agree to a controversial deal with Turkey that Mrs Merkel had earlier this month sold as a potential “breakthrough” in the refugee crisis. But many of her EU counterparts demurred. Even if a compromise materialises, Mrs Merkel currently looks more isolated than any German chancellor since the 1950s.

This continues a slide in Mrs Merkel’s power. Only last summer, she was first among equals in the EU, having managed the euro crisis and a showdown with Russia in Ukraine. But on September 4th she opened Germany’s borders to refugees streaming into Europe, setting off conflicts with Hungary and other eastern countries. At first she had Austria on her side. But in January its chancellor, Werner Faymann, turned into an opponent, as he led a group of Balkan countries to close their borders.

Mrs Merkel’s isolation has not gone unnoticed in Germany. Horst Seehofer, the premier of Bavaria and leader of the Christian Social Union (CSU), nominally the sister party of Mrs Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU), has been attacking her for months. He demands a fixed upper limit on refugees, as Austria has imposed. Following regional elections on March 13th in which the Christian Democrats fared badly, Mr Seehofer warned of an “existential” threat to the Union parties.

His worry is that Union supporters keep drifting to the Alternative for Germany (AfD), a right-wing party founded in 2013. On March 13th it came second behind the CDU in Saxony-Anhalt, with 24%. Compared with other countries with populist parties, however, that is not unusual. “I do not see the AfD as an existential problem for the CDU, but I do see it as a problem,” Mrs Merkel said. Defiantly, she then redoubled her commitment to a “European” solution to the crisis, rather than “national” one, involving border closures.

The lessons of the elections are indeed ambiguous, for they show Mrs Merkel to be less vulnerable than it appears to observers abroad. The winners in the two western states, Baden-Württemberg and Rhineland-Palatinate, were the Greens and the Social Democrats, respectively. Their candidates supported Mrs Merkel’s stance on refugees and were rewarded for it. The Christian Democrats failed mainly because their candidates had tried to distance themselves from her line. “The majority of voters supported Merkel’s refugee policy,” says Gero Neugebauer, a political scientist at Free University Berlin.

Moreover there exists no plausible scenario in which Mrs Merkel could be toppled. The opposition parties in the federal parliament have only 20% of seats and, in any event, agree with Mrs Merkel on refugees. The Social Democrats, her coalition partners, are cantankerous but also side with her. Moreover, they know that ousting Mrs Merkel would lead to new elections, which they do not want. They would lose seats (in two of the three elections on March 13th they received a drubbing). And the AfD would almost certainly enter the federal parliament, a situation which they want to avoid.

Even the CSU cannot directly unseat Mrs Merkel. If its 56 members of parliament were to walk out of the coalition, Mrs Merkel’s majority would merely shrink from 80% to 71%. That leaves only her own party, the CDU, as the place where a putsch could originate. But while she does have naysayers there, it is famous for rallying loyally around its leaders.

More importantly, no viable contender exists to take Mrs Merkel’s place. Wolfgang Schäuble, currently the finance minister, is said to hold a grudge since Mrs Merkel outmanoeuvred him to become party leader in 2000. But he is 73. Ursula von der Leyen, the defence minister, has less support within the CDU than Mrs Merkel and is at least as liberal as Mrs Merkel concerning refugees. Julia Klöckner, the Christian Democrat candidate in Rhineland-Palatinate, was once mentioned as a potential heiress to Mrs Merkel. But she lost the election there, her second defeat in five years.

The only way for Mrs Merkel to leave office before her term is up in 2017 would be if she chooses to. Rumours do indeed recur that she may be open to the job of secretary-general of the United Nations. But that would be out of character at this stage of her career. For a woman who in the past decade became notorious for having no ideology, she appears, with the refugee crisis, to have found her calling.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695008-angela-merkel-will-stay-power-if-she-wants-ladys-not-turning/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Fighting in Ukraine

Bite the bullet

The Minsk peace deal is going nowhere

Mar 19th 2016 | KIEV | From the print edition

Mr Poroshenko, not empty-handed

A COLUMN of men in camouflage snaked through the streets of Ternopil, a sleepy town in western Ukraine, with a casket held aloft earlier this week. Yuri Dinya, a solider who died from wounds sustained in eastern Ukraine, was the latest casualty of a war that sputters along largely out of sight. Although the violence has ebbed, following a peace deal signed in Minsk last year, not one part of the peace plan has been implemented. A meeting on March 3rd between the foreign ministers of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France ended in exasperation.

Yet the skirmishes and negotiations continue not because both sides seek to control Ukraine’s Donbas region, but because neither wants to assume responsibility for it. Russia has made clear that it does not plan to annex it, and would rather use it to destabilise Ukraine from within. Ukraine’s leaders, while formally committed to taking back the territory, also recognise the problems they would inherit. The Minsk agreement is a “big fat status quo that doesn’t satisfy anyone, but that we can’t get out of,” says Balazs Jarabik of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a think-tank.

Part of the problem is that Petro Poroshenko, the president of Ukraine, agreed to a Kremlin-friendly deal that he never expected to hold up (an earlier compact crumbled within weeks). A ceasefire was to be followed by the withdrawal of heavy weapons and local elections. Amnesty for fighters, a hostage exchange, aid distribution and the restoration of Ukrainian financial responsibility for the territories were to ease the way toward reconciliation. Constitutional changes to decentralise power and a law granting the contested territories “special status” would formalise their return to Ukraine, and ultimately allow it to retake control of its borders.

The debate over which step to take first has stopped any from being taken. The Kremlin blames Ukraine for balking at the political elements of the deal. Ukraine, in turn, insists that security should come first. Some in Kiev argue that constitutional changes are impossible until Ukraine’s borders are restored. The Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe still records hundreds or thousands of ceasefire violations weekly, mostly from the separatist side.

Ukraine’s European allies have been pushing for progress on a law over local elections. But frustration is building, especially as Ukraine’s leadership is mired in internal squabbles and corruption scandals. Earlier this month, Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, declared that Ukraine will not become a member of the European Union or NATO in the next two decades. Mr Juncker’s remarks were meant to reassure Dutch voters ahead of a referendum on Ukraine’s association agreement with the EU next month. While the vote is not binding, it will hint at the European mood.

Americans, too, seem wary of Ukraine’s continuing vulnerability. This week Victoria Nuland, the American under secretary for European and Eurasian affairs, warned in the Senate that the political chaos in Kiev creates a “doubt in Europe about whether continued support for Ukraine is warranted”. Such uncertainty gives Moscow hope that the EU will lift its sanctions when they come up for renewal this year.

Politicians in Kiev note that the Minsk deal enjoys little public support. Mr Poroshenko is said to be considering a referendum on a special status for the Donbas; a no vote could be cited as a break with Minsk, while a yes vote may provide cover for divisive measures. A first round of voting on constitutional amendments last year on greater autonomy to the separatist-held territories brought demonstrators to the streets and left four dead. But Ukraine must “bite the bullet” on Minsk, says a Western diplomat in Kiev. For now, there may be no alternative.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695060-minsk-peace-deal-going-nowhere-bite-bullet/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Queuing for cash

Worth their wait in gold

Italian red tape means jobs for those who stand in line

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



THE idea came to Giovanni Cafaro two years ago when, like millions of his compatriots on any given day, he was waiting in a queue in Milan to pay a bill. “It occurred to me I could do the same for others,” he says.

Mr Cafaro, who had just lost his job, set about his new enterprise with gusto. He handed out flyers advertising his services and found several dozen clients. These include companies that would rather their employees did something more productive, like work. In the process, he has created a new profession: that of codista (queuer).

According to Codacons, a consumer group, Italians spend on average 400 hours a year queuing. The annual time wasted is worth €40 billion ($44 billion), it estimates. For decades, rich Italians have hired people to stand in line on their behalf to pay bills, send off parcels and deal with everyday bureaucracy. But Mr Cafaro has given the occupation a legal footing, with its own standardised contract, minimum pay (€10 an hour before deductions) and access to state-run industrial accident insurance (“in case, say, a codista trips on the stairs of a government office,” he explains). Mr Cafaro offers a five-hour course, which he gives over Skype. This includes learning the tedious requirements of central and local government departments for documents, signatures and charges.

Successive Italian governments have tried to cut the queues. From March 15th members of the public can apply for a identification number giving them online access to public services. But it is not just Italy’s complex bureaucracy that keeps people waiting. Italian idiosyncrasies, which reflect a certain fiscal timidity, also play a role. Italy has one of the lowest rates of non-cash transactions in Europe. “Paying in cash is very widespread and people are generally reluctant to use either credit cards or direct debit,” says Mr Cafaro. This is consistent with the fact that Italy has one of the largest shadow economies in the rich world.

Ironically Mr Cafaro’s initiative has created yet another layer of bureaucracy. Those looking to hire a codista under the terms of the new contract will have to pay welfare contributions and deal with the attendant paperwork, even if they employ the codista only for an hour. Rather than cut the queues, Mr Cafaro’s business may make them even longer.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695055-italian-red-tape-means-jobs-those-who-stand-line-worth-their-wait-gold/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

The bystander

France embodies Europe’s dilemmas over migration

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



ABDUL has lost his front tooth, but not his sense of hope. Last year he journeyed 5,000 kilometres, from war-battered Sudan, via Libya and Italy, to the northern French coast. Now, just 33 kilometres of water separate him from Britain, where he wants to make a fresh start. In the refugee camp behind the Calais dunes, Abdul’s tiny two-bed wooden shack is neatly kept, its sloping roof lined with layers of black plastic and donated blankets. Tins of Tesco beans, distributed by British aid workers, sit on a wooden shelf crafted from packing crates. Diggers recently cleared part of the refugee camp, under a court order. But Abdul says he won’t move, until it is time to try his chances. “I just want to get to England,” he says, “and start my life again.”

Barbed wire, metal fences and life under plastic sheeting mark the shocking new social geography of Europe. At Idomeni, on the Greece-Macedonia border, 12,000 refugees have been camped out under canvas since the frontier was shut last week. In Calais, where the sea crossing to Britain is at its narrowest, at least 4,000 migrants crowd into camps. Under a deal agreed in 2003, Britain patrols this border point from Calais, and has paid for reinforced fencing around the French entrance to the Channel Tunnel, to keep migrants out. So the refugees at the French port are stuck. The shacks they have built into the sand, on the border between two of Europe’s richest countries, speak of the continent’s agonised failure to handle its biggest refugee crisis of modern times.

In some ways, France is a bystander to this historic influx. Last year, over 1m refugees registered for asylum in Germany; France received just 79,000 applications. Geography sets France out on Europe’s western fringes, off the favoured route from Syria via Turkey and the Greek islands to Germany. Economics and recent history do the rest. French joblessness, at 10%, is twice that in Britain. Linguistic and family ties to France are weak. Down a boggy, litter-strewn alley in the Calais squatter camp on a recent weekday, Pascal Brice, head of the French Office for the Protection of Refugees, was to be found, clad in a suit and wellington boots, valiantly trying to persuade refugees to lodge asylum applications in France. He has shortened processing delays, he told them; applicants who chose to stay would be housed in clean, dry reception centres around France, or in the 125 white containers now converted into shelters in Calais. But migrants were sceptical. “I don’t speak French,” says Hamid, who made it to Calais from Afghanistan via the Greek island of Lesbos, and has twice been caught by border police while trying to smuggle himself out in the back of a lorry: “and my friends are in England.”

Yet France nonetheless embodies Europe’s dilemmas over borders. Back in the mid-1980s, no other country was quite as enthusiastic as François Mitterrand’s France for the dismantling of frontier controls under the Schengen agreement, in the name of freedom, reconciliation and a shared European future. Today, partly for reasons of counter-terrorism, France was one of the first to reinstate border checks. On its northern coast, France is affected by the refusal of Britain, not a member of Schengen, to let in refugees who are at its door there. And on its south-eastern flank, France is playing the role of Britain to Italy, which does belong to Schengen: controlling once again the narrow crossing between Menton and Ventimiglia, and keeping migrants out. Last summer, scores of refugees camped out on the sun-baked Italian rocks, where the steep cliff face falls into the Mediterranean. Today, a discarded red plaid blanket here, a khaki sleeping bag there, are the only traces of their passage. French police keep permanent watch at a checkpoint. Officials are pleased that they have, for now, sealed this border to migrants—although some fear that the numbers will swell again as Libya implodes, and if a deal with Turkey tightens the route into Europe through Greece.

At once gatekeeper in the south, and host to squatter camps for those its neighbour has shut out in the north, France is well placed to understand the dynamics and anguish of Europe’s refugee crisis. As leading partner to Germany, whose open-door policy has won its chancellor, Angela Merkel, admiration and cost her electoral success, France is also qualified to act as wise counsel and pragmatic friend in the search for a solution. Yet the Franco-German dialogue over refugees has, in reality, been marked by misunderstanding, dismay and irritation. A low point was reached when Manuel Valls, France’s Socialist prime minister, visiting Munich last month, said that France would not take any more than the 30,000 refugees it had already agreed to host under a German-inspired redistribution scheme. “France,” he declared tartly, “never said: Come to France.” His comments, says Thomas Klau, former Paris head of the European Council on Foreign Relations, were an “act of extraordinary hostility”.

The closing of borders, and minds

For France and Germany to disagree, and hold divergent interests, is nothing new. The historical construction of Europe has been predicated on their ability to conjure compromise from conflicting views. Even the great Franco-German partnerships, including that of Mitterrand and Helmut Kohl, who together devised the passport-free area, were marked by profound mutual misgivings: Mitterrand feared German reunification; Kohl was wary of European monetary union. Yet the force of the tie has been a joint determination to overcome such differences.

Today, the effort of each side to understand the other is half-hearted, at best. France, under President François Hollande, is exasperated by what it sees as Germany’s reckless unilateralism, both in welcoming the first wave of migrants, and now drawing up a deal to return new ones to Turkey. Germany feels let down by the refusal of Mr Hollande, fearful of his own far right, to back it properly. The handling of the refugee influx has not been Europe’s finest hour. But the inability of France and Germany to find common cause on the matter does it no further favours.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695006-france-embodies-europes-dilemmas-over-migration-bystander/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




The budget: The generation game

Savings: A nicer ISA?

A tax on sugar: Pricier pop

Brexit brief: Dreaming of sovereignty

Bristol’s economy: London-upon-Avon

“Programmable” Bristol: Data deluge

The music business: Discs, jockeying

Bagehot: A coastal town they forgot to close down





Articles Sections Next

The budget

The generation game

With little cash to spare, the chancellor promises a budget for Britons of the future

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



IN THE run-up to his latest budget, nothing seemed to be going George Osborne’s way. The economy was slowing down, biting into the chancellor’s tax revenues. Growing worries about the June referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union prompted the Treasury to cancel a proposed overhaul of the pensions system. But when Mr Osborne stood up on March 16th, he gave the impression that nothing would knock him off his course to reform the British economy.

It was a budget “for the next generation”, he said repeatedly, as if to emphasise the scale of his ambition. With an extra £7.6 billion ($10.9 billion) of spending cuts, Britain is still forecast to run a budget surplus of £10 billion in 2019-20, just before an election. Lessening the burden of government debt on future generations, he argued, is the right thing to do, as is implementing the structural reforms that will make the British economy more competitive. In that regard, at least, Mr Osborne’s budget speech hit the right tone. But there was not enough to back it up.

The biggest set of reforms, of company taxation, may indeed make the Britain of tomorrow a better place to do business. Following an agreement in November by the OECD, a club of mainly rich countries, Mr Osborne tweaked rules under which firms offset debt-interest payments against their corporation-tax bill. The plan will net around £1 billion a year by 2020. A change to the taxation of royalties, to undermine a wheeze used by oil and internet firms, goes beyond the OECD recommendations.

Small businesses, which complain most vociferously about tax-dodging by big firms with expensive lawyers, are particularly happy. Mr Osborne raised the threshold up to which small companies are eligible for relief on business rates, taxes charged on non-domestic property. About 250,000 firms will see lower rates, a welcome windfall for those worrying about a higher minimum wage to be introduced next month. Allowing small outfits to keep more of their earnings may also encourage more people to give entrepreneurship a go, and others to expand. Among big, rich economies Britain has one of the lowest rates of rapidly growing small firms, which holds back productivity, according to a recent report by Goldman Sachs.

Further incentives to invest were put in place through a reduction in corporation tax, which will fall to 17% by 2020, one of the lowest rates in the rich world. Greater certainty over future tax policy is welcomed by businessfolk. The reduction in capital-gains tax—the headline rate will fall from 28% to 20%—will also help them, at a cost to the Treasury of about £670m a year by 2020. The big downside for all firms is the ever-increasing complexity of the tax code: Mr Osborne smashed his own record by introducing an astonishing 86 tax measures in the budget.

These plans may marginally improve competitiveness in the long term, but for now they are likely to favour oldies over youngsters. Lowering capital-gains tax benefits those with assets in the first place. Add in the increase in the personal tax-allowance and a rise in the threshold for paying a higher rate of income tax—from which richer (and older) types will benefit more than poor youngsters—and many policies seem skewed against the young.

Still, the chancellor pressed on with his “next generation” theme by unveiling a few policies targeted at youngsters. As well as a new scheme to help people save for retirement (see article), he boasted of improving youngsters’ skills. A little more cash will be put towards school sports, to be paid for by a levy on sugary drinks (see article). Schools will soon be able to bid for cash to lengthen the school day—though with only £285m a year earmarked, there is enough for only one-quarter of them to do so. Mr Osborne also pledged to free all state schools from local-authority control by 2020 (currently one in seven primaries and two in three secondaries are independent). Making the change so quickly may be hard, especially when budgets are squeezed: per-pupil spending is supposed to fall by 8% in 2015-20.

The government also talks a good game on infrastructure—the backbone of future growth—but again it was a weak point in the budget. Mr Osborne set in motion a plan for Crossrail 2, an underground railway that will traverse London, and confirmed rail and road upgrades in northern England. But despite a tiny recent increase in infrastructure spending, in 2020 public-sector investment as a percentage of GDP is forecast to be about half its level in 2010. Britain is slipping down international rankings of infrastructure quality.

If Mr Osborne is serious about helping the next generation, structural reform will have to be deeper. In recent months Treasury officials have enthused about eliminating inefficiencies in markets for rail, energy and consumer banking, which could boost lagging productivity. But few such proposals made it into the budget. Mr Osborne also reaffirmed the government’s daft commitment to protect “green belts” of protected land surrounding cities, which constrain housebuilding and inflate property prices. This modest budget will do no harm, either to short-term economic growth or the government’s campaign to keep Britain in Europe. But talk of priming the next generation of Britons to be worldbeaters is overblown.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695062-little-cash-spare-chancellor-promises-budget-britons-future/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Savings

A nicer ISA?

A new scheme adds to tax complexity

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



A FEW weeks ago the big change in the budget on March 16th was expected to be a radical revamp of the tax rules on pensions. That idea was abandoned in the face of industry and backbench opposition. But George Osborne, the chancellor, has introduced a scheme that might eventually become the basis for reform—a lifetime individual savings account (ISA). Patrick Bloomfield of Hymans Robertson, a benefits consultancy, described it as “essentially a new pension regime through the backdoor and the first step on the path to a pensions ISA for all”.

The new scheme, which will start in April 2017, will be open to those aged between 18 and 40. They will be able to pay up to £4,000 a year ($5,700) into the tax-free account, and the government will pay a bonus of 25% of the amount invested each year until the age of 50. The money can be withdrawn to buy a first home with a value of up to £450,000 without penalty. If the money is left alone until the saver is aged 60, it can be withdrawn tax-free; if the money is withdrawn from the account earlier for any other purpose, the government will reclaim the bonuses (plus any investment return made from them) and charge a 5% penalty.

With three separate age requirements and three different tax treatments, the new scheme will add to the complexity facing savers. It will also operate alongside other ISA schemes, including the help-to-buy ISA (also designed to encourage homebuyers) and the cash, stocks-and-shares and innovation ISAs, whose annual savings limit will rise from £15,000 to £20,000.

The flexibility of the scheme may tempt more youngsters to save. But it could persuade others to opt out of their company pension plans. That would run counter to the government’s introduction of auto-enrolment into pension schemes. Steve Webb, a former Liberal Democrat pensions minister who now works for Royal London, an insurance company, warned: “Just at the point that millions of under-40s have started pension saving for the first time, the chancellor has set up a rival product which risks causing mass confusion.”

Savers attracted by the government bonus may forget that, under corporate pension schemes, employers usually match the employee’s contribution—the equivalent of an uplift of 100%. And cautious youngsters may keep their lifetime ISAs in low-yielding cash, rather than riskier assets like equities that tend to yield higher returns over the long term. That may mean savers end up with inadequate pensions.

Another question is whether the new scheme is well targeted. Many young people are on low salaries and are struggling to pay off student debts; they may not have the ability to save £4,000 a year. Those with rich parents, however, may find that the Bank of Mum and Dad will chip in. Even so, with £40,000 needed to fund the average deposit on a first home, it will take many years for savers to reach their goal. A house-building programme that brought down prices might have been a simpler, and better, answer to the problem.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694994-new-scheme-adds-tax-complexity-george-osborne-introduces-new-type-isa/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

A tax on sugar

Pricier pop

A levy on drinks may change recipes, but not waistlines

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

Stand back, it’s time for a shake-up

BRITAIN’S government wants its citizens to strive, not slurp. The budget on March 16th unveiled a new levy on sugary drinks, to be implemented by April 2018. Jamie Oliver, a television chef and sugar-tax evangelist, danced for joy outside Parliament. Shares in fizzy-drinks companies fell (though those of Tate & Lyle, a food company, recovered once traders remembered that the firm sold off its sugar business in 2010).

The policy’s advocates hope that it will reduce sugar consumption, slimming the nation’s children and taking a weight off the National Health Service. The government believes that obesity and its related diseases cost the NHS £27 billion ($39 billion) a year. A levy on drinks makes particular sense because, unlike some sugary foods, they tend to contain few other nutrients. Some studies also suggest that sugar is less filling when gulped than when gobbled, making people particularly prone to overindulging. The tax will reduce the Treasury’s need to tighten its own belt, raising £520m in its first year. The proceeds are earmarked for extra sport in schools.

Drinks with the highest sugar content will attract the highest tax rate. Current plans suggest that a 330ml (12-ounce) can of Coke will attract an 8p tax, whereas the lower-sugar Coca-Cola Life will be taxed 6p. Pricier pop should nudge customers towards low-sugar alternatives, though this relies on retailers passing on the tax to consumers (not a sure bet).

Even if customers are not priced away from sugary drinks, the tax offers a sweet incentive for drinks companies to reformulate their recipes. Some in the soda industry have already been doing this: many of Robinson’s squashes and cordials already have no sugar. This outcome would comfort those worrying about the poorest, whose drinking habits might mean they are hit hardest.

The Office for Budget Responsibility, a watchdog, expects that producers will change their ingredients to avoid the tax, and that consumers will swill around 5% less drink in the high-sugar category per year (but 2% more in the lower category). It also predicts a rise in cross-border trade, as people try to avoid the tax.

A closer look at the evidence may leave some feeling flat. The Institute for Fiscal Studies, a research outfit, found that sugary drinks make up less than 20% of Britons’ added-sugar intake. Even if the tax drained sugary-drinks consumption entirely, nearly nine out of ten people would still get more than the recommended 5% of their calories from sugar. Beating the bulge will take time.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694993-levy-drinks-may-change-recipes-not-waistlines-britain-gets-new-tax-sugary-drinks/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit brief

Dreaming of sovereignty

Talk of taking back power may be delusional, but more democracy is not

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



“TAKE control” is the main slogan of the Vote Leave campaign. Indeed, the argument that Britain has lost sovereignty, and even its democracy, by being in the European Union is at the heart of the case for Brexit. Michael Gove, the justice secretary, complains that “our membership of the EU stops us being able to choose who makes critical decisions which affect all our lives”. Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, says that EU membership is incompatible with parliamentary sovereignty. Many of their fellow Brexiteers claim that, even if leaving has a price, it is worth paying to regain control.

Despite fighting to stay in, David Cameron shares some of these concerns. The prime minister is proud of the European Union Act of 2011, which makes any treaty passing new powers to the EU subject to a referendum. He fought hard last month to win a British exemption from the European goal of “ever closer union”. The government says it is still working on a bill to assert Parliament’s supremacy.

There are three strands to the sovereignty argument. The first is the pure concept of parliamentary supremacy. Before the 1972 European Communities Act, the then Tory prime minister, Edward Heath, insisted that “there is no question of any erosion of essential national sovereignty”. Yet this was true only in the sense that Parliament can repeal the act (a right confirmed by the very holding of a referendum).

What Heath’s phrase skated over was the second strand: that EU membership means that European law trumps national law. This was established in the Factortame cases in the early 1990s, when a British parliamentary act on ship registration was voided by the European Court of Justice after complaints by Spanish fishermen. Vernon Bogdanor, a constitutional historian, says EU membership (along with devolution to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) means parliamentary sovereignty has in practice been eroded. This is true even if Britain copies the sovereignty claims of the German constitutional court, since these have never been tested.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

Many talk of being sovereign as if it were like being pregnant: one either is or is not. The truth is more complex. A country can be wholly sovereign yet have little influence. Britain has signed some 700 international treaties that impinge on sovereignty. Although the EU has the biggest impact, others count a lot: membership of NATO, for example, creates an obligation to go to war if another member country is attacked. It can be worth ceding this independence to gain influence. Mr Cameron has warned Brexiteers against pursuing what he calls the “illusion” of sovereignty.

They may do better pursuing the third strand: democracy, or rather the lack of it. It is wrong to argue, as some do, that EU laws are imposed by unelected bureaucrats in the European Commission. In fact, although the commission proposes draft legislation, it is adopted by the Council of Ministers, consisting of elected national governments, and the elected European Parliament. Moreover, the commission may be unelected, but the choice of Jean-Claude Juncker of Luxembourg as its president was made after he was chosen as the centre-right’s “lead candidate” before the 2014 European elections.

Despite this, there is undeniably a democratic deficit in the EU. It is supranational, but elections (including European ones) are fought on national issues. There is no Europe-wide demos. Voters cannot throw out the EU’s collective leadership. Both the council and the parliament are remote and unaccountable, with decisions often agreed on by shifting alliances. This may partly explain why voter turnout in European elections is so much lower than in national ones (see chart).



As Simon Hix of the London School of Economics notes, this matters especially to Britons, who are not used to coalition government. The demise in the 1980s of the Luxembourg compromise, which gave EU members a form of veto, and the spread of majority voting have also led to Britain being outvoted more often. This is where another of Mr Cameron’s ideas may help: more say for national parliaments.



In 2013 Mr Cameron called national parliaments the “true source” of democratic legitimacy. Yet they have played only a marginal role in the EU. That is to be beefed up by a deal whereby if 55% of national parliaments object to a law it is withdrawn (a “red card”). There are also plans for parliaments to suggest laws (a “green card”).

There is an irony here for British Eurosceptics who like to trumpet parliamentary sovereignty. National parliaments in Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands are far better at overseeing their governments’ EU policies. In Britain, moreover, the elected House of Commons is less effective than the unelected House of Lords. That is partly because MPs can be shamefully ignorant of EU affairs. But just now it is also because MPs are consumed by arguments over Brexit.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695056-talk-taking-back-power-may-be-delusional-more-democracy-not-dreaming-sovereignty/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bristol’s economy

London-upon-Avon

The south-western powerhouse needs better government if it is to prosper

Mar 19th 2016 | BRISTOL | From the print edition



BRISTOLIANS think of themselves as different. Theirs was the only city to vote to adopt an elected mayor in a series of plebiscites held in 2012; nine others rejected the idea. The place has its own currency, the Bristol pound, which can be used in local shops and even to pay council tax. And it is unusually prosperous. The Bristol city-region, which includes three other councils (North Somerset, South Gloucestershire, and Bath and North East Somerset), has by far the highest productivity of any big conurbation outside London (see chart). It also has the highest household income beyond the capital.



Now George Osborne, the chancellor, has dangled the carrot of building on that success as part of his plans to devolve more power to city regions. In his budget speech on March 16th he announced proposals for a “West of England” mayor, who would govern an area joining up the four councils of the region. The offer is well-timed for Bristol, whose productivity advantage over other cities has been slipping, partly as a result of squabbling among the different councils.

Much of the city’s prosperity dates back to the slave trade, which accounted for half its income in the 18th century. Banks and insurance companies sprang up to support it. Even after slavery went away, the bankers did not: today Bristol has one of the highest concentrations of finance jobs in the country.

Happier factors also explain Bristol’s success. An hour’s drive from the beautiful architecture of the city centre are lush Welsh valleys. Bristolian companies are particularly inclined to let their staff work from home, suggest data from the Centre for Cities, a think-tank. This helps to explain an exodus from London of working-age folk, particularly those with families: in 2014 one-third more 30- to 50-year-olds moved from London to the Bristol area than vice versa. Graduates make up 46% of Bristol’s working-age population, compared with a national average of 36%. Foreigners like the place, too; immigration has boosted the city’s population by 6% during the past decade, one of the biggest increases in the country.

Bristol’s success is thus partly down to historical and geographical accident, but local officials have also taken some wise decisions. When the city received money to develop an “enterprise zone” offering financial relief to firms, the council located it in the city centre, next to the main train station. This was an unusual move: cities tend to use such grants to create business parks or manufacturing centres in struggling out-of-town areas. However, rapidly growing firms usually want to locate in buzzing city centres, points out Ben Harrison of the Centre for Cities. By supporting and encouraging more of them to locate there Bristol is playing to its strengths, he says. The council is also investing in snazzy new digital technology (see article).

But in other ways government has hindered more than it has helped. The lack of joined-up thinking among the four local authorities explains why public transport is so ropy. Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways, a pressure group, laments that at Bristol Parkway, another big train station, passengers arriving on the last train from London may face a half-hour wait for a bus. With cars the only option for many, it is small wonder that Bristol’s traffic is some of the worst in Britain.



As for housing, the average Bristol home costs nearly ten times earnings, pricier than in any comparably sized city. Lack of supply is partly to blame. Bristol’s “green belt” of protected land is six times the size of the city, so it is tricky to build new homes: in 2004-14 Bristol’s housing stock grew more slowly than that of inner London. Property will get still pricier as transport links improve. Within a few years a railway upgrade will shave 15-20 minutes off the train journey from London to Bristol’s main station. Londoners who fantasise about living in Bristol and working in the capital may be unable to resist.

Poor public transport and inadequate housing is a bad combination if you want to retain youngsters. Research from the Centre for Cities has suggested that Bristol’s university students are not especially likely to remain in the city after graduation. The pricing-out of young people partly explains why booming Bristol is not especially entrepreneurial: the number of startups fell by 10% in 2010-14, in spite of a recovering economy, according to BankSearch, a consultancy.

Much remains to be sorted out if the West of England proposal is to go through, not least opposition from some in the surrounding councils who fear domination by Bristol. Another question is whether the city’s own mayor would be dropped in favour of the new, regional mayor. But with the promise of more investment, and with other cities taking advantage of devolution offers, local politicians should not pass up the opportunity.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695067-south-western-powerhouse-needs-better-government-if-it-prosper-london-upon-avon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

“Programmable” Bristol

Data deluge

A plan to create Britain’s smartest city

Mar 19th 2016 | BRISTOL | From the print edition

A LORRY overturns by the harbourside within earshot of a microphone-equipped lamppost, which mobilises the emergency services and reroutes traffic while pinging alerts into citizens’ pockets via their smartphones. For now this is just a vision of the future—but perhaps a not-too-distant one. Using a citywide fibre-optic network and a £12m ($17m) supercomputer, Bristol has ambitions to become a “programmable” city.

Central to this is the Bristol is Open project, a joint venture between the council and Bristol University to open up data for public use. Around 200 anonymised data-sets on pollution, energy use, health and other matters have been released online. Such information will be gathered and transmitted using a network comprising 1,500 radio-linked lampposts, hundreds of kilometres of fibre-optic cable running under the city’s streets, and a mile-long stretch of public Wi-Fi spots.

Bristolian boffins are proudest not of this physical infrastructure but of the way it is organised. The city now runs its own operating system, “CityOS”, which simplifies the introduction of new technologies into the system. Experiments such as the driverless cars currently being tested on Bristol’s streets can be easily integrated into the city’s network.

The code is open source, so developers can test out their own ideas. Some of the suggestions so far include “smart ambulances” linked to traffic-management systems that could free up road space during emergencies; a network of smart bins that could notify waste lorries when they need emptying; and a mechanism whereby high levels of pollution could trigger an alert to joggers, or even prompt discounts on bus fares to reduce traffic emissions.

Such ideas are some way off fruition: for now the project’s applications are limited to fairly modest services such as traffic-congestion updates. And some find all the data-harvesting less evocative of the future than of 1984. The university says it complies with data-protection laws and has suggested drawing up a “citizens’ data charter”. But critics fear that technology marches faster than regulations. For instance, there are plans to equip the lampposts with “acoustic detection sensors” capable of recording noise levels—and eventually, some worry, speech. In Bristol you never know who—or what—might be listening.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695066-plan-create-britains-smartest-city-data-deluge/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The music business

Discs, jockeying

A lack of capacity to press records threatens to derail the vinyl revival

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

Searching for a Howlin’ Owl (or Wolf)

NOSTALGIA is not what it used to be in the record industry. Having spent a decade from the mid-1990s in the wilderness, vinyl is now fashionable once again, and not just for obscure indie bands and old Eagles albums. Big labels release the music of stars such as Adele and Justin Bieber in the format. In 2007 just 205,000 vinyl records were sold in Britain. Last year the total reached 2.1m, the highest in 21 years (though still only 2% of all music sales). Vinyl sales are also booming in America, increasing by 30% to 12m last year.

The renaissance has been so rapid it has caught the companies that press vinyl records off-guard. Unable to keep up with demand, they are giving priority to orders from big labels and delaying those from smaller ones, threatening the very basis of the revival.

Vinyl is resurgent because it gives a better sound and, with modern music so disposable, it is satisfying to own an actual artefact, says Mark Burgess, who founded Flashback Records, a London record store and small music label, in 1997. “It’s also the ritual of putting the needle on the record and actively listening to the music,” he says. Flashback’s turnover has increased 10% annually for a decade: business has been so good that Mr Burgess has opened two more shops since 2006. The biggest-selling piece of audio equipment on Amazon, an online retailer, last Christmas was a budget turntable.

Another reason for the revival is Record Store Day. Between 2000 and 2009, the number of such outlets in England fell by more than half, to 300. The trend was the same in America. In 2007 a group of store owners in Baltimore established a special day for people to support their local record shop. (This year’s is on April 16th.) Fans queue up to buy special editions only sold through record stores.

The shops also host gigs and provide a venue for musical interaction that older generations took for granted. “It’s a lonely business, downloading,” sighs one customer at Flashback. Meanwhile, the cost of classic second-hand albums has soared. A few years ago an old Fleetwood Mac album such as “Rumours” would sell for £1 ($1.55), says Mr Burgess. “Now, you can pay up to £25 for a mint condition original.” Re-issues are pricey, too.

The opening of new pressing plants has eased the production bottleneck somewhat; at its worst, last year, there was a six-month backlog. But there are bigger, more existential questions facing vinyl. In an age of instant gratification, can even larger groups of young people be persuaded to be patient and pay extra for something of style and beauty?

And although Record Store Day has boosted vinyl sales, some shops now claim that the day, and the format itself, has been hijacked by the big labels. They print pink vinyl collector’s items of pop queen favourites and monetise their back-catalogues of 1970s has-beens, rather than promoting new artists.

It is not only bearded, middle-aged men who are buying—teenagers and hipsters (some of them bearded) love the retro feel. But re-issues increasingly dominate the format. Joe Hatt of Howling Owl Records asks: “How can it be a revolution when the bands and the artists who are looking to the future can’t be heard over the sound of the irrelevant and the dead?”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695063-lack-capacity-press-records-threatens-derail-vinyl-revival-discs-jockeying/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

A coastal town they forgot to close down

The sad underside of George Osborne’s metropolitan revolution

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



BLACKPOOL in its pomp was everything a mill worker or clerk could wish for in a holiday resort. There were the piers and beaches, the outdoor dancing stages and the music halls, ludicrously extravagant Moorish and Indian follies where entertainers from Laurel and Hardy to Frank Sinatra delighted the crowds. And there was the Tower, modelled on Eiffel’s in Paris, with its lights, ballroom and mighty Wurlitzer organ. One in five Britons holidayed in the town. So the memories of those years lived on long after the dawn of mass foreign tourism in the 1960s. The recent success of “Strictly Come Dancing”, a televised ballroom-dancing contest, is testament to a lingering national soft-spot for its old blend of sequined razzmatazz and Victorian politesse.

Today the memories are almost all Blackpool has left. Abandoned for the Costas, it failed to find a new role, became one of the ten most deprived towns in Britain and is now almost cinematically bleak: Coney Island meets Detroit. The town centre is a smelly (urine and fried food, with notes of cannabis) patchwork of charity shops, nightclubs with fading playbills and unloved tourist emporia flogging boiled sweets in saucy shapes. In the back streets scrawny men loiter outside terraces of peeling boarding houses, swigging from cans and glaring at the seagulls. “People aren’t usually in Blackpool if they have somewhere to go,” says Brian, an unemployed waiter outside the job centre.

His comment reminded Bagehot of a song by Morrissey in which the gloomadon-popping Lancastrian evoked “the coastal town that they forgot to close down”. The lyric captures something of Blackpool’s sadness, but also the economic transformation under which it is falling yet further behind and which was advanced by George Osborne in his budget. The chancellor of the exchequer is curbing efforts to limit the decline of struggling places like this. Where previous governments, to varying degrees, tried to prop them up, his (tacit) message to their residents is: get on your bike. Move to those places with the connections, industries and profile needed to make it in a globalised economy. Places like Manchester, today a creative- and financial-services boomtown and the crane-dotted pivot of the “Northern Powerhouse”, his grand plan to integrate the big northern cities.

What is Mr Osborne’s game? He wants the state to concentrate less on solving problems and more on creating the conditions in which places and people succeed in the first place. Think of his increases to the minimum wage, his infrastructure spending, his sugar tax and his wave of devolution to cities (none more than Manchester, which he announced would gain new control over its policing). Sometimes, such policies disproportionately boost the growth of places that are already doing well. For example, the chancellor announced that by 2020, councils will raise all the money they spend: “If you want local communities to take responsibility for local growth, they have to be able to reap the rewards.” Likewise, his small-business tax cut does more for municipalities that can fall back on big, profitable companies for their revenues, while his transport investments are unabashedly metropolitan: a new underground railway through London, a new tunnelled road linking Manchester and Sheffield and a high-speed trainline connecting the northern cities. On the eve of his budget speech the Manchester Evening News carried an artist’s impression of the extension and swankification of the city’s main station (from which the 200-mile trip to London, at 68 minutes, will be quicker than the 50-mile, bone-rattling ride to Blackpool).

The corollary of all this is that failing places will be given more latitude to fail. For example, through cuts to welfare and local government, Mr Osborne is dismantling the Zimmer frame built up by Labour to keep decrepit towns on their feet. Blackpool is the local authority which has lost most per person under austerity, because it is so reliant on public spending. Its private economy is weak and seasonal and its people are relatively poor, unhealthy and troubled: one in four claims welfare benefits, life expectancy is five years below the national average and the town has acute crime, drug-abuse and alcoholism problems. Removing the Zimmer frame was always going to send it toppling, and so it has toppled: public-sector employment has fallen and, unlike in much of Britain, the private sector has not filled the gap. Blackpool’s economy shrank by 8% over the five years from 2010.

Heaven knows I’m miserable now

All of which is making a grim situation worse. The council has trimmed street-cleaning, business and social-care services. New cuts from Whitehall mean some leisure centres and libraries may have to close, warns Simon Blackburn, the Labour council leader. And Britain’s geographical polarisation is self-perpetuating: as Blackpool slides, its most mobile citizens leave for the big cities (254 well-educated youngsters left between 2009 and 2012, one-third for London) while down-and-outs attracted by low house prices move in (bedsits rent for £70, or $100, per week). The result is a downward spiral towards a future as, in Mr Blackburn’s words, “a refuge for the dispossessed and the never-possessed”.

Mr Osborne’s metropolitan revolution responds to the harsh realities of the modern economy and is thus welcome. And it is a wise use of public money to extend the success of places that have what it takes to grow and be prosperous, and help people elsewhere relocate to where the good jobs are. But one can hold these views and simultaneously regret Blackpool’s fate. Voters there feel left behind and (like their counterparts across the West) are turning to populist political outlets: last year the UK Independence Party’s share of the vote more than tripled to 15% and 17% in the town’s two constituencies. And contrary to Brian the waiter’s assertion, plenty of people in Blackpool love its tawdry shimmer and do not want to leave. “It’s seen better days,” admits Jill, a permed pensioner admiring the grey Irish Sea from the prom. “But we get lovely sunsets.”

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695053-sad-underside-george-osbornes-metropolitan-revolution-coastal-town-they-forgot-close/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




The Commonwealth: What’s the point of it?

Small islands: Lift up your voice





Articles Sections Next

The Commonwealth

What’s the point of it?

The new secretary-general will have to be tough, dynamic and crafty if the oddest of post-imperial clubs is to rekindle its sense of purpose

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



“THERE’S been an existential question mark over the Commonwealth for some time,” says a seasoned diplomat in its secretariat in London. “The Commonwealth has been dead, absolutely dead, for the past eight years,” laments Richard Dowden, director of the Royal Africa Society (and a former Economist writer), taking a swipe at the outgoing secretary-general, Kamalesh Sharma, an urbane Indian diplomat who has run the show since 2008. As Queen Elizabeth nears 90 after 64 years as its titular head, some wonder if the club will survive when she goes.

Ask citizens of the 53 countries that make up the Commonwealth what it is for, and most will shrug. Its most visible moment, which happens every four years, is a sports jamboree. A few years ago the Royal Commonwealth Society, which promotes the club, conducted a poll asking if respondents would be “sorry or appalled if your country left the Commonwealth”. People in its poorer members were likeliest to answer “yes”; those in Britain, Australia and Canada tended to indifference. Few knew much about it; a quarter of Jamaicans thought its head was Barack Obama.

The modern Commonwealth was born in 1949, partly thanks to Jawaharlal Nehru, independent India’s first prime minister, who had declared his country a republic but wanted to stay friends with the former imperial power and other former British dominions. As other ex-colonies in Africa, Asia and the Caribbean joined, “Commonwealth values” (never precisely defined) were promoted, especially in the 1970s and 1980s, when Southern Rhodesia (later Zimbabwe) and South Africa struggled to shed their white masters. Under a dynamic secretary-general from Guyana, Sir Shridath (“Sonny”) Ramphal, from 1975 to 1990, the grouping gained clout in world councils.

The Commonwealth’s purpose is twofold: to advance democracy and human rights; and to aid economic development. But on the first score it lacks a proper mechanism for enforcement. And on the second, it is not a big provider of cash. One of its principal boasts is its ability to help the gamut of island states, many of them tiny, that are members (see box on next page). But nowadays many of them look more eagerly to much richer bodies such as the European Union.

Softly, softly, to a point of silence

It was in 1991, in Harare, Zimbabwe’s capital, that heads of government declared that the Commonwealth should bolster human rights and democracy. The organisation gained respect for the teams it sent to observe elections. In 1995 a ministerial action group was set up to deal with “persistent and serious violators” of those principles. Since then several offenders, including Nigeria, Pakistan, Fiji, the Gambia and Zimbabwe, have been ejected or shamed into leaving, usually temporarily.

But under Mr Sharma the organisation is generally thought to have atrophied, especially as a vehicle for upholding democracy and human rights. In 2011 the idea of a commissioner for human rights was floated—only to be sunk by Nigeria, South Africa, India and others. Every two years Commonwealth heads of government meet for a pow-wow known by its initials, CHOGM, pronounced “choggum”. The last was in November, in Malta (pictured above); the one before that, in Sri Lanka in 2013, was overshadowed by the host government’s execrable human-rights record. In the words of Hugh Segal, a former Canadian senator, the Commonwealth was “missing in action” over Sri Lanka, where 40,000 people, mostly civilians, are thought to have been killed by government forces in the closing stages of the civil war in 2009.

The Commonwealth has also suffered from its newer members’ perception that it is run by a coterie of “white” countries, led by Britain, Australia and Canada. To gain more clout it needs the biggest post-colonial members, particularly India, Pakistan, Nigeria, South Africa and Malaysia, to start pulling their weight. But India’s prime minister has failed to attend the past three CHOGMs. Amartya Sen, an Indian Nobel prizewinner who co-authored a report in 2007 suggesting how to reinvigorate the Commonwealth, bemoans India’s lack of involvement, which he fears is unlikely to change under Narendra Modi.

Mr Sharma says that quiet persuasion has done more to advance democracy than public denunciation would have, for example when Guyana’s government stepped down a year ago after narrowly losing an election. Commonwealth mediation helped Fiji re-embrace democracy and helped guide the Maldives away from its one-party regime in 2009, he insists. He regards his softly-softly approach to Sri Lanka as vindicated by last year’s decision by Mahinda Rajapaksa to bow out as president after losing an election. (A former senior UN official who tracked the proceedings calls this notion “preposterous”.)

To give Mr Sharma his due, the Commonwealth acts by consensus. Countries are meant to carry equal weight in discussions and there are few sanctions short of expulsion. Even the democracy requirement is flexible; the sultanate of Brunei weirdly passes the test.

And despite its weaknesses, the Commonwealth is still a club that countries want to join. Though war-ravaged South Sudan is the only one formally on the waiting list, a string of others have been dandled as “possibles”: Algeria, Burma, Burundi, Ireland, Kuwait, Nepal, Palestine, Yemen. Its very oddness is an attraction. As its proponents often boast, it encompasses a third of the world’s population, a quarter of the UN’s membership and a fifth of the world’s land mass. Most members share a legal heritage and language (though Mozambique broke the English-speaking mould by joining in 1995, followed by Rwanda in 2009). “The Commonwealth is of great value to the world for what it is, before you consider what it does,” says Mr Sharma. “It contributes to global sanity and global wisdom.”

So what’s it for?

The Commonwealth’s real force is as a unique all-purpose network, whose embrace includes trade, education and an array of 180-odd professional bodies, from law to dentistry. In the recent CHOGM in Malta, Jonathan Marland, a British peer and tycoon, relaunched the Commonwealth Business Forum, gathering 1,200 people from 70 countries, including 25 ministers and 15 heads of state. Britain’s prime minister, David Cameron, praises the club’s ability to “bring Pakistan and India together in a useful format”; its support for his campaign against global corruption; its climate-change advocacy in the run-up to the global conference in Paris late last year; and its “forum for discussions in Africa and in the Caribbean, which can feel ignored and unloved”.

But the ultimate glue of the Commonwealth has undoubtedly been Queen Elizabeth. The headship of the club will not automatically pass to her son and heir. During his life Nelson Mandela was sometimes mooted as a possible successor. But Charles, Prince of Wales, has been steadily advancing his case: Operation Seduction, his friends half-jokingly call it.

Into this strange milieu as the next secretary-general steps Patricia, Baroness Scotland, a dual citizen of Britain and the Caribbean island of Dominica, who was attorney-general in Britain’s most recent Labour government. She may tread softly on human-rights issues, though surely not as softly as her predecessor—her early promise to press for gay rights will displease many African members.

The Commonwealth certainly needs a kick. That carries some risks: it could be mortally wounded if India and a few other big African countries ever walked out. But it is unlikely to die. It is an extraordinary network of disparate peoples bound by an imperial history that seems, even among former subject peoples, to inspire nostalgia as well as resentment. Besides, its assorted people “have the same sense of humour”, Lady Scotland said earlier this month. “No one needs to say ‘I’m only joking’ when saying something ironic to another Commonwealth citizen.”





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21694706-new-secretary-general-will-have-be-tough-dynamic-and-crafty-if-oddest/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Small islands

Lift up your voice

The Commonwealth offers tiny islands a rare platform for airing their worries

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



TUVALU and Nauru, lonely miniature outposts in the western Pacific, are just two of the minnows that enjoy making a splash when they swim with the big fish of the Commonwealth. Once the Ellice bit of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Tuvalu is a string of coral atolls, pictured above, at no point higher than 5 metres above the sea, lying more than 5,000km (3,150 miles) north-east of Australia. Its population is just over 10,000. Nauru, a rock of phosphate poking out of the sea in roughly the same expanse of ocean, is less populous by a rugby team or two.

Both are acutely vulnerable to global financial shocks, natural disasters and climate change. Selling its internet domain (.tv) is Tuvalu’s biggest earner, along with postage stamps and remittances from abroad. Nauru depends almost entirely on selling its phosphate, the price of which fell by three-quarters in the year following the financial crash of 2008, and on aid from Australia. Both statelets sell licences to fishing companies.

Though such tiddlers are members of an array of international and regional bodies, it is at meetings of Commonwealth heads of government every two years that many enjoy using a platform where they are listened to. No fewer than 31 of the Commonwealth’s 53 members are “small states”, defined as having a population under 1.5m or—to include such countries such as Namibia, Papua New Guinea and Jamaica—as having “the characteristics of small states”. Of those 31, 25 are islands, a tally that does not include Britain’s 14 “overseas territories” such as St Helena and Ascension Island in the Atlantic and the Pitcairn Islands (population around 50).

In the past decade or so climate change, a special worry for small islands, has moved up the Commonwealth agenda. (Vanuatu, until 1980 the British-French condominium of the New Hebrides, was due to hold the next Commonwealth shindig, but bowed out after last year’s tropical cyclone.) At the Malta meeting in November proposals on climate change were agreed upon with the eager backing of islanders. Presented the following month to the grand UN climate-change conference in Paris, they added bite to the eventual declaration: an example of how the Commonwealth can project small-island power.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21695010-commonwealth-offers-tiny-islands-rare-platform-airing-their-worries-lift-up-your/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Tesla’s mass-market ambitions: On a charge

Corporate governance: He who would Valeant be

Taxation and oil companies: Oiling the wheels

South Korean exporters: Films are the new stars

Air cargo: Too little freight, too much space

Religion, ethics and the workplace: Cross the boss

Schumpeter: Team spirit





Articles Sections Next

Tesla’s mass-market ambitions

On a charge

As Tesla becomes more like a regular carmaker, it faces a bumpier ride

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



THE eye-catching falcon-wing doors that adorn Tesla’s Model X (see picture) set it apart from other big and expensive SUVs. But like the firm’s Model S, a stylish and speedy saloon, the biggest difference lies under the bodywork: it is powered by a battery. Tesla has accelerated into the automotive fast-lane by making electric cars that appeal to rich folk keen to burnish their credentials as environmentally aware techies. But at the end of March it is launching the Model 3, a cheaper motor aimed at the upper end of the mass market. It will be a far harder sell.

Tesla has hitherto thrived in a niche. Other carmakers crammed bulky and expensive batteries into petite “city” cars. Tesla put a bigger power-pack into large and expensive ones (prices start at $70,000), more readily absorbing the cost of the battery. This also gives the cars a decent range of more than 250 miles (400km) between charges, and lightning acceleration. In 2015, after just over ten years in business, Tesla’s sales surpassed 50,000 cars. By 2020 it hopes to sell 500,000 a year, mostly Model 3s. These will cost as little as $35,000 (before the generous subsidies many governments dish out). But it is entering a part of the market where competition is intense and profit margins slimmer.

Its achievement so far is, nonetheless, remarkable. The roadside is littered with the wrecks of new entrants unable to take on the established carmakers, from Tucker in the 1940s to DeLorean in the 1970s and latterly Fisker’s failed bid to sell upmarket petrol-electric hybrids. Tesla’s classy design and nifty technology—a touchscreen instead of an instrument panel, and autonomous-driving capabilities—have ensured that only the Mercedes S-Class, which Daimler-Benz has spent decades refining, outsells it among large luxury saloons.

Tesla has shown that the barriers to entry in the car industry are far lower than widely assumed. The company bought a factory in Fremont, California, from GM and Toyota for just $42m, after the American firm pulled out of their joint venture and filed for bankruptcy in the wake of the financial crisis. Tesla also bought equipment to kit it out cheaply, from other carmakers struggling to cut their capacity.

It is run frugally. Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, reckons Tesla’s total capital spending and outlay on research and development so far is under $4 billion—one-seventh of what Volkswagen spends in a year. And in Elon Musk, its ebullient boss, it has a figurehead whose relentless promotion has quickly established Tesla as a luxury brand in an industry where convention suggests this should take 25 years.

Tesla has also rewritten the economics of making electric cars. It tackled high costs by stringing together hundreds of small, mass-produced laptop batteries. Tesla claims that its power-packs cost half what big carmakers pay their suppliers for custom-designed large-format batteries, and that its Gigafactory, a huge battery plant close to completion in the Nevada desert, will cut costs by another 30%.

It will need all its superior performance to stay ahead. Tesla currently has no direct competitors. Yet Apple looks set to launch a luxury electric car. Battery costs for other carmakers are also falling fast. In a couple of years Audi, Jaguar and other premium-car makers plan electric vehicles on a par with Tesla’s two priciest cars.

Launching the Model 3 will put Tesla’s business model under far more strain. Other carmakers look on its extreme vertical integration with bemusement. If Mr Musk fancies himself as the next Henry Ford, his factory certainly resembles the Model T’s production line, where iron ore and rubber went in one end and a car chugged out the other. Other carmakers are now largely brand managers, assemblers and systems integrators, ensuring that all the parts they buy from suppliers work in harmony when bolted and welded together. This serves to spread risk and push costs to suppliers. Tesla makes most of its parts in-house. Mr Musk regards this as a competitive advantage. Firms “build value by doing hard things,” he reckons. But tooling, forging and design suck up capital.

The firm is far more integrated even than carmakers of yesteryear. It has sought to attract buyers and tackle “range anxiety” by building its own worldwide network of more than 3,500 roadside “superchargers”. These can put an 80% charge on the battery in 40 minutes, and Tesla drivers can charge up without charge. It is a bit like Ford opening its own filling stations and giving away the petrol.

Whereas other carmakers sell their vehicles through networks of independent dealers, Tesla sells directly to the public, through its website and in showrooms located in shopping centres. This means it keeps the retail markup, but it is unclear how much, if at all, this offsets the cost of maintaining the showrooms. And dealer networks are useful in other ways: they assume a lot of risk by paying for cars when they take delivery of them, rather than when they sell them.

In all, Tesla’s way of working requires lots of cash. Barclays, a bank, thinks the firm will burn through $11 billion over the next five years, and will not generate significant profits until then. Investors have willingly stumped up so far but many analysts question whether Tesla is worth its current market capitalisation of $29 billion, more than half the value of GM, which makes nearly 10m cars a year. The worry is that entering the mass market will change the way Tesla makes cars, the sort of customers it chases and the competitors it faces.

Tesla thinks of itself as a technology company but the Model 3 will make it more of a large-scale manufacturer. It is unclear how well suited it will be to the task of designing and churning out cars at far higher rates than now. Mr Musk admitted that the design of the Model X was overly ambitious, especially the fancy doors, delaying its launch by many months.

Tesla will henceforth have to attract customers who want to buy a car not an engine, as Berenberg, another bank, puts it. The wealthy customers it has now often own more than one car, and can afford the luxury of charging facilities at home. They use the Tesla to salve their consciences with a “trip to church on Sunday”, as the boss of a rival carmaker jokes. Buyers of its cheaper model may rely on it as their sole vehicle, and lack space for home charging, making its range and the availability of public chargers more important.



They may also care less about image and the environment, and more about cost and performance, putting the Model 3 in competition with fossil-fuel cars such as the BMW 3 Series and Mercedes C-Class, not just other electric cars. Even in the market for electrics, Tesla will no longer have the road to itself. Other makers are constantly boosting their battery cars’ range. A new version of the BMW i3 will go for 120 miles before plugging in. GM’s Chevrolet Bolt, which hits forecourts later this year, may cost a bit more than a Model 3 but boast a similar, 200-mile range.

Analysts reckon Tesla will at best have ramped up its production to 320,000 cars, rather than its target of 500,000, in 2020. But perhaps that doesn’t matter. Mr Musk insists he is more interested in disrupting the car industry, and advancing the switch to electric cars, than in playing by his rivals’ numbers game. Among the Silicon Valley neighbours Tesla likes to compare itself to, “full stack” vertical integration is all the rage, and the biggest tech firms are less interested in making things than they are in creating software “platforms” on top of which a variety of services can be built.

So, Tesla’s ultimate aim may be more to create a platform for slick electric, autonomous cars that can also be built by others, in the way that various smartphone brands run on Google’s Android operating system. In that case, how well the Model 3 sells may not be the main determinant of the firm’s value.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695012-tesla-becomes-more-regular-carmaker-it-faces-bumpier-ride-charge/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Corporate governance

He who would Valeant be

Lessons from a drug firm’s disaster

Mar 19th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



UNTIL recently, America hadn’t had a spectacular corporate disaster since Lehman Brothers in 2008. But Valeant, a Canadian but New York-listed drug firm, now meets all of the tests: a bad business model, accounting problems, acquisitions, debt, an oddly low tax rate, a weak board, credulous analysts, and managers with huge pay packets and a mentality of denial. The result has been a $75 billion loss for shareholders and, possibly, a default on $31 billion of debt.

Valeant’s business model was buying other drug firms, cutting costs and yanking up prices. Since 2010 it has done $35 billion of deals, mainly financed by debt. At a time when Americans face stagnant living standards, a strategy based on squeezing customers was bound to encounter political hostility—“I’m going after them,” Hillary Clinton has vowed.

Valeant added to this mix a tendency towards evasiveness. In October investigative reporters revealed its murky relationship with a drugs dispensary, Philidor, which it consolidated into its accounts yet did not control. The relationship was severed but the Securities and Exchange Commission is still investigating. Federal prosecutors are also looking into various of the company’s practices. On Christmas Eve Michael Pearson, Valeant’s CEO and architect, went into hospital with pneumonia. On February 28th Mr Pearson (total pay awarded of $55m since 2012, according to Bloomberg) returned to work, welcomed back by the chairman for his “vision and execution”.



The facts that have emerged in March suggest that Mr Pearson should have been fired. Profit targets have been cut by 24% compared with October’s. The accounts will be restated and the filing of an annual report delayed. The results released on March 15th contain neither a full cash-flow statement nor a balance-sheet, but it appears that Valeant has been generating only just enough cash to pay its $1.6 billion interest bill this year. As suppliers and customers get wary, its cashflow may fall, leading to a default.

There are three lessons. First, boards matter: the managers should have been removed in October. Second, disasters happen in plain sight. Valeant issued $1.45 billion of shares in March 2015, when 90% of Wall Street analysts covering its shares rated them a “buy”. Yet as early as 2014 a rival firm, Allergan, had made an outspoken attack on Valeant’s finances, the thrust of which has been proved correct.

The final lesson is that “activist” investors, who aim to play a hands-on role at the firms that they invest in, have no monopoly on wisdom. Jeffrey Ubben of ValueAct and Bill Ackman of Pershing Square both own chunks of Valeant and have supported it. Mr Ackman is at present trying to consolidate America’s railway system. Mr Ubben is trying to shake up Rolls-Royce, a British aerospace firm. After Valeant, why should anyone listen to what they say?



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695009-lessons-drug-firms-disaster-he-who-would-valeant-be/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Taxation and oil companies

Oiling the wheels

Governments are easing the tax burden on the industry, with some exceptions

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



RISING oil prices once looked like a one-way bet for national treasuries. Governments in resource-rich countries were able to extract ever more money from oil companies through a range of levies, royalties and production-sharing agreements. Their average take on each barrel rose from $9.90 in 2000 to $30.40 in 2014, according to Boston Consulting Group. That rate was reasonable when oil prices hit triple digits. But with oil now languishing around $40 a barrel, it is too high. Governments are moving to cut it. In his budget on March 16th Britain’s chancellor, George Osborne, abolished one tax on oil production and halved another. Some North Sea oilfields will see their tax rate fall from 67.5% to 40%.

Some ways of taxing oil production are more reactive to price changes than others. Countries like Australia and Norway take a share of an oilfield’s profits. When prices, and hence profits, fall, those systems adjust automatically. Others, such as Brazil and Kazakhstan, charge a fixed royalty per barrel. As oil prices fall, these stay constant, pushing up the government’s percentage take. Some systems, in which costs and revenues get shared between oil companies and governments, work as a mixture of the two. A number of the royalty-based regimes are now punitive. Figures from EY, an accounting firm, suggest that with oil at $40 a barrel, Brazil and Angola now take more than 100% of the gross profits of some oil projects (see chart).



High tax rates can cause problems, even when they are not extortionate. Rystad, an energy consultant, expects global oil-and-gas investment to fall to $522 billion this year, from $900 billion in 2013. When governments try to attract new investment to a basin, they are now in effect bidding for a share of a smaller pie. Some oil resources are so attractive that oil companies swarm in come what may. Declining and high-cost oil provinces, such as the British North Sea, are not so fortunate. There, tax incentives can prove crucial. Last year Maersk Oil decided to go ahead with its Culzean field after the government introduced tax breaks for complicated projects.

Some provinces face an even more pressing challenge. If an oilfield’s operating costs, including royalties, are above the oil price, its owners might shut it down temporarily. A number of American shale formations are particularly vulnerable, according to Alexey Kondrashov, EY’s head of oil-and-gas taxation.

Britain fired the starting-gun on a round of tax cuts last year by reducing the rate it charges on oil profits and introducing a range of investment allowances. The headline tax rate for new fields, 60% at the start of 2015, fell first to 50%, and will now be cut to 40%. Following Britain’s first cut, Kazakhstan reduced its tax on exports of oil. Brazil put a new oil royalty on hold. Colombia, Mexico and Kenya all tinkered with some of their tax rules. The Canadian province of Alberta, which last year voted in a left-wing government promising corporate-tax rises, decided in January not to raise its oil royalties.

If the recent partial recovery in oil prices peters out, more governments may rethink their fiscal regimes, despite tight budgets and the public’s dislike of tax cuts for the oil giants. But there are no easy answers. Whereas royalties are easy to calculate and hard to avoid, they are inflexible. Profit-based taxes and production-sharing agreements are complicated, and vulnerable to gaming by oil companies. That no system is without its flaws helps to explain why governments take such different views on how to tax the oil industry.

Although a number of countries are reducing the tax burden, there is not yet a race to the bottom. Some governments may even move in the opposite direction. Russian oil firms, which received a windfall when their operating costs tumbled along with the rouble, are steadying themselves for a tax rise. And in February Barack Obama proposed a new federal royalty of $10.25—in addition to state ones—on every barrel produced in America. Fortunately for the oilmen, a Republican Congress means his plan may not get far.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695016-governments-are-easing-tax-burden-industry-some-exceptions-oiling-wheels/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

South Korean exporters

Films are the new stars

Ships and steel suffer, but the entertainment industry shines

Mar 19th 2016 | SEOUL | From the print edition



FOR an export juggernaut, South Korea’s recent losing streak is alarming: for 14 straight months its exports have fallen in value terms compared with a year earlier. In January they plummeted by 18.8% to just under $37 billion—the steepest drop since 2009. Petrochemical products are a key South Korean export, so low global oil prices partly explain the numbers. Still, the country’s longtime engines of growth, including steel mills, shipyards and car plants, appear to be running out of puff.

Last year POSCO, a steel giant set up in 1968, posted its first annual net loss. It had already been bumped down the global rankings by Chinese and Japanese rivals, from third- to fifth-largest producer, between 2010 and 2014. This month Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering (DSME), one of the world’s biggest shipbuilders, recorded its worst deficit on record, losing more than 5 trillion won ($4 billion) in 2015. Its sales fell by almost a quarter. It laid off 13,000 workers last year; now it says it will dismiss a further 12,000. In January Hyundai Motor, a carmaker, reported a drop in profits for an eighth straight quarter. It expects sales (combined with those of its affiliate, Kia Motors) to inch up by 1.5% this year—a fraction of the 24% growth achieved in 2010.

Such firms are being hurt by growing output among Chinese producers and by the won’s recent strength against the yen, which is helping Japanese rivals. South Korea’s exports are equivalent to around half of its GDP, and a quarter of them go to China, where growth has been faltering. Ryu Seung-sun, head of research at Mirae Asset Securities in Seoul, says that because South Korea exports parts for consumer goods, like screens and chips for Chinese smartphones, it is bound to be among the first to suffer from a worldwide slowdown.

However, Park Sangin, an economist at Seoul National University, thinks internal factors are the bigger culprits: after all, the country’s economy weathered the recent global recession with relative ease, he says. Many of its sprawling conglomerates are built around the smokestack industries that powered the country’s industrial take-off under Park Chung-hee, a former dictator (and father to the current president, Park Geun-hye) over four decades ago, with the result that manufacturing accounts for as much as a third of South Korea’s GDP today. Over the years these chaebol, as the conglomerates are known, have expanded into all sorts of sectors. One-tenth of their offshoots are now unprofitable “zombie” firms, kept on life support through cross-shareholdings.

Some industrial groups have begun to shed ailing, non-core businesses; DSME, for example, is selling a subsidiary that runs golf courses. However, others are continuing to diversify in pursuit of new sources of growth. As Samsung’s electronics affiliate has lost market share to plucky smartphone-makers in China, the group has moved, among other things, into biopharmaceuticals, the pet project of the conglomerate’s de facto boss, Lee Jae-yong. Samsung BioLogics recently broke ground on its third production plant which, when up and running, will make it the world’s largest manufacturer of such drugs.

Other businesses are thriving despite the downturn. Seven of the ten best-performing stocks last year in the MSCI Asia Pacific Index, a benchmark followed by big investment funds, were South Korean, among them pharmaceutical, cosmetics and aerospace firms.

Media stocks have been buoyed recently by the success of CJ E&M, a subsidiary of CJ Corp, another chaebol. The affiliate established itself as an export star with the hit 2013 film, “A Wedding Invitation” (pictured), made for the Chinese market with Chinese actors but a Korean crew. In November last year MSCI added CJ E&M to its Korea index, as it bumped out Daewoo Shipbuilding and Hyundai Merchant Marine, a struggling shipping line. As media firms profit from the popularity of Korean soap operas, films and music in China and South-East Asia, more are partnering with Chinese firms to produce or promote content.

It is doubtless a good thing that the South Korean economy no longer has all of its export eggs in a handful of heavy-industrial baskets. But cultural and fashion businesses are no less volatile and vulnerable to global trends than ones that make stuff out of lumps of metal. Last month South Korea’s two biggest cosmetics-makers, Kolmar Korea and Cosmax, which now depend heavily on the Chinese market, announced lacklustre earnings. Even a more diverse export base is not enough to protect South Korea entirely from the chill winds blowing across Asia.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695015-ships-and-steel-suffer-entertainment-industry-shines-films-are-new-stars/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Air cargo

Too little freight, too much space



Overcapacity hits another part of the transport industry

Mar 19th 2016 | BERLIN AND CASTLE DONINGTON, ENGLAND | From the print edition



TO BRITISH holidaymakers flying from East Midlands airport, near the quiet English town of Castle Donington, it seems like any other small airfield. But after dark, when the last passengers have departed, it begins to buzz with activity as Britain’s second-biggest air-cargo hub. Freighter planes arrive throughout the night at a dedicated terminal for DHL, a German logistics giant, to be serviced by an army of fluorescent-yellow-clad workers. Some planes are stuffed full of fish from Iceland, others with parcels from places as far-flung as rural Pakistan and the Pacific islands.

Although East Midlands airport is bustling, and the global air-cargo business now handles more than a third of world trade by value, the industry has been under pressure since the financial crisis. At the World Cargo Symposium, a meeting of industry bigwigs in Berlin this week, there were grumbles that their business has seen better days. The volume of goods travelling by air has risen marginally over the past year but airlines’ cargo revenues have fallen from a peak of $67 billion in 2011 to around $50 billion a year now. Freight provides just 9% of total airline revenues now, down from over 12% a decade ago.

A dramatic fall in sea-freight rates—of more than 75% since 2012 on some routes—as a result of overcapacity among shipping lines has encouraged customers to switch from sending some non-urgent deliveries by air. Excess capacity among the airlines themselves has done further damage. Since the financial crisis, there has been no let-up in the growth of passenger demand, so carriers have been expanding their fleets. This means the amount of cargo space in the belly of passenger planes has risen sharply. Combined with flat demand for shipping by air, the result is that average capacity utilisation across the air-cargo business has fallen to 43.5%, the lowest since the crisis. So, customers have been able to demand big price cuts.



Some all-cargo airlines have gone bust in recent years, and other carriers with big cargo divisions have been suffering, despite the fall in the cost of jet fuel. Last August, for instance, Midex, at one point the largest all-cargo airline in the Middle East with a ten-strong fleet of freighters, closed down. Lufthansa Cargo, the freight division of Germany’s largest airline, slipped into loss last summer. South America’s largest airline, LATAM, reported a 27% year-on-year fall in cargo revenue for the fourth quarter of 2015. LATAM has responded by cutting its use of freighter planes to focus on belly-hold cargo. IAG, the owner of British Airways, now looks prescient for having got rid of its freighter fleet altogether.

There are some routes on which there is more cargo than the passenger aircraft flying them can handle, says Andrew Herdman of the Association of Asia-Pacific Airlines. Exports from Africa to Europe and mainland China to America are more significant than passenger flows between them. Long journey times across the Pacific mean that many passenger aircraft do not have the range to take off with a full hold.

Even so, airlines operating freighters are being squeezed into such niches by the expansion of integrated logistics businesses such as DHL, FedEx and UPS. These firms, with their vast fleets of planes, lorries and vans, and their highly efficient distribution centres, are sucking up much of the business from e-commerce companies. FedEx said this week that net profits in its most recent quarter were up 18% year-on-year, beating expectations.

Even the logistics giants may soon see their businesses disrupted. This month Amazon, an e-commerce giant, said it would lease 20 Boeing 767 jets for its delivery service. That should have caused some concern at DHL, which currently makes a quarter of its revenues from shipping Amazon’s packages.

Though planemakers continue to enjoy strong demand for passenger aircraft, weak sales of cargo planes are forcing them to re-examine their freighter programmes. Airbus has put on hold its plan to launch a freighter version of its A380 superjumbo. Sales of the latest freighter version of Boeing’s jumbo, the 747-8F, have disappointed since it entered service in 2011. Analysts used to think there was a case for a further update to the 747 freighter, to replace planes that will be retired in the 2020s—but now there is much scepticism.

Because of the weak oil price, some elderly, fuel-guzzling freighters have continued to fly, or even been brought out of retirement, which is further reducing the demand for new freighters. However, the sharp fall in air-cargo rates is likely to hasten the decommissioning of many 747s, and the replacement of these four-engined jets with more efficient, two-engined Boeing 777s. And since no one is ordering passenger versions of the 747, Boeing is now losing money on the whole programme. The downturn in the air-freight market has spelled doom for several cargo airlines; it may also be the final blow for the venerable jumbo jet too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695013-overcapacity-hits-another-part-transport-industry-too-little-freight-too-much-space/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Religion, ethics and the workplace

Cross the boss

What your manager may have in common with a vampire

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



SHOCKING as it may sound, bosses occasionally ask underlings to do unscrupulous things. In a study in 2013 by Ethics & Compliance Initiative (ECI), a non-profit body, 9% of American employees said they had been pressured by managers to undertake a task that compromised their ethical beliefs. Standing up for yourself can be bad for your career. When Countrywide, an American mortgage broker, leant on its staff to commit fraud by passing on defective loans to the government, it fired those who spoke out. Indeed, according to ECI, 21% of employees who reported misconduct at work said they faced some sort of retaliation from their firms.

So perhaps it is better to ward off a dodgy request by signalling to your boss that such an approach would be unwelcome. New research by Sreedhari Desai of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, to be published in the Academy of Management Journal, suggests one potential strategy. Just as vampires in gothic fiction can be kept at bay with a brandished crucifix, so too, it seems, can evil bosses.

Ms Desai conducted field research at Indian firms to test whether those who kept a religious symbol at their desks were treated differently by their bosses to those who did not. In another experiment she looked at what happened when members of a team appended a virtuous quotation to their e-mail signoffs, such as “Better to fail with honour than succeed with fraud”. In each case she found that managers were less likely to ask those in their charge to act unethically if they displayed some indication of moral values.

It may be that bosses are reluctant to put seemingly righteous employees in an awkward situation. Or they may fear that such people are more likely to blow the whistle on any improper demands. Or perhaps exposure to a moral sentiment or symbol makes bosses look deep within themselves, consider the ethics of what they are about to ask, and think better of it.

The truth seems to lie in a mix of these factors, says Ms Desai. Her experiments showed that those in positions of power who were exposed to moral or religious symbols were less likely to ask something immoral of any of their employees—but they were even less likely to do so of the person to whom the symbol belonged.

Interestingly, when looking at white-collar workers in India, it appeared that it made little difference whether the two parties shared a religion. Muslims were more likely to respect someone displaying a Hindu deity or Christian cross, for example, than someone who did not display anything. Indeed, Ms Desai worries that bosses who are themselves religious may discriminate more generally in favour of workers who are openly devout, to the disadvantage of those who keep their faith to themselves, or do not have one.

In relatively godless Western countries, workers with a strong religious faith have become increasingly inclined to react against secular pressure by insisting on their right to self-expression at work. For example, in 2013 a British Airways employee won a discrimination case against the airline after it had told her to cover up a crucifix necklace which, it said, breached its uniform policy. In a survey by the Randstad Research Institute, the research arm of a big human-resources consultant, 23% of French managers reported instances of religious conflict in their workplace last year, about double the proportion in 2014.

But attitudes to expressions of personal values at work may vary greatly between similar countries. The early findings of a follow-up study Ms Desai is conducting suggest that, for example, when Americans see a moral quotation appended to an e-mail they tend to take it as a true representation of the sender’s beliefs; Australians, by contrast, suspect the sender is being “holier than thou”, and tend to trust him less.

The Aussies may be on to something. There may not be a correlation between someone who proclaims his religious or moral principles at work and that person’s propensity to act in a moral way. In a further experiment, Ms Desai gave her participants the opportunity to behave ethically or unethically. Then, in what they believed was an unrelated study, they were given the option of appending a moral quotation to an e-mail to others in their group and/or to one sent just to themselves. Those who chose to signal their righteousness only to the outside world were more likely to have misbehaved in the first part of the experiment. Such people might do well to consider Luke 16:15 in the New Testament: “Ye are they which justify yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695011-what-your-manager-may-have-common-vampire-cross-boss/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

Team spirit

Businesses are embracing the idea of working in teams. Managing them is hard

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



TEAMS have become the basic building-blocks of organisations. Recruitment ads routinely call for “team players”. Business schools grade their students in part on their performance in group projects. Office managers knock down walls to encourage team-building. Teams are as old as civilisation, of course: even Jesus had 12 co-workers. But a new report by Deloitte, “Global Human Capital Trends”, based on a survey of more than 7,000 executives in over 130 countries, suggests that the fashion for teamwork has reached a new high. Almost half of those surveyed said their companies were either in the middle of restructuring or about to embark on it; and for the most part, restructuring meant putting more emphasis on teams.

Companies are abandoning functional silos and organising employees into cross-disciplinary teams that focus on particular products, problems or customers. These teams are gaining more power to run their own affairs. They are also spending more time working with each other rather than reporting upwards. Deloitte argues that a new organisational form is on the rise: a network of teams is replacing the conventional hierarchy.

The fashion for teams is driven by a sense that the old way of organising people is too rigid for both the modern marketplace and the expectations of employees. Technological innovation puts a premium on agility. John Chambers, chairman of Cisco, an electronics firm, says that “we compete against market transitions, not competitors. Product transitions used to take five or seven years; now they take one or two.” Digital technology also makes it easier for people to co-ordinate their activities without resorting to hierarchy. The “millennials” who will soon make up half the workforce in rich countries were reared from nursery school onwards to work in groups.

The fashion for teams is also spreading from the usual corporate suspects (such as GE and IBM) to some more unusual ones. The Cleveland Clinic, a hospital operator, has reorganised its medical staff into teams to focus on particular treatment areas; consultants, nurses and others collaborate closely instead of being separated by speciality and rank. The US Army has gone the same way. In his book, “Team of Teams”, General Stanley McChrystal describes how the army’s hierarchical structure hindered its operations during the early stages of the Iraq war. His solution was to learn something from the insurgents it was fighting: decentralise authority to self-organising teams.

A good rule of thumb is that as soon as generals and hospital administrators jump on a management bandwagon, it is time to ask questions. Leigh Thompson of Kellogg School of Management in Illinois warns that, “Teams are not always the answer—teams may provide insight, creativity and knowledge in a way that a person working independently cannot; but teamwork may also lead to confusion, delay and poor decision-making.” The late Richard Hackman of Harvard University once argued, “I have no question that when you have a team, the possibility exists that it will generate magic, producing something extraordinary…But don’t count on it.”

Hackman (who died in 2013) noted that teams are hampered by problems of co-ordination and motivation that chip away at the benefits of collaboration. High-flyers forced to work in teams may be undervalued and free-riders empowered. Groupthink may be unavoidable. In a study of 120 teams of senior executives, he discovered that less than 10% of their supposed members agreed on who exactly was on the team. If it is hard enough to define a team’s membership, agreeing on its purpose is harder still.

Profound changes in the workforce are making teams trickier to manage. Teams work best if their members have a strong common culture. This is hard to achieve when, as is now the case in many big firms, a large proportion of staff are temporary contractors. Teamwork improves with time: America’s National Transportation Safety Board found that 73% of the incidents in its civil-aviation database occurred on a crew’s first day of flying together. However, as Amy Edmondson of Harvard points out, organisations increasingly use “team” as a verb rather than a noun: they form teams for specific purposes and then quickly disband them.

Teeming with doubts

The least that can be concluded from this research is that companies need to think harder about managing teams. They need to rid their minds of sentimental egalitarianism: the most successful teams have leaders who set an overall direction and clamp down on dithering and waffle. They need to keep teams small and focused: giving in to pressure to be more “inclusive” is a guarantee of dysfunction. Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s boss, says that “If I see more than two pizzas for lunch, the team is too big.” They need to immunise teams against groupthink: Hackman argued that the best ones contain “deviants” who are willing to ruffle feathers. A new study of 12,000 workers in 17 countries by Steelcase, a furniture-maker which also does consulting, finds that the best way to ensure employees are “engaged” is to give them more control over where and how they do their work—which may mean liberating them from having to do everything in collaboration with others.

However, organisations need to learn something bigger than how to manage teams better: they need to be in the habit of asking themselves whether teams are the best tools for the job. Team-building skills are in short supply: Deloitte reports that only 12% of the executives they contacted feel they understand the way people work together in networks and only 21% feel confident in their ability to build cross-functional teams. Slackly managed teams can become hotbeds of distraction—employees routinely complain that they can’t get their work done because they are forced to spend too much time in meetings or compelled to work in noisy offices. Even in the age of open-plan offices and social networks some work is best left to the individual.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21694962-managing-them-hard-businesses-are-embracing-idea-working-teams/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




The blockchain in finance: Hype springs eternal

Buttonwood: Overcoming their fears

Central banks and digital currencies: Redistributed ledger

TLTROs: Money for less than nothing

Bridgewater: The hardest trade

Cyber-crime: The Dhaka caper

Measuring inflation: How much is that doggy?

Rotterdam: The shipping news

Free exchange: Doing less with more





Articles Sections Next

The blockchain in finance

Hype springs eternal

Distributed ledgers are the future, but their advent will be slow

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



NORMALLY, it is Simon Taylor’s job to persuade sceptical colleagues at Barclays that rapid technological change will disrupt the bank’s business. So it comes as something of a surprise to have to dampen the excitement about the blockchain. “It’s quite silly. I get ten invitations to speak at a conference every day,” he says. “The technology will have real impact, but it will take time.”

The blockchain is the technology underpinning bitcoin, a digital currency with a chequered history. It is an example of a “distributed ledger”: in essence, a database that is maintained not by a single actor, such as a bank, but collaboratively by a number of participants. Their respective computers regularly agree on how to update the database using a “consensus mechanism”, after which the modifications they have settled on are rendered unchangeable with the help of complex cryptography. Once information has been immortalised in this way, it can be used as proof of ownership. The blockchain can also serve as the underpinning for “smart contracts”—programs that automatically execute the promises embedded in a bond, for instance.

It is easy to see why bankers get excited about distributed ledgers. Instead of having to keep track of their assets in separate databases, as financial firms do now, they can share just one. Trades can be settled almost instantly, without the need for lots of intermediaries. As a result, less capital is tied up during a transaction, reducing risk. Such ledgers also make it easier to comply with anti-money-laundering and other regulations, since they provide a record of all past transactions (which is why regulators are so keen on them—see article).

Besides, embracing the technology allows big banks to appear innovative. For the most breathless evangelists, it holds out the prospect of liberation from all the dross that has accumulated in the financial system, from incompatible IT systems to expensive intermediaries. “For many, the blockchain is the Messiah,” says Gideon Greenspan, the founder of Coin Sciences, a blockchain startup based in Israel.

Yet the path to the promised land won’t be an easy one. One stumbling block is what geeks call “scalability”: today’s distributed ledgers cannot handle huge numbers of transactions. Another is confidentiality: encryption techniques that allow distributed ledgers to work while keeping trading patterns, say, private are only now being developed.

Such technical hurdles can be overcome only with a high degree of co-operation between all involved. But this is not a given in the highly competitive world of finance. Some efforts are already under way. More than 40 banks now have a stake in R3 CEV, a startup meant to come up with shared standards. Similarly, firms including IBM and Digital Asset Holdings have started the Open Ledger Project to develop open-source blockchain software.

The Open Ledger Project may have trouble combining the bits of code its members contribute. Such problems will slow adoption, notes Tolga Oguz of McKinsey, a consultancy. Moreover, most projects are still “proofs of concept”. Only a few services have gone live. A dozen banks are using a firm called Ripple to process international payments cheaply. In August Overstock.com, an online retailer, announced a “smart-contract” platform, as did Symbiont, another startup. In January NASDAQ, a stock-exchange operator, launched Linq, a service that allows companies to issue debt and securities. It also plans to initiate a blockchain-based e-voting service for shareholders in firms listed on its exchange in Estonia.

Then there are more specialised services. Everledger uses a blockchain to protect diamonds by sticking data about a stone’s attributes on it, providing proof of its identity should it be stolen. Wave, another blockchain startup, encodes documents used in global supply chains, reducing the risk of disputes and forgeries.

More applications will pop up this year and next. Prime targets will be self-contained markets with complex products, many participants and convoluted procedures. One example is syndicated loans, which can involve dozens of lenders and which can take as long as a month to negotiate. Symbiont recently teamed up with Ipreo, another fintech firm, to automate such loans using smart contracts. Another tempting target is trade finance, which still requires lots of paperwork to travel around the globe along with the goods being sold.



Widespread use of the blockchain is still five to ten years off, predicts Angus Scott of Euroclear, which settles securities transactions. What is more, he says, disruptive fintech startups are unlikely to lead the charge. In markets where the success of a technology depends on its adoption by many counterparties, as is often the case in finance, incumbents have an advantage. The Australian Securities Exchange in January set an example when it enlisted Digital Asset Holdings to develop a blockchain-based system for settling trades.

Given the attenuated timetable and daunting obstacles, there is a risk that banks will lose interest and pursue less glamorous technologies instead. BNY Mellon, an American bank, recently decided not to go ahead with a project that would have used the blockchain to simplify international payments, because it could not persuade enough banks to participate. It would have taken “a significant effort” to make it work, according to Tony Brady of BNY Mellon.

Yet it would be wrong to conclude that the blockchain is no more than a fad. It is merely moving through the same hype cycle as other next-big-things have done before it: inflated expectations are followed by disillusionment before a technology eventually finds its place. Although it will take a while for distributed ledgers to rule the world, they are an idea, to paraphrase Victor Hugo, that will be hard to resist.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695068-distributed-ledgers-are-future-their-advent-will-be-slow-hype-springs/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

Overcoming their fears

Investors may expect slower growth, but not a recession

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



INVESTORS have recovered some of their confidence. In the first six weeks of the year stockmarkets plummeted, but in mid-February the S&P 500 index began a rally which has regained most of the lost ground (see chart). Emerging markets are back where they were at the start of the year. Another sign that markets are less fearful is the declining yield on speculative, or junk, bonds, which dropped from 10.2% on average on February 11th to 8.5% a month later.

The two big worries in January and February were that the Chinese economy was slowing fast and that the Federal Reserve might therefore have miscalculated when it pushed up interest rates in December. Perhaps the global economy might be heading back into recession.

Those worries have not completely disappeared: forecasts for economic growth are still being revised down. The OECD, a think-tank, predicts that global growth will be 3% this year, below its previous estimate of 3.3%. But slower growth is not the same as a recession.

In China the official figures continue to show a slowdown but not a catastrophic one: industrial output in January and February (the months were combined because of the impact of China’s new-year holiday) was up 5.4% on the previous year while retail sales were up 10.2%. Both figures were lower than those recorded in December. But both fixed investment and property sales were higher than expected. A rebound in commodity prices, seen as a proxy for Chinese demand, may also be a sign that the economy is not collapsing. And the Chinese authorities have eased monetary policy (via a cut in the reserve ratio for banks) to boost growth.

In America employment numbers have shown no sign of a deteriorating economy, although February’s retail sales were disappointing. The latest estimate of first-quarter growth from the Atlanta Fed’s GDP Now model is for an annualised rise of 1.9% (around 0.4-0.5% for the quarter).

The European Central Bank (ECB) did its bit to boost growth on March 10th by cutting rates further into negative territory, expanding its bond-buying programme and offering banks an incentive to increase their lending. The package had a mixed initial reaction from the markets, after Mario Draghi, the ECB’s president, hinted that rates could not be cut any further. But most economists seemed to think that the ECB had done more than expected.

The problem, according to Stephen King, an economist at HSBC, is that “the combination of weak nominal GDP growth and low interest rates suggests that central bankers’ monetary powers are beginning to wane.” Normally, monetary easing would weaken a currency, but the euro rose after the ECB’s move. The yen has also jumped since the Bank of Japan eased policy in January. It may take more to impress the markets these days than it did in 2012, when Mario Draghi turned the tide of the euro crisis: we have moved from “whatever it takes” to “whatever”.

Another issue for markets is that growth in corporate profits has stalled. The first-quarter profits of S&P 500 companies are expected to be 6.2% lower than a year ago. Even if energy companies are excluded, they will be 0.7% lower. Global corporate profits fell by 2% last year, according to Société Générale, a French bank; in emerging markets they were down by 12%. In response, firms have been cutting investment spending: Standard & Poor’s, a rating agency, estimates that global capital expenditure fell by 10% in 2015 and will drop further this year and next. In real terms global capex may be no higher in 2017 than it was in 2006.

Then there is political risk. The setbacks for Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic party in German regional elections and the likelihood that Donald Trump will be the Republican nominee for president indicate that voters are in an ornery mood. Politicians may well respond to their anger by taking a more populist tack, increasing taxes on business and raising trade barriers.

All this means there is a limit to how exuberant any equity rally can be. This year may end up resembling 2015, when, after many twists and turns, most markets finished flat or down. Yet it is hard to imagine investors turning their backs on shares altogether. The latest poll by Bank of America Merrill Lynch shows that fund managers retain a higher-than-normal weighting in equities. With cash yielding virtually nothing and many government bonds offering negative returns, investors do not have much choice. It will take signs that the global economy (or at least America’s) is actually in recession for investors to succumb to outright panic.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695072-investors-may-expect-slower-growth-not-recession-overcoming-their-fears/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Central banks and digital currencies

Redistributed ledger

Even central bankers are excited about the blockchain

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

RUSSIA’S central bank has set up a working group. The People’s Bank of China (PBOC) is keen. Inspired by bitcoin and its blockchain technology, the world’s central bankers are contemplating digital currencies of their own. Like bitcoin, these would be built around a database listing who owns what. Unlike bitcoin’s, though, these “distributed ledgers” would not be maintained collectively by some of their users. Instead, they would be tightly controlled by the issuers of the currency.

The plans involve letting individuals and firms open accounts at the central bank, a privilege usually enjoyed only by retail banks. Unlike a regular bank account, these would be guaranteed in full by the state, regardless of any limit in the national deposit-insurance scheme. That would make parking cash at the central bank particularly attractive during times of uncertainty.

Central banks would benefit too. They could save on printing costs if people held more bits and fewer banknotes. Digital currency would be tougher to forge, though a successful cyber-attack would be catastrophic. Digital central-bank money could even, in theory, replace cash. If it did, central bankers could then use deeply negative interest rates to give the economy a jolt. And boosting growth by handing out “helicopter money” would become as easy as adding a zero to electronic balances.

Better yet, whereas bundles of banknotes can be moved without trace, electronic payments cannot. Replacing cash with digital currency, under the control of the central bank, would make it tougher to launder money, dodge taxes or sell drugs. It would also make prying into people’s finances much easier. That may be one reason why the PBOC wants to introduce a digital currency “as soon as possible”. The technology first developed to free money from the grip of central bankers may soon be used to tighten their control.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695088-even-central-bankers-are-excited-about-blockchain-redistributed-ledger/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

TLTROs

Money for less than nothing

The ECB plans to pay banks to borrow from it

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



AMID the volley of tricks Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank (ECB), deployed earlier this month to revive the sluggish euro-zone economy, “targeted longer-term refinancing operations”, or TLTROs, received little attention. For one thing, the ECB has been trying TLTROs (extending cheap credit to banks that boost lending to businesses) since 2014. Moreover, next to ever-more-negative interest rates and ever-bigger bond purchases, TLTROs seemed mundane. But if you look at the fine print, the ECB is offering to pay banks to lend.

To encourage credit growth, the ECB has been charging banks for parking excess reserves with it (those negative interest rates). The new TLTRO II scheme is supposed to increase the incentive to lend, by returning some of the money the ECB is making in this way to banks that increase their stock of corporate loans. Those that raise their lending above a certain target will be paid as much as 0.4% to borrow from the ECB, with the precise rate depending on how liberally they splash the ECB’s money around.

The forebear of the current scheme, TLTRO I, was not quite as generous. It offered banks very cheap loans if they increased lending. It was aimed at countries like Italy and Spain, where monetary easing had not reduced borrowing costs by as much as it had in Germany or France.

Some saw TLTRO I as a damp squib. Only half of the €400 billion ($436 billion) on offer in its early stages was taken up, and later demand dropped off further (see left-hand chart). Bank lending to firms in the euro area in January was the same as it had been in September 2014, at the scheme’s launch. The banks that borrowed from the ECB under TLTRO I did expand credit, but largely in countries with already healthy lending, such as Germany and France.

As limp as this sounds, Mr Draghi was pleased with the scheme. Although banks in “vulnerable” countries—a category that includes Italy, Portugal and Spain—have not increased lending in absolute terms, they have at least been cutting corporate lending more slowly than they had been, as the scheme requires. Stabilising lending to companies when it had been falling at an average annual rate of 4% since 2012 is a success of sorts. Numbers crunched by Fitch, a rating agency, suggest that Italian and Spanish banks were the most avid participants. A single Italian bank, Intesa Sanpaolo, drew €28 billion of TLTROs.

There are also signs that TLTRO I brought down borrowing costs for businesses. The ECB found that banks in vulnerable countries that received TLTRO funds cut lending rates by an average of 1.15 percentage points between June 2014 and July 2015, compared with only 0.45 points among non-recipients. Lending volumes followed a similar pattern. Borrowing costs around the euro zone converged (see right-hand chart), although perhaps thanks to other policies as well.

Mr Draghi is taking few chances with the new, beefed up, TLTRO II. Whereas TLTRO I loans have to be repaid by September 2018, irrespective of when they were made, TLTRO II loans will last four years from the date of issuance. TLTRO I loans can also be called in if the borrower fails to meet its lending target; TLTRO II loans will not be recalled, and the interest on them will not rise above 0%, even if lending targets are not met. And banks will be eligible to borrow far more: TLTRO I limits the loans on offer to 7% of a bank’s outstanding corporate credit; under TLTRO II the cap will be raised to 30%.

Marco Stringa of Deutsche Bank notes that TLTRO II even offers banks protection against speculative attack, as they will be able to use the cash to buy back their own bonds if necessary. Credit Suisse summarised the scheme’s conditions as “extremely favourable”, and added: “We expect markets to notice, eventually.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695089-ecb-plans-pay-banks-borrow-it-money-less-nothing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bridgewater

The hardest trade

A successful hedge fund confronts mortality

Mar 19th 2016 | New York | From the print edition



OTHER than the obvious task of picking good investments, the most difficult trade for most hedge funds is swapping old bosses for new. Banks tout histories measured in centuries; many mutual funds have thrived for decades, through multiple managers and owners. Successful hedge funds, in contrast, with their unique investment strategies, tend to struggle with changes of leadership. In recent weeks Bridgewater, a giant of the industry with $154 billion under management, has been providing ample evidence of this.

Bridgewater is in the middle of a ten-year “planful transition” in which its founder, Ray Dalio, has promised to relinquish both his majority ownership and management control. The first part appears to be going according to plan: Mr Dalio says he now holds only a “significant minority” of shares, having sold the rest of his holding to other employees. But he is still co-chief investment officer, among other roles.

Mr Dalio recently became involved in a semi-public spat with Greg Jensen, who was co-CEO until complaining that the planful transition was not going according to plan (he remains co-chief investment officer). Mr Dalio, in turn, complained that Mr Jensen was violating the company’s principles by criticising him behind his back. Shortly afterwards Bridgewater hired Jon Rubinstein, a former Apple executive, as a new co-CEO.

Mr Dalio dismisses all the fuss as part of Bridgewater’s “radically transparent culture”, in which disagreements are supposed to be voiced and settled openly (although not publicly). Both he and Mr Jensen maintain that their dispute has been resolved. Mr Dalio says he will continue to pull back from management, and ultimately hopes to become something of a “mentor”, who does not handle day-to-day decisions but remains involved. He cites the example of Lee Kuan Yew, who relinquished the title of prime minister and gradually stood back from running Singapore over a number of years (at one point styling himself “minister mentor”).

Mr Dalio says he would judge himself a failure if the firm wilted without him. He believes that its unusual culture, which he has outlined in a 106-page statement of principles, helpfully broken down into 210 distinct points, is strong and effective enough to last without him. The most important of these, “truth”, is accompanied by bruising corollaries, such as “Don’t depersonalise mistakes” and “Don’t pick your battles. Fight them all.” The goal of employee evaluations is to be accurate, not kind. Meetings are recorded, aiding evaluation. Potential recruits are asked cryptic questions in interviews, such as, “Do you like something firm or soft?”

This eccentric approach might be dismissed were it not for Bridgewater’s remarkable success. Its Alpha Fund has had only three down years since its inception in 1991 (see chart). Clients, the firm says, remain untroubled by the current hullabaloo. Perhaps they are reassured by principle number 136: “Understand that problems are the fuel for improvement.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695069-successful-hedge-fund-confronts-mortality-hardest-trade/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Cyber-crime

The Dhaka caper

Online thieves unseat the governor of Bangladesh’s central bank

Mar 19th 2016 | Delhi | From the print edition

Rahman takes the rap

IT WAS as audacious as any heist and yet unlikely material for a Hollywood blockbuster. Hackers masquerading as officials from Bangladesh’s central bank asked the New York branch of the Federal Reserve to transfer nearly $1 billion to private bank accounts in Sri Lanka and the Philippines. By the time authorities cottoned on, $101m had been nicked. On March 15th Atiur Rahman, the governor of Bangladesh’s central bank, took the blame and resigned.

That has not stopped the finger-pointing. In the manner of a bank customer complaining about fraudulent credit-card charges, Bangladeshi authorities say the Fed, which was acting as the central bank’s bank, should not have paid out anything at all. The Fed says the instructions it received were legitimate. The Philippine authorities cannot say what happened to the $81m sent to their country. Much of the money disappeared in its opaque casinos, which they say are not covered by rules to prevent money laundering (a worry in itself). The CCTV system at a bank branch where some of the money was withdrawn was not working.

Even the criminals (of which nothing is known) should kick themselves: were it not for a typo in one of their requests, dozens more payments might have gone through. Staff at the central bank of Sri Lanka, who blocked a $20m onward transfer on the grounds that it was odd for a central bank to be making a big payment to a private account, covered themselves in glory. Deutsche Bank, which reportedly spotted a payment to a “fandation” and asked for a clarification, also comes out looking vigilant.

Mr Rahman, a development economist who was due to retire this summer, admits he is “not a technical guy”. It was as much his delay in revealing the fraud—the finance minister claimed he first read about it in the papers—as the loss itself that made his position untenable.

The attack is hardly an isolated incident. Criminal gangs are adept at hacking into e-mail accounts and sending instructions to bankers asking them to wire large sums. Corporate treasurers are now warned not to trust e-mails that appear to come from the boss, requesting that a payment be made.

Kaspersky Lab, a cyber-security firm, last year claimed $1 billion had been siphoned from financial institutions in this way. The Bank of England said it faced “advanced, persistent and evolving cyber-threats”. If a brave producer does take on the story of the Dhaka caper, expect plenty of sequels.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21694968-online-thieves-used-fake-emails-steal-money-101m-bank-heist-unseats/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Measuring inflation

How much is that doggy?

Big data provide new ways to gauge price rises

Mar 19th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition



INFLATION is a simple concept, but price rises are surprisingly hard to measure. First, statisticians must work out what stuff people buy, and in what proportions (the “basket” of goods). Then they must track the prices of those goods over time. Finally they must decide how to account for new products, changing tastes and the fact that if the price of, say, apples rises, some people will buy another fruit instead rather than pay more.

Big data could make all of this easier. At the moment, calculating America’s consumer-price index (CPI) involves sending people into shops to note down prices. The basket is based on a survey of consumers which is updated only every three years or so. This looks increasingly cumbersome in a world where every online purchase is logged, somewhere, in a database. In theory online baskets and prices, at least, could be tracked digitally.

Adobe, a technology firm, is trying to do just that. The firm collects anonymised sales data from websites that use its software. The amount of data available is vast: according to the firm, it includes three-quarters of online spending at America’s top 500 retailers. It is using this ocean of information to compile a “digital price index” (DPI) to rival official measures of inflation. Two economists, Pete Klenow of Stanford University and Austan Goolsbee of the University of Chicago, are helping the firm to crunch the numbers.



The DPI has several advantages over the conventional approach. It tracks 1.4m goods, compared with the CPI’s 80,000. It is based on actual purchases rather than advertised prices, increasing its accuracy. And the volume of data allows Messrs Klenow and Goolsbee to use fancier statistical methods to account for people changing what they buy as prices move.

The new index completely misses changes in offline prices and spending on things like petrol and rent. It will not replace the CPI any time soon. It does suggest, however, that official statistics may themselves be missing big price movements, especially for consumer technology. The researchers found that the price of computers fell by 13.1% in the year to January, almost double the 7.1% fall recorded in the CPI. Televisions fell more in price than the CPI reports, too. The speed of innovation in technology might account for the difference. The researchers found that fully 80% of technology spending is on new products, which the more nimble DPI can incorporate quickly.

If this is a widespread phenomenon, and inflation is lower than officially recorded, that has implications for central bankers, borrowers, savers and anyone who strikes long-term contracts. It also means that GDP might be understated, says Mr Klenow. If overall spending is recorded accurately but inflation is exaggerated, output must be higher than thought.

Official statisticians are improving their methods. The CPI includes some prices that are collected automatically by “scraping” websites (something Britain’s statisticians are also experimenting with). But if their take-up of big data is sluggish, official statistics could eventually face disruptive private-sector competition.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695097-big-data-provide-new-ways-gauge-price-rises-how-much-doggy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Rotterdam

The shipping news

Europe’s biggest port is a barometer of the world economy

Mar 19th 2016 | Rotterdam | From the print edition

Oil, wind and water

UNLESS you are a hermit, you own and consume things that have passed through the port of Rotterdam. Last year the port handled 466m tonnes of cargo, more than double the amount of Europe’s second port, Antwerp. The endless shifts in the size and composition of these flows provide an instant indicator of the state of the world economy. And the trends that are transforming the port’s operations—automation and the shift away from fossil fuels—give a sense of the future too.

Thanks to its easy access for big ships from the Atlantic and for barges from the interior, Rotterdam has been Europe’s dominant port for much of modern history. Its success is man-made: in the mid-19th century, when the Ruhr region of Germany was industrialising, Rotterdammers dug a channel to connect the Maas river, which runs through the city, to the Rhine, creating the most shipworthy route from Europe’s industrial heartland to the North Sea.

The port has been evolving in sympathy with the global economy ever since: in the mid-20th century, new handling and storage facilities for oil and chemicals were built to cater to the post-war boom. As globalisation gathered pace in the 1990s and 2000s, the port expanded further into the sea, to provide berths for the mega-ships bringing sneakers and flat screens from Asia to Europe.

Activity at the port today bears witness to four trends currently shaping the world economy: the low price of oil, slow growth in China and emerging markets, the sluggish euro-area recovery and the global slowdown in manufacturing and trade. From his office overlooking the Maas, Eelco Hoekstra, the boss of Vopak, the world’s largest independent storage company of “all things liquid”, sees the physical manifestation of movements in energy markets sailing by each day.

In 2014, he recalls, when fracking was flooding America with cheap natural gas, huge cargoes of American coal suddenly started floating past. Gas was displacing coal in America but remained expensive in Europe, since America had little export capacity. So European utilities began snapping up the unwanted American coal instead: more of it was exported to the Netherlands than to any other country in 2014 and the first half of 2015.

Soon after, the price of oil collapsed. Big consumers expected a relatively prompt revival, however, judging by the price of futures contracts. Rotterdam’s vast storage tanks quickly filled, as traders bought cheap crude on the spot market and sold futures at a higher price, locking in a profit. The low oil price, meanwhile, has helped pad margins at refineries and chemical plants, spurring a flurry of activity in Rotterdam’s sprawling industrial complexes.

The oil price fell thanks in part to slowing growth in China, which is also evident in the sudden appearance of Chinese ships offloading surplus steel. This in turn means fewer barges are taking iron ore down the Rhine to German steel mills. Declining sales of German cars in China compound the problem, as carmakers consume less steel. The drop in shipments of bulk goods arriving in Rotterdam, says Allard Castelein, CEO of the port, is a direct result of this baleful cycle.

The relative strength of the American and British economies is some compensation. In 2015 so-called “RoRo” (roll-on roll-off) traffic of lorries crossing the North Sea to Britain increased by 13% compared with the year before. America-bound cargo has also held up well. There are also a few countries from which imports to Rotterdam are growing fast. As wages in China have risen, says Roderick de la Houssaye of van Uden, a logistics firm, his clients—particularly makers of shoes and clothes—are relocating. Some have gone to places with lower wages, such as Indonesia and Vietnam; others to closer manufacturing regions such as Turkey, which are less likely to suffer from transport disruption.



Some people see “near-shoring” to places like Turkey as a sign that globalisation is ebbing. The Baltic Dry Index, which tracks the cost of moving raw materials by sea, hit a record low in February. That is partly the result of a ship-building binge, but also of faltering demand. For the past few years world trade has been growing no faster than the world economy—the reverse of the usual pattern; in dollar terms, it declined by almost 14% in 2015.

All this can clearly be felt in Rotterdam, where one in four containers originates in China. “When Singapore’s harbour is empty, it’s hard to see how we can be full,” says Mr Castelein. Although the volume of goods handled in the port grew by 4.9% last year, this was almost entirely thanks to the increased trade in oil and oil products. Container volumes dropped by 1.1% and agricultural bulk by 3.8%.

Whether this slowdown is just a temporary dip or a permanent one is the subject of a heated debate. Mr Hoekstra is convinced that intercontinental trade will continue to grow. In the past 15 years he has seen shipments of oil and refined products quadruple. The main driver, he says, is a growing imbalance between those who have natural resources and those who need them. As oil and gas production becomes ever more concentrated in a few places, the need to ship and store the stuff will only grow, he thinks. Russia and the Middle East have too much oil; Asia too little. Europe has a shortage of diesel but a surplus of gasoline, which South Africa, in turn, wants more of—and so on.

Port in a storm

But Bart Kuipers of Erasmus University argues that a number of trends all push in the same direction: less container traffic. Economies are shifting from industry to services; advances in logistics and technology, such as near-shoring and 3-D printing, are making it more practical to manufacture things in the rich world; recycling drives are sapping the incentive to import.

Rotterdam provides much more conclusive evidence of another trend that will shape the world economy: automation. Earlier this year its crane-drivers, often referred to as “the kings of the terminal”, went on a 24-hour strike that paralysed large parts of the port for the first time in 13 years. They were protesting against competition from robots. In 2013 the opening of “Maasvlakte 2”, which extended the port by a fifth by reclaiming land from the sea, was welcomed as a feat of engineering not just because it made the Netherlands 20km² (8 square miles) bigger, but also because its new “ghost” terminals run with almost no human intervention. In an episode of “The Wire”, a hit American TV drama, a stevedore at the port of Baltimore declares a jazzy promotional video about Rotterdam to be a “horror movie”.

AGVs on the march

In this part of the port, there is no hustle and bustle. Crane-drivers have been replaced by “remote crane operators”, who sit in a distant office in front of computer screens, using joysticks to control as many as three cranes at once. The cranes lift containers onto self-driving, battery-powered automated guided vehicles (AGVs), which deliver them to stacks to be distributed by truck, train or barge. When their batteries run out, the AGVs drive to a depot where robots remove the spent ones and insert replacements. It is eerily quiet and dark, as the AGVs do not need light to navigate.

Humans’ main role is to stay out of the way; an AGV is about as heavy as a small aircraft and the whole system shuts down if any unexpected people or vehicles enter the terminal. APM Terminals, which operates part of Maasvlakte 2, hopes each crane will be able to move over 40 containers per hour in this way, compared with 30 or so in less advanced facilities. That cuts shipping times, saving lots of money. It is also far safer and, as one shipping executive notes, “Robots don’t take breaks or strike.” Sensing mortal danger to their livelihoods, workers are threatening more strikes unless the management promises to preserve their jobs and salaries.

Another area of evolution concerns how the new parts of the port are powered. The AGVs and cranes in the new terminals are all electric, and an increasing number of windmills and solar panels provide much of the power the port consumes. All this reduces emissions of greenhouse gases, in keeping with increasingly restrictive European rules. The port is also investing in all sorts of climate-friendly experiments, from using residual heat from industry to warm homes and offices in the city to storing carbon under the seabed.

Nonetheless, notes Jan Rotmans of Erasmus University, “Everything in the port breathes fossil.” Much of its business comes from the shipping and storing of oil, coal and other polluting fuels. Shell and ExxonMobil recently announced that they would spend some €2 billion ($2.2 billion) expanding their refineries in Rotterdam.

Mr Rotmans wonders whether this business will continue to grow. That depends on whether the rest of the world will follow the port’s lead in terms of curbing its emissions. Rotterdam and other ports are not perfect bellwethers for the world economy: they give little indication, for instance, of what is happening in services, since lawyers and consultants don’t tend to travel in ships. But, horror movie or not, it is hard to deny that Rotterdam’s docks reflect glimmers of the future.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695096-europes-biggest-port-barometer-world-economy-shipping-news/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

Doing less with more

Low wages are both a cause and a consequence of low productivity

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



COUNTRIES grow richer when they learn how to produce more valuable stuff per person. Sadly, many advanced economies seem to have lost the knack. Except for a brief spurt around the turn of the millennium, productivity has grown painfully slowly in rich countries over the last four decades (see chart)—a factor, economists reckon, that has contributed to stagnant pay. Labour productivity in America fell at a startling 2.2% annual pace in the fourth quarter of 2015; growth of 0.6% for the year as a whole was better, but hardly impressive.

Orthodox explanations for the problem tend to fall into one of three categories. The first, championed by Robert Gordon, an economist at Northwestern University, suggests humanity has run out of big ideas.* Recent technological advances, the argument goes, lack the transformative power of the inventions of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Electricity and indoor plumbing, in Mr Gordon’s view, altered lives in a far more fundamental way than the digital revolution has managed. We were promised flying cars, to paraphrase Peter Thiel, a venture capitalist, but wound up instead with social networks.

There are several inconsistencies in this story, however. Recent developments in artificial intelligence and robotics look at least as transformative as the gains in software and computing that powered the productivity boom of the late 1990s. The breadth of the productivity slowdown also poses a problem for Mr Gordon’s thesis. Productivity growth has slumped not just in the rich world, but also in developing countries such as Mexico and Turkey, which should be able to boost efficiency easily by adopting the productivity-boosting technology that is already in use in wealthier places.

Some optimists argue instead that the problem is one of measurement. Technological progress often raises productivity in ways that statistical agencies struggle to detect. The tumbling cost of digital media (vast amounts of which are in effect free) subtracts from measured GDP, for example. Meanwhile, huge improvements in the quality of goods like smartphones can be difficult for statistical agencies to capture.

Yet mismeasurement probably plays only a small role in the slowdown. Chad Syverson of the University of Chicago estimates that the productivity slump has cost America about $2.7 trillion in lost output since 2004, or about $8,400 for every American. That is far more than most estimates of the unmeasured gains from information technology. New research presented at the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, by David Byrne and John Fernald of the Federal Reserve and Marshall Reinsdorf of the IMF suggests there is little reason to think that the official data are worse now than in the late 1990s, when measured productivity growth was much higher. Indeed, the data ought to have improved, since the smartphones and computers that give statisticians such headaches are no longer made in the rich world.

A third, more worrying possibility is that ossifying rich economies are getting worse at shifting people from obsolete firms and stagnant towns to more productive ones. In America, for instance, the rate of startup formation has fallen steadily since the late 1980s, according to work by Jorge Guzman and Scott Stern of MIT. That is not as disconcerting as it sounds: the authors find that the American economy is still producing plenty of the right sort of firms, with lots of growth potential. Worryingly, however, fewer of those firms seem to grow big.

A few, high-growth startups account for most new jobs created in the private sector. But over the past 15 years America’s high-growth companies have not expanded much faster than their plodding peers. Flagging competitive pressures could be to blame. Profitable firms are increasingly likely to bank their earnings than to plough them back into the business. Regulation may also be a problem. Messrs Guzman and Stern find that entrepreneurial potential in some places, such as San Francisco and its hinterland, is far larger than in others, such as Detroit. Yet restrictions on construction constrain the movement of people from stagnant places to dynamic ones. A paper published in 2015 by Chang-Tai Hsieh of the University of Chicago and Enrico Moretti of the University of California, Berkeley, suggested that if it were easier to build in and around San Francisco, and thus cheaper to live there, employment in the area would rise by more than 500%, while many cities in the Rust Belt would all but vanish.

Waste not, want not

Orthodox economics suggests plenty of ways to nurture productivity growth—and, with luck, wages—such as boosting support for research and cutting red tape. But some in the profession are also beginning to ask whether the link between low productivity and low wages may run in both directions. Low pay allows firms to employ workers profitably in marginal jobs and to continue to use workers even though robots or software could replace them. Investments in automated checkout machines, for example, are less attractive when there are lots of cheap humans around.

Some economists, such as João Paulo Pessoa and John Van Reenen of the London School of Economics, reckon low British wages, which tumbled during the Great Recession, help account for weak productivity growth during the subsequent recovery, since firms felt less pressure to economise. Similarly, abundant, cheap labour may help explain how the American economy has managed to produce the unusual combination of soaring employment and weak wage growth in recent years.

By allowing economies to operate with lots of labour-market slack and by relying on falling pay to boost competitiveness, governments have enabled firms to make careless use of low-wage labour. By prioritising a return to full employment, politicians could give a much-needed kick to both wages and productivity.



Sources:

“The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The US Standard of Living Since the Civil War”, Robert Gordon, 2016.

“Challenges to mismeasurement explanations for the US productivity slowdown”, Chad Syverson, NBER Working Paper 21974, January 2016.

“Does the United States have a productivity slowdown or a measurement problem?”, David Byrne, John Fernald and Marshall Reinsdorf, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2016.

“The state of American entrepreneurship? New estimates of the quantity and quality of entrepreneurship for 15 US states, 1988-2014”, Jorge Guzman and Scott Stern, 2016.

"Where has all the skewness gone? The decline in high-growth (young) firms in the US", Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda, NBER Working Paper 21776, December 2015.

“Why do cities matter? Local growth and aggregate growth”, Chang-Tai Hsieh and Enrico Moratti, NBER Working Paper 21154, May 2015.

“The UK productivity and jobs puzzle: Does the answer lie in labour market flexibility?”, Joao Paulo Pessoa and John Van Reenen, Centre for Economic Performance Special Paper, June 2013.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21695071/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Sonification: Now hear this

Artificial intelligence and Go: A game-changing result

Research publishing: Taking the online medicine

Restoring lost memories: Total recall





Articles Sections Next

Sonification

Now hear this

Scientific data might be filled with important things waiting to be discovered. Just listen to them

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



DURING the first world war Heinrich Barkhausen, a German physicist, carried into the trenches an antenna, a crude electronic amplifier and a pair of headphones. His mission: to intercept Allied field-telephone communications. The strange noises he heard among the transmissions were not, as he thought, a problem with his equipment; later it was discovered that these “whistlers” were radiofrequency bursts from extremely distant lightning. Barkhausen was among the first scientists to learn something new about the world from sound alone.

By the 1960s, seismologists were using instruments that recorded local tremblings as frequency modulations on magnetic tape. Days and weeks of data lay on these tapes, and the only way to sift through them for interesting events was to play them back at high speed, listening for any anomalies. The field of sonification—turning data into sound—had been born. When the Voyager 2 space probe passed Saturn in 1981 and sent back a stream of data that its keepers could not decipher, they sonified it. The hailstorm-like sound, they determined, came from debris in Saturn’s rings striking the craft.

Sonifications make for attention-grabbing sounds on the news, so these days many scientific findings are sonified. Overwhelmingly, though, these are an afterthought; scientists still rely on their eyes and algorithms to spot interesting phenomena. That looks set to change as more scientists, engineers and even designers and artists look to exploit better what the seismologists and Voyager scientists knew decades ago: sound can be the key to scientific discovery.

Bring the noise

One person currently championing sonification is Robert Alexander, a design scientist from the University of Michigan who spent time as a fellow at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Centre. His work with data from satellites measuring the stream of particles from the sun has yielded a number of discoveries (and also a number of musical compositions).

That is because hearing presents a different set of strengths from that of vision. Humans can hear frequencies across three orders of magnitude, from about 20 to 20,000 hertz, and can discern tiny differences in those frequencies. They can deal with volumes from that of a pin dropping to a rock concert. Perhaps hearing’s greatest strength is its temporal resolution, 100 times finer than that of vision: you will know if your favourite band’s drummer is as little as a few thousandths of a second late on the beat.

Dr Alexander found, through listening alone, that ions of carbon are better at indicating the regions from which the solar wind originates than the oxygen that was previously employed, and determined the cause of a long-lived storm of swirling particles within the wind. He even spotted an undocumented source of noise in the instruments aboard the Ulysses spacecraft.

A greater influence than these discrete discoveries, though, is the enthusiasm for sonification they have created among his colleagues. Lan Jian, a solar scientist at Goddard, has learned that sonification is a great way to search for unusual events within data from WIND, another spacecraft sent to observe the sun. It speeds things up by a factor of ten or more, she says. Dr Alexander has gone on to publish a kind of best-practice sonification guide for researchers swimming in the copious data from sun-studying satellites.

Such success stories remain rare, as visual analysis of data still dominates the sciences. Yet vision has its limits. Many experiments measure a slew of variables at once, and the trick is to discover which of these are connected and how. As visual display technology has improved greatly it has been possible to display data in enhanced ways, but it is becoming a struggle. “Now we’re seeing people looking at very complicated graphs; they’re overloaded by data, and the visual system can’t handle it all,” says Matthew Schneps of the Harvard-Smithsonian Centre for Astrophysics.

Dr Alexander’s work—and indeed much of the work in science so far—falls under a category of sonification called audification. When a single measure is taken at regular intervals, the result is a simple stream of regularly spaced points. Audification is simply the shifting of such “time-series data” to a frequency within the audible range—exactly what the seismologists, Voyager 2 scientists and lots of early radio astronomers did. As a reflection of change in just one variable in time, audification results in simple tones and rhythms.

But hearing can discern much more than just pitch and pace: it can pick up multiple instruments with differing timbres, keeping track of each note’s pitch, and even its attack and decay—how fast it rises and falls in volume. That is where another kind of sonification called parameter mapping comes in. This can turn scads of data sources into one stream of sound. The rise and fall of one variable is mapped to, say, the volume of a synthesised violin, while the shift of another is mapped to its pitch. Many different timbres of sound can be added, resulting in a data-rich soundscape.

Human hearing is extremely good at dealing with such noisy input. Making out what your interlocutor is saying at a crowded cocktail party, or noticing the approach of a predator among the cacophony of birds and bugs in a rainforest, can be done. “Where there are subtle changes of noise, or patterns in the change, that’s where the ear really takes over,” says Andy Hunt, of the University of York, in Britain.

Intelligent design

Dr Hunt has parameter-mapped data ranging from images of cervical cells being screened for cancer to electrical signals from the muscles of recovering stroke patients. He has also worked with data from several hundred sensors fitted to helicopters during test flights. These data used to be printed out and laid on the hangar floor; engineers walked along them for hours, looking for anything untoward. Dr Hunt parameter-mapped the same data and turned them into a sound file, just seconds long, in which problems could be spotted.

David Worrall of the Australian National University believes parameter-mapping sonifications are particularly suited to monitoring of complex systems. When he began to work with the Fraunhofer Institute, in Germany, on a project to analyse network activity as a proxy for how much different departments were co-operating, those in the institute’s IT department were sceptical. But through regular listening to his sonification, he says “they started to notice patterns in the flow of the network—this would happen, then that, and then suddenly the printer drivers would go down.” What began as a managerial query has become a network-monitoring tool. Dr Worrall has also developed a sonification of the stockmarket for an Australian government research group, in order to spot insider trading.

How precisely to carry out such parameter mapping is a subject of ongoing study; experiments have shown that volunteers tasked with plucking out sounds of interest find it easier when listening to some mappings than to others. That can depend in part on how easy the resulting sonifications are on the ear, especially if they are being monitored all day.

“If you want anyone to use your sonification, it shouldn’t sound too disturbing or give you a headache,” says Alexandra Supper, a sociologist at the University of Maastricht, in the Netherlands, “but at the same time there can also be a danger of making it sound too pleasing, such that it becomes background music.”

For sonification to become more widespread, researchers must bridge this divide. For Dr Worrall—a composer by training—the answer is in design, which he says “is an uncomfortable bedfellow” for both scientists and artists. But Paul Vickers of the University of Northumbria, in Britain, says progress is being made in breaking down scientists’ conservative nature and bringing in aesthetic elements in a serious and rigorous way. “We’re seeing people working in the scientific domains engaging with philosophers of music and psychologists, and thinking about how we listen in the real world to inform how we design sonifications.” Sounds promising.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21694992-scientific-data-might-be-filled-important-things-waiting-be-discovered/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Artificial intelligence and Go

A game-changing result

AlphaGo’s masters taught it the game, but an electrifying match shows what the computer may have to teach humans

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS not quite a whitewash, but it was close. When DeepMind, a London-based artificial intelligence (AI) company bought by Google for $400m in 2014, challenged Lee Sedol to a five-game Go match, Mr Lee—one of the best human players of that ancient and notoriously taxing board game—confidently predicted that he would win 5-0, or maybe 4-1.

He was right about the score, but wrong about the winner. The match, played in Seoul to crowds on the edges of their seats and streamed to millions online, was won by the computer, four games to one.

Ever since Garry Kasparov, a chess grandmaster, lost to a computer in 1997, Go—which is far harder for machines—has been an unconquered frontier. AlphaGo’s win demonstrates the power of “deep learning”, an AI technique being used by firms such as Google, Amazon and Baidu for everything from face-recognition to serving advertisements on websites. As the name implies, deep learning allows computers to extract patterns from masses of data with little human hand-holding. Games make a good testing-ground for technology that DeepMind hopes to apply in medicine and scientific research.

With good reason

The match was a roller-coaster. AlphaGo won the first three games. Commentators were convinced it had made mistakes, but as it racked up wins, they were forced to concede that perhaps the machine, which had learned from a mixture of watching humans play and playing against itself, was using strategies its human masters had simply overlooked.

The fourth game, though, was thrilling. A brilliant tesuji (a clever, insightful move) by Mr Lee seemed to throw the machine, which had not foreseen it: its next dozen plays were, this time, real errors (For a more in-depth write-up, see here). That suggests that there remain, for now, a few weaknesses in the way AlphaGo plays.

The fifth game underlined how hard it is to exploit them. Once again, the human commentators reckoned that the machine had made a serious mistake early on. However, Mr Lee could not capitalise on it and AlphaGo eventually clawed its way back into contention.

Computers are already better than humans at chess, backgammon and even “Jeopardy!”, a punny American quiz show that was won by Watson, an IBM supercomputer, in 2011. Go had been, until now, a redoubt of human mental superiority. Yet some see AlphaGo’s victory as an opportunity: it already seems to have found new tactics and strategies that humans can, in turn, learn from. Asked if AlphaGo’s play had given him new insights into the game, Mr Lee said it had. “The typical, traditional, classical beliefs of how to play—I’ve come to question them a bit,” he reflected.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21694883-alphagos-masters-taught-it-game-electrifying-match-shows-what/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Research publishing

Taking the online medicine

Old-fashioned ways of reporting new discoveries are holding back medical research. Some scientists are pushing for change

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

“NEVER tried sharing data like this before,” said the tweet. “Feels like walking into a country for the first time. Exciting, but don’t know what to expect.”

David O’Connor of the University of Wisconsin-Madison was announcing his decision on February 14th to post online data from his laboratory’s latest experiment. He and his team had infected macaques with the Zika virus and were recording the concentrations of virus in the monkeys’ bodily fluids every day. Researchers know that Zika is transmitted principally by infected mosquitoes. But if the virus appears in saliva and urine then these might also be sources of infection.

Dr O’Connor and his colleagues published their results every day to a publicly accessible website. They hoped this would be useful to others working on the disease and, ultimately, to health authorities striving to contain it. They did not expect to garner much attention. But they did.

Within days, researchers from all over the world started contacting them, making suggestions and asking for samples to conduct work that Dr O’Connor’s lab was ill-equipped to carry out. He describes the experience of data-sharing as “universally positive”. But as his tweet suggests, such openness is far from routine.

Careers in medical research hang on publishing papers in prestigious journals such as Nature, Science and Cell. Even in emergencies such as the recent Zika outbreak, or the earlier epidemic of Ebola fever in west Africa, biologists are reluctant to share data until their work is published.

Once a paper is submitted to a journal, though, its findings can languish unseen for months as it goes through a vetting process known as peer review. Reviewers can ask for substantial changes, further experiments and also suggest the journal reject the paper outright. If several journals turn down a paper before it is published, it may be years before the results become public.

Left in the dark in this way, other practitioners may waste time and money conducting unnecessary experiments. In cases where the unpublished work might warn of things like unsafe treatments, the cost of the delay could be measured in lives. Dr O’Connor’s response is part of a reaction against this delay.

Peerless publishing

He is not alone. On February 10th, prompted by concerns that vital data on the Zika epidemic could be held up by journal peer review, scientific academies, research funders and a number of academic publishers urged researchers “to make any information available that might have value in combating the crisis”. The publishers promised that posting a paper online as a so-called preprint would not disqualify it from publication in a journal later.

But not all publishers signed up to the agreement, and it raises many questions. As Stephen Curry of Imperial College London noted in a blog post for the Guardian, a British daily newspaper, if the approach is valid for Zika, then why not for other infectious diseases, including malaria or HIV/AIDS, which kill millions every year?



The problem is not new. But an increase in spending on biomedical research has led to a surge in scientific publication. The number of research articles published each year has doubled since 2003 (see chart), with the biomedical sciences accounting for about 40% of the total.

That has tightened the bottleneck at elite journals, which publish no more papers than they did 30 years ago and demand that more research be crammed into each submission. As Ronald Vale of the University of California, San Francisco, noted last year in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, an average biology paper in 2014 required two to fourfold more data than a paper published 30 years earlier. Graduate students at his institution now take about a year longer, on average, than they did to publish their first paper.

“The problem is our CV is lagging behind our productivity,” says Jessica Polka, a postdoctoral researcher at Harvard. To convince people to embrace preprints, Dr Polka, Dr Vale and other biologists organised ASAPbio, a meeting held on February 15th-16th in Chevy Chase, Maryland. Their aim is to get more biomedical researchers to emulate physics, a field in which a preprint repository has existed since 1991. The arXiv, as this repository is known, now hosts over a million preprints, a large proportion of which have been published eventually by physics journals.

Yet, although a poll of nearly 400 scientists attending ASAPbio revealed 90% are dissatisfied with the state of publishing in biology, biomedical researchers seem reluctant to follow the example of those in the physical sciences. About 8,000 preprints a month are now uploaded to arXiv. By contrast, bioRxiv, a similar repository for biology founded in November 2013, holds only around 3,000 in total.

Several things prevent biology and medicine from catching up. First, there is the fear of disqualification from publication in an elite journal. While many such journals, including Nature and Science, do allow work to be published to preprint servers before submission, others do not. Cell, for example, considers them on a case-by-case basis, asking authors to contact them before posting online. The Journal of the American Medical Association, in general, bars such papers from consideration altogether.

A second worry for researchers who post their research online is that they may be scooped by rivals who could copy their methods and publish the work in a journal first. This concern could be resolved if funders and institutions recognised a preprint as the first report of a discovery, rather than recognising only journal articles. In physics that is already the case.

Thirdly, there is the danger of non-validated, erroneous findings in a preprint misleading researchers. However, this has not proved a significant problem in the physical sciences. Manuscripts submitted to arXiv (and bioRxiv) are checked to ensure that they are not crank science. And, as Paul Ginsparg, who founded arXiv, noted in a talk at ASAPbio, researchers are more careful to check un-peer-reviewed papers before making them public. Furthermore, journal peer review is not infallible: poor science routinely slips through the net.

In any case, there is no reason to prevent a preprint from being reviewed after it is uploaded. One example of this is Discrete Analysis, a mathematics journal launched on March 1st by Tim Gowers of the University of Cambridge. This is an “overlay” journal, a sort of stripped-down online publication which provides links to papers in arXiv and sends submitted manuscripts out for peer review at no cost to the author (the administration cost of around $10 per submission is covered by the journal).

Agency of change

Michael Eisen of the University of California, Berkeley, a zealous proponent of open science, argues that the traditional publication model is outmoded. Researchers are far more likely to use keyword searches in Google to find papers relevant to their work than to leaf through printed journals. Preprints, he says, put researchers back in the driving seat: “Instead of being told by journals what papers to review, we review papers useful to us.”

There are signs that researchers might be tiring of the grip that the elite journals have on the biomedical sciences. Over 12,000 people have so far signed the San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA), which began in 2012 as a commitment for research to be assessed “on its own merits rather than on the basis of the journal in which the research is published”. If the science community takes this notion seriously, more researchers might be persuaded of the value of publishing preprints (because journal publications will be less important). A report to the British government on open access to research, published in February by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, recommends all universities in the country now sign DORA.

The wide adoption of preprints, however, depends ultimately on paymasters and interview panels moving away from judging the worth of a scientist by the number of publications in elite journals that appear on his CV. While few funding agencies consider preprints to be formally published work, some have at least made tentative moves towards assessing a scientist’s research more broadly. Medical research groups in America, Britain and Australia, for example, have emphasised that scientific work will be judged by its quality, not by the reputation of the journal it is published in. That will certainly be more onerous for committees than counting up the “right” sort of papers. But if more researchers feel comfortable about uploading their work to preprint servers, it will break the stranglehold of elite journals on biomedical science and accelerate discovery. That would save millions of dollars. More importantly, it would save lives.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21694990-old-fashioned-ways-reporting-new-discoveries-are-holding-back-medical-research/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Restoring lost memories

Total recall

Missing memories have been restored in mice with Alzheimer’s disease

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

Remembering in a new light

SOME mice can easily remember where they hide food, but not those genetically engineered to develop Alzheimer’s disease. Like humans they become forgetful. By the time these mice are seven months old they are unable to remember, for example, which arm of a maze they have explored before. Two months later, their brains are riddled with amyloid beta, the protein “plaques” that also characterise the latter stage of the disease in humans.

Now researchers have managed to restore memories to mice with Alzheimer’s. This helps provide more evidence about how memories are lost during the early stages of the disease and may point to how, some time in the future, those memories might be brought back.

Susumu Tonegawa and his colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology used a technique known as optogenetics, which activates clusters of neurons by shining light on them. As they report in Nature, the researchers prepared seven-month-old Alzheimer’s mice by injecting a harmless virus into the rodents’ dentate gyrus, a part of the hippocampus that helps to store fearful memories. The virus contains a gene for channelrhodopsin-2, a light-sensitive protein which forms pores in the cell membranes of neurons infected with the virus. These pores are closed in the dark, but open in response to blue light, flooding neurons with positively charged ions. The resulting pulse of current makes the neurons fire. During their experiments, the researchers were able to illuminate the infected neurons of the mice using optical fibres implanted in their brains.

Using a standard lab test of memory, a mouse was placed in a box and given a small electrical shock to its feet. Normal mice remember this and freeze in fear if put back in the box the following day, but mice with Alzheimer’s scamper about unfazed. Yet when the researchers stimulated the dentate gyrus of these mice with blue light, they also froze, suggesting that they were now able to recall the original shock.

Holding on to a fearful memory in the long term, however, requires the brain to strengthen the nerve connections (synapses) that link memory of the box to experience of the shock. This process, known as long-term potentiation, goes awry in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients. Consistent with this idea, the Alzheimer’s mice did not freeze when placed in the box but only when their neurons were illuminated.

To help the Alzheimer’s mice consolidate and keep their memory of the electric shock, the team flashed their dentate gyrus with blue light at 100 hertz, a frequency known to induce long-term potentiation. After this the Alzheimer’s mice froze in the box for at least six consecutive days, suggesting they were able to remember the shock themselves.

Work by other groups has suggested that in its early stages, Alzheimer’s principally damages the brain’s ability to process and store memories. This new work, however, indicates that it is the brain’s ability to retrieve memories that is impaired. The distinction is far from an academic one. If memories are garbled before they are stored, they are lost for ever. But if Dr Tonegawa is right, then memories are correctly preserved in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients. That means it may be possible to rescue them—perhaps by adapting optogenetics for use in human sufferers. That remains a distant possibility for now.

But there is a more immediate consequence of the work for the estimated 40m people with the disease. Electrical stimulation of large areas of the brain of Alzheimer’s patients is already being tried, using electrodes implanted in the skull. But Dr Tonegawa’s team found that stimulating neurons in the dentate gyrus other than those directly involved with holding the fear memory prevented Alzheimer’s mice from remembering their shocks in the long term. That suggests that unless the technique can be refined, deep-brain stimulation may not be effective.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21694971-step-forward-understanding-how-memories-workand-how-recover/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




India’s young: We’re not gonna take it

Iraq’s unravelling: The mistakes that made Islamic State

The Bard abroad: All the world was his stage

Art and loneliness: Out of isolation

Hartwig Fischer at the British Museum: On a mission

Hartwig Fischer at the British Museum: Correction: “Don’t p@nic”, March 12th





Articles Sections Next

India’s young

We’re not gonna take it

India’s youth are trading fatalism and karma for free will—and higher expectations

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



The End of Karma: Hope and Fury Among India’s Young. By Somini Sengupta. Norton; 244 pages; $26.95.

DELHI found itself under siege last month. Young men blocked roads and canals that feed people and water into the city. They looted, set fires and dragged women out of cars to rape them. The protesters, from a relatively privileged group of land-owning peasants called Jats, were agitating to be included in India’s list of “other backward classes”, which guarantees university places and government jobs. Faced with dry taps, Narendra Modi’s government was eventually forced to concede to the demand.

This is the fury to which Somini Sengupta refers in the subtitle of her sharply observed study of India’s young, “The End of Karma: Hope and Fury Among India’s Young”. The median age in India is 27. Every month between 2011 and 2030, nearly 1m Indians will turn 18. Those coming of age this month were born well after the country started opening up its markets in 1991; they have spent their formative years in a world of optimism and rapid economic growth. But Ms Sengupta calls India “a democracy that makes promises it has no intention of keeping”.

By 2030 the majority of Indians will be of working age. This could be what economists call a “demographic dividend”, creating a high worker-to-dependent ratio—or it could be a time bomb. India is producing nowhere near enough jobs for the tens of millions of young people joining the workforce every year.

The argument running through Ms Sengupta’s book, made of seven richly detailed portraits of young Indians, is both simple and beguiling. For centuries Indians born into wretched circumstances have accepted their lot as karma—punishment for misdeeds in past lives. This belief explains the persistence of the caste system, and the remarkable fact that a country that is home to one in three of the world’s poor has not come apart at the seams. But young people no longer accept karma, argues Ms Sengupta. Ideas of aspiration and free will have entered the Indian consciousness. Young Indians today demand the right to shape their own futures. If fury is in ample supply, so is hope.

Yet at every step the young are thwarted. It starts in the womb. A traditional preference for boys means that India has one of the most skewed sex ratios in the world: 1.13 boys for every girl, second only to China. (The ratio in America is 1.05.) One in three children under five is underweight. Nearly two-thirds of food meant for early-childhood feeding programmes is pilfered. A rare bright spot is education: in 2013, 96% of primary-school-age children were enrolled. But here, too, India fails its young. By the age of ten, only 60% of students can complete work at the level of a five-year-old. More than half cannot subtract.

These are the failings of the state. But culture is an enemy too. Varsha, the daughter of a dhobi, or laundry man, wants to be a police officer. But this is no work for a girl. Her father allows her to study chiefly to improve her marriage prospects. “He knows only louts will marry a girl without a high school degree nowadays,” says Ms Sengupta. Monica and Kuldeep, a glamorous young couple from the outskirts of Delhi, seemed to have escaped their karma. They chose each other—and worse, they chose from rival castes. At first estranged from their families, they eventually made peace. Life was going well. Then three years after their marriage, Monica’s brother shot them both in the head, thereby restoring the family’s honour.

Out of anger, hope

It is not all fury. Anupam, the son of a rickshaw-driver from the “other backward classes” from Bihar, itself among the most backward states, makes an unlikely escape from poverty. Improbably, he wins a place at an Indian Institute of Technology, elite engineering schools that admit just 5,000 of 200,000 applicants a year. He also attends the equally renowned Indian Institute of Management. His hard work earns him a job at India’s securities regulator. By the end of 2013, he has moved to a commuter town outside Mumbai. His mother relaxes on a sofa playing Candy Crush on an iPad he bought her.

Ms Sengupta, whose family migrated from Calcutta (now Kolkata) via Canada to California when she was a girl, served as the New York Times’s New Delhi bureau chief between 2005 and 2009. She employs the traditional tools of the reporter to great effect, interweaving data, first-hand accounts and archival research to paint a vivid picture of life for India’s young people. But what separates the book from the musings of so many foreign correspondents is the lens through which Ms Sengupta sees the country: that of a mother. Becoming a parent “made me want to see India through the eyes of its young. It made the fault lines clearer,” she writes in the epilogue. “In that sense, it is a love letter to my own girl.”

Reading Ms Sengupta’s stories of young women arrested for speaking their minds on Facebook, of teenagers trafficked to work as domestic servants in big cities, it is difficult not to feel gloomy. Yet stories like Anupam’s, while rare, are not unheard of. At the same time as the Jat protests outside Delhi last month, India’s political establishment was convulsed by a controversy surrounding the arrest for sedition, under a colonial-era law, of Kanhaiya Kumar. The student-union president of a left-leaning Delhi university, himself from a Bihari family, was accused of supporting “freedom” for Kashmir. Released on bail in early March, Mr Kumar clarified his position in a speech on campus: “It is not freedom from India we want. It is freedom in India,” freedom from hunger, from corruption, from caste. As long as India produces young men and women with this fire of conviction, it will also remain a place of hope.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694984-indias-youth-are-trading-fatalism-and-karma-free-willand-higher/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Iraq’s unravelling

The mistakes that made Islamic State

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

Blood Year: Islamic State and the Failures of the War on Terror. By David Kilcullen. Oxford University Press; 312 pages; $24.95. Hurst; £9.99.

WHEN David Kilcullen, a young Australian army officer who had been seconded to America’s State Department as a counter-terrorism strategist, arrived in Baghdad’s Green Zone in late 2005 he found himself at “Ground Zero for the greatest strategic screw up since Hitler’s invasion of Russia”. Just as it is said that the first world war was the calamity from which sprang all the other calamities of the 20th century, so too was the bungled aftermath of the invasion of Iraq the screw-up from which all other screw-ups followed.

In his new book, Mr Kilcullen gives an unflinching insider’s account of how mistakes and missed opportunities led inexorably to the events of 2014. This is the “blood year” of his title, when Islamic State (IS) began its blitzkrieg through Iraq that culminated in the seizure of Mosul, the country’s second-biggest city, and the approach almost to Baghdad. Eighteen months after Barack Obama assembled his international coalition to “degrade and defeat” IS, the self-styled “caliphate” still holds Mosul and a string of other Iraqi cities, while controlling much of eastern Syria including Raqqa, its “capital” since 2013.

There is plenty of blame to go round. Mr Kilcullen’s contempt for George W. Bush’s defence secretary, Donald Rumsfeld, is searing. If invading Iraq was an irresponsible distraction from the real fight against al-Qaeda, Mr Rumsfeld’s insistence on a “light footprint” strategy meant that the number of troops available to contain the entirely predictable (and predicted) chaos following the removal of Saddam Hussein was “criminally” inadequate.

This was compounded by disbanding the Iraqi army and then dismantling the ruling Baath party, thus rendering most of the country’s qualified middle class unemployable. The conditions for the debacle to come were now complete. It was in the ensuing years of sectarian bloodletting that al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI), the predecessor to IS, emerged under the psychotic leadership of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi as the most potent force in the insurgency.

Yet Mr Kilcullen is full of praise for Mr Bush’s commitment to the troop “surge” in 2007 led by General David Petraeus. Mr Bush may have made a lousy call over Iraq in the first place, but he understood the moral and reputational imperative to repair some of the damage and was sufficiently flexible to apply new methods when old ones had failed.

The same could not be said for his successor, Mr Obama. As Mr Kilcullen sees it, by the time the new president took office in 2009 Iraq was in a much better place. AQI had been more or less eradicated, the violence had largely abated and, under American guidance, the government of Nouri al-Maliki in Baghdad showed some willingness to share power with Sunnis and Kurds. But Mr Obama, instead of maintaining enough boots on the ground to keep things going in the right direction, headed for the exit at the first opportunity when, in late 2010, he and Mr al-Maliki failed to agree to a deal extending the legal status of American forces in Iraq.

Within hours of the last American soldiers departing, Mr al-Maliki returned to his Shia sectarian ways, betraying promises made to the Sunnis and hollowing out the army (equipped and trained at a cost of $26 billion to American taxpayers), creating a corrupt praetorian guard. With nowhere to turn, the Sunni minority was vulnerable to co-option by a resurgent AQI, which by 2013 was responsible for levels of violence not seen since the surge. With a strategic hinterland across the notional border with Syria and faced with an Iraqi army unwilling to fight for mainly Sunni cities, AQI morphed into ISIS (Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham) and then into IS.

It was given a helping hand by a feckless Mr Obama, already guilty of “passivity in the face of catastrophe” according to Mr Kilcullen. Had Mr Obama punished Bashar al-Assad for crossing the “red line” by using chemical weapons against his own people, as Mr Obama had promised, the author believes that the regime might have fallen and IS would not have taken hold in Syria.

Mr Bush learned from his mistakes. But in Mr Obama the author sees an ideological stubbornness that prevents him from doing so and that in some ways echoes the theories of Mr Rumsfeld. Mr Obama relies on technology and modest air campaigns to constrain the West’s enemies while refusing to commit the forces on the ground needed to defeat them (his partial U-turn on Afghanistan is typically grudging and insufficient). The longer America leaves IS to embed itself in the cities it has captured the greater the harm it does and the more lethal the force that will eventually be required to remove it, Mr Kilcullen argues.

Unfortunately, this wise and important book ends on an off-note. Mr Kilcullen suggests that perhaps some sort of bargain could be struck with an economically distressed Russia that would lead to a co-operative effort to find a political solution to end the terrible civil war in Syria that IS has fed from. Given Mr Obama’s acquiescence in the ruthless bombing of Syrian rebels ordered by Vladimir Putin just as this book was sent to the publishers, it is not a far-fetched notion. But it would be a deal struck on Russian and Iranian terms aimed at preserving a monstrous regime only too happy to drive yet more desperate Sunni Arabs into the deadly embrace of IS.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694981-mistakes-made-islamic-state/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Bard abroad

All the world was his stage

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



Shakespeare in Swahililand: Adventures with the Ever-Living Poet. By Edward Wilson-Lee. William Collins; 288 pages; £20. To be published in America by Farrar, Straus, and Giroux in September; $26.

ACCORDING to the diaries of Captain William Keeling of the East India Company, in 1607 “Hamlet” was performed on his ship Dragon off the coast of Sierra Leone. If the extract is genuine, it was the first performance of the play ever to be mentioned in writing. Edward Wilson-Lee of Cambridge University has pulled together this and many intriguing threads in his “story of Africa less often told”. “Shakespeare in Swahililand” is an attempt to understand whether the great playwright’s work speaks across cultural boundaries to a shared humanity. It primarily looks at “Swahililand”: Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, and the parts of Congo, Malawi and Sudan, where the language is spoken, but cannot resist ranging farther afield. (Ethiopia’s emperor, Haile Selassie, said that after God, Shakespeare was “the greatest creator of mankind”, but his information ministry banned an Amharic-language staging of the regicidal “Makbez”.)

Shakespeare arrived on the continent in the baggage of explorers. From Richard Burton to Henry Morton Stanley, a volume or two of Shakespeare was an indispensable part of an African adventure. Mr Wilson-Lee speaks of the “exquisite strangeness” of the fact that “ravaged by physical hardship and fever” they should reach “for lines written for Elizabethan Londoners several hundred years earlier”. But Shakespeare was “a talisman of Englishness…to keep themselves from ‘going native’.” And as European explorers were replaced by settlers and colonists, Shakespeare became “a tool of psychological warfare and cultural colonisation”.

In 1867, though, the missionary Edward Steere translated storybook versions of four of Shakespeare’s plays into Swahili. This was the beginning of a golden age when Shakespeare could be heard in new languages on the continent. Mr Wilson-Lee delights in examples of the “plays richly refracted through the eyes of a place and time wholly alien to the Swan of Avon”. In the early 1900s Indian acting troupes performed Agha Hashr Kashmiri’s “Saidi Havas”, a blend of “Richard III” and “King John”, in makeshift theatres in Mombasa; there were versions of “Hamlet” set on Mughal battlefields, and snake-bitten Juliets who merged with the character of Cleopatra.

Shakespeare’s prominence in British-set school syllabuses meant his work had fully diffused into African life by the second half of the 20th century, “in the speeches of politicians and lawyers and the folklore of rural villages”. But as independence dawned, his influence was called into question. Was Shakespeare part of a universal human culture which belongs to everyone, or an extension of colonial power? Two Kenyans represented the contrasting views. Ngugi wa Thiong’o, a celebrated novelist, scoffed at “Shakespeare in Colonial Trousers” and went on to refuse to write in English, whereas the first African member of the Kenya Legislative Council, Eliud Wambu Mathu, used “The Merchant of Venice” in a speech in 1955 to explain the injustices of British rule.

The subject, though interesting, can feel stretched over the book’s 250 pages. The historical records are sadly thin, which means Mr Wilson-Lee often resorts to what feels like speculative filler. Some of the links he makes are beyond tenuous—at one point he compares African elephants to the storm in “King Lear” on the grounds that both are “sublime grey objects”. The book sometimes strays far from both Shakespeare and Swahililand. But it has successfully told a lesser-known story of Africa, and it is a story worth knowing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694985-all-world-was-his-stage/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Art and loneliness

Out of isolation

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



The Lonely City: Adventures in the Art of Being Alone. By Olivia Laing. Picador; 336 pages; $26. Canongate; £16.99.

SEVERAL years ago, Olivia Laing, a British writer, took a leap of faith in a new relationship, moving to New York. Her lover was of the fickle sort, and she soon found herself alone, drifting, her lack of attachment amplified by the city’s urgency and purpose.

Her book about this period, “The Lonely City”, grabs hold hard of the shameful feeling of loneliness. In modern society, loneliness has become “increasingly inadmissible, a taboo state whose confession seems destined to cause others to turn and flee”. People are more accepting of anger, envy, guilt and greed. To be lonely is to have failed, according to the rules of a shrinking and ever more interconnected world. Ms Laing builds a case for loneliness as particularly pernicious, citing studies to show it can be harmful to physical health and difficult to overcome: “the damaged individual and the healthy society work in concert to maintain separation.”

Ms Laing’s loneliness was acute rather than chronic, and she overcame it through the consolation of art. She studies four men whose experiences cover the spectrum of isolation: Edward Hopper, Andy Warhol, David Wojnarowicz and Henry Darger. Her research on the lesser-known two is especially moving.

Wojnarowicz was so abused and neglected as a child that even as an adult there were times he could barely speak. His art—installed, performed, written, painted—focused on those ignored by history. The eruption of AIDS gave a resilient man a cause. He lost friends and lovers; he got the disease himself. He became a prominent member of a direct-action group, ACT UP. According to Ms Laing, linking art and protest forced him finally “to resist the silencing and isolation he’d suffered from lifelong”. But as he grew sicker, the feeling of invisibility returned. He wrote in his journal, “I am disappearing but not fast enough.” His ashes were scattered on the White House lawn in protest at the government’s response to the crisis, a loner and outsider finding himself, Ms Laing writes, at “the absolute heart of America”.

Where Wojnarowicz was able to find some connection through his art, Darger did not. He spent half a century as a hospital janitor. His other life as a creator of epic collages of fictitious worlds was discovered only after his death. His work often depicted violence against children, part of the reason he still sits outside the canon. Ms Laing interprets the horror as a desperate plea for attention: “Commit atrocities, become a windmill of slaughter: anything to get the attention of the divine eye, to prove that at least one being was aware of him, and felt his presence to be significant.”

Ms Laing finds relief in taking these artists’ work in her own hands, suggesting that connecting through touch with the loneliness of others can act as a balm. Back behind her laptop, she decries the familiar arguments that digital culture has alienated us from human contact. Loneliness did not appear with the internet. Like many people, Ms Laing finds making connections, especially those “of a risk-free kind, in which the communicator need never be rejected, misunderstood or overwhelmed”, frighteningly hard. But connecting becomes less intimidating if the fear of failure is removed. This brave book is a step in that direction.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694983-out-isolation/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Hartwig Fischer at the British Museum

On a mission

The new head of the British Museum wants museums to take a stand

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

Unafraid of colours clashing

WHEN the British Museum (BM) announced last September that its new director would be Hartwig Fischer, the common response was, “Hartwig who?” The soft-spoken director of the Dresden State Art Collections (SKD) was little known beyond the narrow world of museology. David Cameron had to approve his appointment, but six months on, the prime minister has still not met him.

The challenges Mr Fischer will face are many. He must attend to the museum’s permanent collections, ignored in the past few years and looking tired. He must decide the future of the grand (if awkward) circular Reading Room that the museum inherited from the British Library, and he will have to learn the mysterious ways of the Whitehall civil servants who control the museum’s public funding. He will face growing calls to return objects to the places they were taken from. But it is the position he will adopt in the wider public debate about what museums are for by which Mr Fischer will be measured.

Neil MacGregor, the museum’s scholarly and yet impish outgoing head, turned down the knighthood that would have drawn him further into the British establishment, and became instead the nation’s storyteller-in-chief with his radio series, “A History of the World in 100 Objects”. He positioned the BM, which had grown stale in the first years of this century, as “a museum of the world for the world”, giving it a new lease on life. With Mr MacGregor gone, and Sir Nicholas Serota, director of the Tate Galleries, possibly soon to retire (he turns 70 next month), culture in Britain needs a new advocate. Will Mr Fischer take up the challenge?

Mr Fischer was born in Hamburg, but his mother was from Strasbourg, a city that has frequently changed hands between France and Germany, and the linguistic divide “went straight through the family”, he says. Mrs Fischer grew up in Milan and on the Italian lakes, as a result of which her son has been fluent in four languages since his youth. (At 16 he went to America for a year, working on a farm in Iowa while attending the local high school. Back in Germany a year later, having just passed his driving test, he drove to London, returning with his car weighed down by second-hand books.) Mr Fischer’s studies in art history led to a doctoral thesis ostensibly on a painter called Hermann Prell, but it also allowed him to study the violent, inward-looking nationalism that led Germany to the first world war.

The man soon to take on one of the crown jewels of British high culture has a popular touch. He avoids the obfuscating language of his field, for example in a masterfully clear essay, “The Path to Abstractionism”, on Vassily Kandinsky, a great 20th-century Russian modernist. He insisted that any renovation at the 14 museums that make up the SKD, where he has been director for more than three years, must leave visible some reminder of Dresden’s wartime destruction. His open criticism of those who would rather paint over the past led to attacks in the press. The shows he has put on in Dresden have focused on global art history, reaching deep into the collections to highlight Indian miniatures and Japanese katagami painting of samurai kimonos, not just European porcelain.

Tongue slightly in cheek, he says museums are “in charge of eternity”. But he truly does believe they have a political mission to forge “global citizenship” (the statement he gave at his appointment to the BM mentioned this in passing, but the reference was easy to miss). This has particular resonance in Dresden, which saw some of the biggest demonstrations in the uprising against Erich Honecker, the East German leader, in 1989, and which has since been the birthplace of Pegida, Germany’s anti-Muslim, anti-migrant movement.

The turning point came in December 2014, when the museum projected the words “Dresden for all” on its façade. This attracted Pegida supporters chanting slogans with a Nazi tinge: Lügenpresse (“liar press”) and Volksverräter (“traitor to the people”). “I consciously took the decision not to remain neutral,” Mr Fischer says. He began making speeches to citizens’ groups that had formed to counter Pegida’s regular Monday marches (“the cultures of the world are at home here, and the people who carry those cultures,” he told them) and persuaded the government to allow the museum to hang long banners outside the building boasting: “The State Art Collections Dresden. Works from Five Continents. A House Full of Foreigners. The Pride of the Free State of Saxony.” In early February the museum threw open its doors to refugees and locals on a Sunday under the banner “Meet a Friend”. The place was soon overcrowded, with an open-hearted and warm atmosphere.

Mr Fischer moves to Britain just as the country examines its own role in the world: which way to vote over membership of the EU. When he settles into his office overlooking the courtyard of Montague House on April 4th, he will be given the pick of the BM’s collection to hang on the wall. In his Dresden office he had just a single artwork, one of the compasses that Olafur Eliasson, a Danish-Icelandic artist, has used to explore questions of identity and integrity, nationalism and globalism. It hung from the ceiling and spun on its axis, stopping only when it found true north. Mr Fischer will wait and watch before he speaks out in public. When he does, his views are likely to be surprising.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694980-new-head-british-museum-wants-museums-take-stand-mission/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Correction: “Don’t p@nic”, March 12th

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition

Johnson (“Don’t p@nic”, March 12th) gave the @ sign’s name in Dutch as aapenstartje. It is apenstaartje (“monkey’s tail”). Tail between legs: sorry.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694982-correction-dont-pnic-march-12th/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: George Martin: Their humble servant





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: George Martin

Their humble servant

George Martin, record producer, died on March 8th, aged 90

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



THE first thing that struck George Martin, when the four young men strolled into his studio at EMI on Abbey Road in 1962, was that they looked quite clean. That came as a relief. Their demo tape, frankly, had not impressed him: badly balanced, and obviously recorded in a back room somewhere. Some sort of raw energy in it, hard to define, was all that had led him to bring them down from Liverpool.

The Beatles, on their side, were equally surprised. They knew him as the producer behind the Goons, Peter Sellers’s crazy spoofs, and Flanders & Swann of “Mud, mud, glorious mud”. This posh-looking man (though, in fact, the son of a carpenter), with tailored clothes and the clipped voice of a kind headmaster, was not what they expected. But a liking for silly jokes bound them instantly. And Mr Martin soon found that, though he might perch on his high stool with “the boys” obediently gathered round to sing, it was they who were the masters, and he the servant.

This arrangement did not trouble him. As the young and eccentric head of the struggling Parlophone label, he had stumbled on genius, and now his job was gently to encourage and record it. He himself, he stressed, had no brilliance. He was a Jack-of-all-trades, “averagely good” at a number of things, who happened to have perfect pitch and a decent pair of ears. As a child he had taught himself the piano, but was never that good. At the Guildhall he learned the oboe, at which he was workmanlike. For Parlophone he began on the rather despised light-music-and-classical side. He was in love with sound but, though devoted to Bach and in awe of Ravel’s orchestration, he found pop music offered him more chances to experiment and create. Arranging and recording it was like painting with an infinite palette of colours.

His time with the Beatles, which lasted from their first single, “Love Me Do” (1962) to their last album, “Abbey Road” (1969), tested his ingenuity to the limit. He began, in mono, by tidying up the beginnings and ends of songs; in five years, on “Sergeant Pepper”, he was employing in stereo almost every instrument of the orchestra, and dubbing one four-track machine on another not once, but twice. For “Strawberry Fields Forever” he spliced together two takes at different tempi in different keys; for ”Tomorrow Never Knows” he brought in eight loops of sounds played backwards; soon he was getting the engineer to cut a tape in bits, toss them in the air and reassemble them. Technology could barely keep pace with the whims of his charges.

Nor, sometimes, could he. It was up to him to interpret the boys’ mumbles and “dooby-doops”—“something like this, George”—as instrumental sections, whether a string quartet (“Yesterday”), a Lowrey organ (“Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds”), or a piccolo trumpet (“Penny Lane”). On “A Day in the Life” he brought in a 41-piece orchestra in black tie to make a glissando that went, as John wanted, “from nothing to the end of the world”.

He refused to claim much credit for all this. Talk of him as the “fifth Beatle” he thought ridiculous. So were suggestions that he should share the composition honours on the record labels with Lennon and McCartney. After a while, the words “Produced by George Martin” appeared there, a first for the industry, but he went no further. Because, when all was said, he only arranged: he could never have found those notes, or written those songs.

Where he defended himself more forcefully was over his pay. Though the Beatles were soon earning millions for EMI, he was stuck on £3,000 a year, and when he failed to secure more than one-fifth of 1% of the royalties he left, in 1965, to set up his own Air Studios in London and the Caribbean. The Beatles stayed with EMI but demanded that he should still record them, because he was their friend. So he remained, firmly, despite ups and downs caused by drugs and pushy girlfriends. Tactfully, he said nothing about either, and the result of their giggly dope-taking was, to his unfogged mind, music that melted into new shapes like the paintings of Salvador Dalí. Only twice did he impose himself: at the start, insisting that they replace Pete Best as their drummer, and at the end, when he agreed to record “Abbey Road” if they stopped fighting.

Slightly out of tune

Their chief effect on him was to make him, too, famous and in great demand. Fame he didn’t want; he was happy to be their interpreter, and the platinum and gold records were consigned to the loo. Demand he welcomed. In the early 1960s he took on Gerry and the Pacemakers and Cilla Black; in 1963, records produced by him were at number one for 37 weeks out of the 52. Later, when Air was set up, he recorded Shirley Bassey, Celine Dion, Elton John and Jeff Beck. He stopped, in the late 1990s, only because his hearing was beginning to decay.

There was no George Martin sound to put beside the lushness of Burt Bacharach or the massed grandiosity of Phil Spector. At most, a few likings marked him out. For the natural vibrato and slight out-of-tuneness of the human voice; for the quirky resonances of different instruments; for the indefinable “something” of the old four-track machine and the U47 valve-operated microphone; for wit and freshness, and for the unimpeded flowering of talent under his unseen hands.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21694967-jack-all-trades-behind-much-beatles-success-was-aged-90-obituary-george-martin/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

World GDP

The Economist commodity-price index

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21695000/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21695004-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21695005-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

World GDP

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition



The world economy grew by 2.5% in the last quarter of 2015 compared with a year earlier, according to our estimates. Global GDP growth has declined for five consecutive quarters and is at its lowest since the beginning of 2013. Growth in the BRIC economies (Brazil, Russia, India and China) has slowed, as it has in other emerging markets. Emerging markets’ contribution to growth has fallen from 2.6 percentage points in the third quarter of 2013 to 1.8 points. In the rich world, the annual growth rate in America, Britain and Japan slowed between the third and fourth quarters of 2015. Euro-area growth has been moderate since the recession and economists reckon it will still be subdued this year.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21694998-world-gdp/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21695007-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Mar 19th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21694995-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Fri, 18 Mar 2016]

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



Russian foreign policy: A hollow superpower





Barack Obama visits Cuba: Cubama





America’s primaries: What now?





Britain’s budget: The fiddler’s charter





Pandemics: An ounce of prevention





Letters



Brexit, concussion, Turkey, online dating, Bernie Sanders, language: Letters to the editor





Briefing



Russia’s wars: A strategy of spectacle





United States



Super Tuesday III: Beware the ides of March





They could have stopped Trump: How non-voters blew it





The Supreme Court: Going nowhere fast





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





Indiana’s refugee order: Exodus, continued





Refugees in the north-east: The green light





Exit Marco Rubio: Marcomento mori





Lexington: The view from the rustbelt





The Americas



Barack Obama in Cuba: Hello, Barry





How Latin Americans see the United States: Dugout diplomacy





The United States and Latin America: Harmony now, discord later





Bello: Of soldiers and citizens





Asia



Reforming India: Bouquets and brickbats





Pakistan’s Mughal heritage: Short cuts





A new president in Myanmar: Changing lanes





The politics of protest in Vietnam: Gatecrashers





Japan’s male-only emperor system: Imperial lather





Propaganda in North Korea: Doctored Strangelove





China



Labour unrest: Deep in a pit





UN covenants: Suppressed in translation





Banyan: This insubstantial pageant





Middle East and Africa



Africa’s ports: The bottleneck





Nigeria’s currency crisis: Can you spare a dollar?





Politics and patronage in South Africa: All the president’s friends





Russia’s Syria surprise: Putin the peacemaker





Tension in Saudi Arabia’s Eastern Province: After the execution





Iraq: The unquiet cleric





Europe



Higher education: Class apart





Merkel under pressure: The lady’s not for turning





Fighting in Ukraine: Bite the bullet





Queuing for cash: Worth their wait in gold





Charlemagne: The bystander





Britain



The budget: The generation game





Savings: A nicer ISA?





A tax on sugar: Pricier pop





Brexit brief: Dreaming of sovereignty





Bristol’s economy: London-upon-Avon





“Programmable” Bristol: Data deluge





The music business: Discs, jockeying





Bagehot: A coastal town they forgot to close down





International



The Commonwealth: What’s the point of it?





Small islands: Lift up your voice





Business



Tesla’s mass-market ambitions: On a charge





Corporate governance: He who would Valeant be





Taxation and oil companies: Oiling the wheels





South Korean exporters: Films are the new stars





Air cargo: Too little freight, too much space





Religion, ethics and the workplace: Cross the boss





Schumpeter: Team spirit





Finance and economics



The blockchain in finance: Hype springs eternal





Buttonwood: Overcoming their fears





Central banks and digital currencies: Redistributed ledger





TLTROs: Money for less than nothing





Bridgewater: The hardest trade





Cyber-crime: The Dhaka caper





Measuring inflation: How much is that doggy?





Rotterdam: The shipping news





Free exchange: Doing less with more





Science and technology



Sonification: Now hear this





Artificial intelligence and Go: A game-changing result





Research publishing: Taking the online medicine





Restoring lost memories: Total recall





Books and arts



India’s young: We’re not gonna take it





Iraq’s unravelling: The mistakes that made Islamic State





The Bard abroad: All the world was his stage





Art and loneliness: Out of isolation





Hartwig Fischer at the British Museum: On a mission





Hartwig Fischer at the British Museum: Correction: “Don’t p@nic”, March 12th





Obituary



Obituary: George Martin: Their humble servant





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





World GDP





The Economist commodity-price index





Markets





