The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Special report: Chinese society

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Politics this week

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



At least 250 people were killed by a bomb blast in Baghdad, thought to be the worst attack in Iraq since 2007. When the prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, tried to visit the site of the attack, in a Shia neighbourhood, the crowd chased him away. Islamic State claimed responsibility. There were also three terrorist attacks in Saudi Arabia, including one in the holy city of Medina. See article.

The Syrian army called a 72-hour truce to celebrate Eid al-Fitr, the festival that marks the end of the holy (and, this year, exceptionally bloody) Muslim month of Ramadan.

A nationwide strike in protest at the lack of jobs and non-payment of wages for government employees shut down much of Zimbabwe. The government is broke and desperately trying to raise new loans from foreign donors. See article.



Prospects for economic growth in Guinea have been dashed by Rio Tinto’s decision to shelve its planned $20 billion investment in an iron-ore project. The mine, railway and port could have doubled the size of Guinea’s economy.

The Olympic spirit

Brazil’s interim president, Michel Temer, insisted in an open letter to the international press that visitors and athletes would be safe during the forthcoming Olympic games. He said the country had ample experience and tens of thousands of security personnel would be deployed. The letter followed a pull-out by some prominent athletes and protests by police in Rio de Janeiro, who said their pay was in arrears.

In the latest sign of social breakdown in Venezuela, hundreds of women made a co-ordinated crossing of their country’s western border, into Colombia, in search of food. They said they were unable to provide for their families because of Venezuela’s ongoing economic crisis.

Spreading its poison

Several jihadists attacked a restaurant in a rich suburb of Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh, killing 20 people including nine Italians and seven Japanese. Two officers also died. Islamic State claimed responsibility.

Rodrigo Duterte formally took up his new post as president of the Philippines. In keeping with his swashbuckling image, he told police officers that they had the right to kill suspects who threatened their lives by resisting arrest. But he said he would honour the previous government’s peace accord with Muslim insurgents on the southern island of Mindanao. See article.



Voters in Australia delivered an uncertain verdict in an election called by the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull. The outcome may allow Mr Turnbull to form a new government with a tiny majority. A hung parliament is also possible, with various independents holding the balance of power. The final outcome rests with postal votes. See article.

America’s Treasury imposed sanctions on North Korea’s dictator, Kim Jong Un, and other senior officials in the country for the first time, because they “inflict intolerable cruelty and hardship on millions” of people.

China’s navy began a week-long exercise around the Paracel islands in the South China Sea. Vietnam, which also claims the islands, lodged a protest. Meanwhile, the Chinese defence ministry said two of its fighter jets had encountered “provocative actions” by a pair of Japanese ones over the East China Sea in June. The ministry said the Japanese jets used fire-control radar to “light up” the Chinese planes. Japan denied any provocative behaviour.

Little comfort

The long-awaited report into Britain’s reasons for joining the American-led invasion of Iraq was published. After six-and-a-half years, Sir John Chilcot concluded that war had not been a “last resort”, as peaceful options for disarming Saddam Hussein’s regime had not been exhausted at the time. Damningly, his inquiry determined that the evidence on Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction was presented with a certainty that was “not justified”. See here and here.

Two leading politicians on the victorious Leave side in Britain’s referendum on the EU left the political landscape. Boris Johnson decided not to run for leader of the Conservative Party after his former ally, Michael Gove, launched his own bid. In another surprise Nigel Farage stood down as leader of the UK Independence Party. He will retain his well-paid job as a member of the European Parliament.

In the Conservative Party’s leadership contest, Theresa May took 165 votes among MPs, just over half the total. She is expected to advance to a run-off among the party’s grassroots. Meanwhile, Labour MPs were still trying to uproot their stubbornly planted leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who was refusing to step down. See article.

Spain and Portugal should be fined for failing to bring their deficits in line with EU rules, the European Commission has concluded. The final say rests with EU finance ministers. They are in a tough spot. The EU’s right to police national budgets is already contentious.

In a reversal of its initial position, the commission said an EU-Canada trade deal will be put to national parliaments. The pact, which the commission’s president, Jean-Claude Juncker, had hoped to fast-track, will now be delayed for years. The decision bodes badly for Britain’s post-Brexit trade negotiations with the EU.

Austria announced that a rerun of the country’s presidential election will take place on October 2nd. In May the Green Party’s Alexander Van der Bellen beat Norbert Hofer, a member of the Eurosceptic Freedom Party, by just 31,000 votes. The constitutional court, however, annulled the results because of irregularities.

“Extremely careless”

At the conclusion of a year-long investigation, the director of the FBI, James Comey, lambasted Hillary Clinton for using a private e-mail server while she was secretary of state, describing it as an “extremely careless” way to handle sensitive, classified information. But in a big relief for the Democratic candidate for president, Mr Comey recommended that no charges be brought.



Juno, a space probe built by NASA, reached Jupiter, where it will orbit for the next two years examining the atmosphere and magnetic fields of the biggest planet in the solar system. NASA hopes Juno will help it understand more about how Jupiter was formed.





Business this week

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



Markets had another jittery week pondering the financial fallout from Britain’s vote to leave the EU. Several British commercial-property funds stopped investors cashing out following a rapid increase in redemption requests. Government-bond yields fell further. Yields on America’s ten-year Treasuries dropped to a record low and German bunds fell deeper into negative territory. Japan’s 20-year bond offered a negative yield for the first time. The pound, meanwhile, was at a 30-year-low against the dollar at $1.29. See here, here and here.

Fears about the health of Italian banks intensified. Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the world’s oldest lender, came under particular pressure, following leaked reports that it will need to raise capital. Shares in Italy’s big banks have halved in value this year. See here.

A stabilising force

The Bank of England relaxed capital requirements for banks, as it tried to reassure markets that Britain would avoid a credit crunch. Mark Carney, the central bank’s governor, suggested that the next meeting of the monetary-policy committee on July 14th would move to ease monetary policy, possibly through a cut in interest rates or more quantitative easing. See here.

George Osborne, Britain’s chancellor of the exchequer, proposed a further cut to corporation tax, to below 15%, as an incentive to stop companies moving away from Britain once it leaves the EU (the rate was due to fall to 17% by 2020). Mr Osborne also ripped up his plan to achieve a budget surplus by 2020, acknowledging that the government had to be “realistic” in the post-Brexit world.

Shareholders in the London Stock Exchange voted in favour of the proposed merger with Deutsche Börse. Joachim Faber, the chairman of DB’s supervisory board, recommended that DB’s shareholders vote the same way. The head of Germany’s financial regulator, BaFin, and some German politicians have questioned the deal, which would put the headquarters of the combined company in London.

A jury found three former bankers at Barclays guilty of manipulating LIBOR, a benchmark interest rate (a fourth man pleaded guilty). They were accused of fraudulently submitting false LIBOR rates to exaggerate their trading positions. The trio had argued that they did not know what they were doing was dishonest.

Two banks in Abu Dhabi, National Bank of Abu Dhabi and First Gulf Bank, said they would merge, creating the Middle East’s largest lender with $175 billion in assets. The emirate has been looking at ways to consolidate its banks following the collapse in the price of oil. See article.

For the first time, Puerto Rico defaulted on general-obligation bonds, which are supposed to have rock-solid constitutional guarantees of repayments to creditors. The default came a day after Barack Obama signed emergency legislation that creates a fiscal control board for the territory with the power to restructure its crippling debt load.

Own goal

In Spain, Lionel Messi, considered by many to be the world’s best footballer, was found guilty of tax evasion and sentenced to 21 months in prison, suspended on condition he does not offend again. He is appealing against the verdict.

The first death was recorded of a motorist using an autonomous driving mode. Tesla Motors confirmed that a driver who had engaged the autopilot in a Model S sedan had died in May when the car failed to recognise a lorry crossing its path and ploughed under it. Tesla provided a software update to the Model S last October that allows motorists to pass control to the autopilot but has stressed that drivers must keep their hands on the steering wheel.

The benefits of staying in

The prime minister of Greece, Alexis Tsipras, met his Chinese counterpart, Li Keqiang, in Beijing to seal a deal by which China’s government-owned COSCO shipping company will take a 67% holding in the Greek port of Piraeus, the home of the country’s shipping lines. Mr Tsipras hopes the deal will boost Piraeus as an entry point for Chinese investment and goods into Europe.

There was a distinct appetite for takeovers in the food industry this week. Danone, based in France and the world’s biggest maker of yogurts, launched a $12.5 billion bid to buy WhiteWave, an American firm known for its range of healthy products. Hershey, a confectioner, rejected a $23 billion takeover bid from Mondelez, which counts the Cadbury and Oreo brands among its lines. The Hershey Trust would need to give its consent to any deal, which it may do if Mondelez sweetens its offer.





KAL's cartoon

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





Leaders




Italian banks: The Italian job

China’s middle class: 225m reasons for China’s leaders to worry

Hillary Clinton’s e-mails: Notes on a scandal

Immigration and politics: Aussie rules

War in Iraq: The dangerous chill of Chilcot





Italian banks

The Italian job

Italy’s teetering banks will be Europe’s next crisis

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



INVESTORS around the world are extraordinarily nervous. Yields on ten-year Treasuries fell to their lowest-ever level this week; buyers of 50-year Swiss government bonds are prepared to accept a negative yield. Some of the disquiet stems from Britain’s decision to hurl itself into the unknown. The pound, which hit a 31-year low against the dollar on July 6th, has yet to find a floor; several British commercial-property funds have suspended redemptions as the value of their assets tumbles. But the Brexit vote does not explain all the current unease. Another, potentially more dangerous, financial menace looms on the other side of the Channel—as Italy’s wobbly lenders teeter on the brink of a banking crisis.

Italy is Europe’s fourth-biggest economy and one of its weakest. Public debt stands at 135% of GDP; the adult employment rate is lower than in any EU country bar Greece. The economy has been moribund for years, suffocated by over-regulation and feeble productivity. Amid stagnation and deflation, Italy’s banks are in deep trouble, burdened by some €360 billion ($400 billion) of souring loans, the equivalent of a fifth of the country’s GDP. Collectively they have provisioned for only 45% of that amount. At best, Italy’s weak banks will throttle the country’s growth; at worst, some will go bust.

Not surprisingly, investors have fled. Shares in Italy’s biggest banks have fallen by as much as half since April, a sell-off that has intensified since the Brexit vote. The biggest immediate worry is the solvency of Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the world’s oldest bank. Several attempts to clean it up have failed: it is now worth just a tenth of its book value, and could well come up short in a stress test by the European Central Bank later this month (see article).

Size alone makes Italy’s bank mess dangerous. But it is also an exemplar of the euro area’s wider ills: the tension between rules made in Brussels and the exigencies of national politics; and the conflict between creditors and debtors. Both are the consequence of half-baked financial reforms. Handled badly, the Italian job could be the euro zone’s undoing.

Hang on lads, I’ve got a great idea

Italy urgently needs a big, bold bank clean-up. With private capital fleeing and an existing bank-backed rescue-fund largely used up, this will require an injection of government money. The problem is that this is politically all but impossible. New euro-zone rules say banks cannot be bailed out by the state unless their bondholders take losses first. The principle of “bailing in” creditors rather than sticking the bill to taxpayers is a good one. In most countries bank bonds are held by big institutional investors, who know the risks and can afford the loss. But in Italy, thanks in part to a quirk of the tax code, some €200 billion of bank bonds are held by retail investors. When a few small banks were patched up under the new rules in November, one retail bondholder committed suicide. It caused a political storm. Forcing ordinary Italians to take losses again would badly damage Matteo Renzi, the prime minister, dashing his hope of winning a referendum on constitutional reform in the autumn. Mr Renzi wants the rules to be applied flexibly.

But politics is also in play in the euro zone’s creditor countries. Germany rightly says that Italy’s troubles are largely of its own making. It has been unforgivably slow in getting to grips with its crippled banks, perhaps because its regional lenders are bound up in local politics. Any system that allows member states to pick and choose which rules to comply with is bound to unnerve voters in Germany. Just as Mr Renzi has a lot to gain from watering down or suspending the rules, clemency may have a political cost in Germany, where elections are due to be held next year. “We wrote the rules for the credit system,” said Angela Merkel, in response to Mr Renzi’s appeals for leniency. “We cannot change them every two years.”

If they planned this jam, they planned a way out

Nonetheless, the Italian prime minister is right. The market pressure on Italy’s banks will not ease until some confidence is restored, and that will not happen without public funds. If the bail-in rules are applied rigidly in Italy, the outcry from savers will both damage confidence and leave the door to power open for the Five Star Movement, a grouping that blames Italy’s economic troubles on the single currency. The feeling will grow that Italy is getting scant benefit from the supposed pooling of risks across the euro zone, but is damaged by the many constraints it is under—by its inability to devalue its way towards stronger growth, by a fiscal compact that shackles its budget, and now by bail-in rules that came in after other countries had bailed out their banks. If Italians were ever to lose faith in the euro, the single currency would not survive.

There is no point in following rules to the letter, if doing so leads to the demise of the single currency. So the correct response is to allow the Italian government to plump up the capital cushions of its vulnerable banks with enough public money to quell fears of a systemic crisis. Such a rescue should come with conditions: an overhaul of the Italian banking system that forces tiddlers to merge and slashes overheads by closing the country’s profusion of branches. To give the European bail-in directive a greater chance of being implemented in future, it should be changed so that retail investors who already hold bank bonds are explicitly shielded.

Some sort of fudge is more likely. There is already talk of a handy clause in the bail-in rule book that would allow a temporary capital injection for Monte dei Paschi. That may be enough to put a floor under stock prices so that Italy’s other banks, such as UniCredit, are able to raise private capital. Europe would doubtless hail such an outcome as an example of rules-based solidarity. But if history is any guide, it would neither return Italian banks to full health nor resolve any of the bloc’s underlying problems. One lesson of Brexit is that glossing over the concerns of voters is not a sustainable strategy. The euro zone’s jerry-built financial architecture does so twice over, by sidestepping the fears of those in creditor and debtor countries. That will not work for ever—which is why investors are right to be so worried.





China’s middle class

225m reasons for China’s leaders to worry

The Communist Party tied its fortunes to mass affluence. That may now threaten its survival

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



BEFORE the late 1990s China barely had a middle class. In 2000, 5m households made between $11,500 and $43,000 a year in current dollars; today 225m do. By 2020 the ranks of the Chinese middle class may well outnumber Europeans. This stunning development has boosted growth around the world and transformed China. Paddyfields have given way to skyscrapers, bicycles to traffic jams. An inward-looking nation has grown more cosmopolitan: last year Chinese people took 120m trips abroad, a fourfold rise in a decade. A vast Chinese chattering class has sprung up on social media.

However, something is missing. In other authoritarian countries that grew rich, the new middle classes demanded political change. In South Korea student-led protests in the 1980s helped end military rule. In Taiwan in the 1990s middle-class demands for democracy led an authoritarian government to allow free elections.

Many pundits believe that China is an exception to this pattern. Plenty of Chinese cities are now as rich as South Korea and Taiwan were when they began to change. Yet, since tanks crushed protests in Tiananmen Square in 1989, China has seen no big rallies for democracy. China’s president, Xi Jinping, has shown nothing but contempt for democratic politics.

There is evidence that this approach works. The hardline Mr Xi is widely admired in China as a strongman and a fighter against corruption. Few middle-class Chinese people say they want democracy, and not just because speaking up might get them into trouble. Many look at the chaos that followed the Arab spring, and recoil. Some see Britain’s decision to leave the European Union as a sign that ordinary voters cannot be trusted to resolve complex political questions. The Chinese government may be ruthless towards its critics, but at least it lets its people make money. So long as they keep out of politics, they can say and do pretty much what they want.

Anxious times

Scratch the surface, however, and China’s middle class is far from content (see our special report in this issue). Its members are prosperous, but they feel insecure. They worry about who will look after them when they grow old; most couples have only one child, and the public safety-net is rudimentary. They fret that, if they fall ill, hospital bills may wipe out their wealth. If they own a home, as 80% of them do, they fear losing it; property rights in China can be overturned at the whim of a greedy official. They worry about their savings, too; banks offer derisory interest rates and alternative investments are regulated badly or not at all. No Ponzi scheme in history ensnared more investors than the one that collapsed in China in January.

Many middle-class Chinese are also angry. Plenty scoff when they are force-fed Marxism. Even more rage about corruption, which blights every industry and activity, and about nepotism, which rewards connections over talent and hard work. Nearly all fume about pollution, which clogs their lungs, shortens their lives and harms their children. They cannot help noticing that some polluters with important friends foul the air, soil and water with impunity.

And some feel frustrated. China has well over 2m non-governmental organisations. Many of those working for them are middle-class people trying to make their society better, independently of the party. Some are agitating for a cleaner environment, for fairer treatment of workers, or for an end to discrimination against women, or gay people, or migrants. None of these groups openly challenges the party’s monopoly of power, but they often object to the way it wields it.

The party understands that the middle class, which includes many of its 88m members, is the bedrock of its support. When Mr Xi came to power in 2012, he echoed America with inspiring pro-middle-class talk of a “Chinese dream”. The party gauges public opinion in an attempt to respond to expectations and relieve social pressures.

Even so, it is hard to imagine China’s problems being solved without more transparent, accountable government. Without the rule of law—which Mr Xi professes to believe in—no individual’s property or person can truly be safe. Without a more open system of government, corruption cannot systematically be detected and stamped out. And without freedom of speech, the NGOs will not bring about change.

The middle rages

After thousands of years of tumultuous history and more recent memories of the bloody Cultural Revolution of the 1960s, the Chinese often say that they have a deeply ingrained fear of chaos. But nearly half of all people living in cities are under 35. They know little about Mao-era anarchy. When they feel the government is not listening, some are willing to stand up and complain. Take the thousands of middle-class people in the southern Chinese town of Lubu, who protested on July 3rd over plans to build a waste-incinerator there. They battled with police and tried to storm government offices.

Such protests are common. There were 180,000 in 2010, according to Tsinghua University, since when there have been no good estimates. When growth was rapid, stability followed, but as the economy slows, unrest is likely to spread, especially as the party must make hard choices like shutting factories, restructuring state-owned enterprises and curbing pollution.

Ultimately the fate of middle-class protests is likely to depend on the party elite. The pro-democracy movement of 1989 took off because some of its members also favoured reform. There is no sign of another Tiananmen, but there are tensions within the leadership. Mr Xi has made enemies with his anti-corruption purges, which seem to hit rivals harder than allies (a recent target is a former chief aide to Hu Jintao, his predecessor—see article). Mr Xi’s colleagues are jockeying for power.

The party may fend off challenges for many years. China’s vast state-security apparatus moves quickly to crush unrest. Yet to rely on repression alone would be a mistake. China’s middle class will grow and so, too, will its demands for change. The party must start to meet those demands, or the world’s biggest middle class may yet destroy it.





Hillary Clinton’s e-mails

Notes on a scandal

The Democratic nominee needs to change the way she operates

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THE former secretary of state and her colleagues were “extremely careless in their handling of very sensitive, highly classified information”. Hillary Clinton, who in August said she “did not send classified material”, in fact used her home-brew IT system in eight e-mail chains containing material that someone in her position should have known was classified top-secret. There was no direct evidence that her own e-mail account was compromised, but she sent and received e-mails in “the territory of sophisticated adversaries” and the accounts of some people with whom she corresponded were indeed hacked, opening a possible route for foreign spies into Mrs Clinton’s in-box. Delivering his verdict on a year-long investigation, the FBI’s director, James Comey, sounded like someone who was laying out the case for the prosecution.

It turned out that Mrs Clinton will not be charged—because Mr Comey concluded that her mistakes were neither intentional nor the result of malice towards the United States, and because the attorney-general, Loretta Lynch, said that she would follow the FBI’s lead. In legal terms, the matter is closed.

At one level, that is a relief. An indictment might have shifted the odds of winning the presidential race decisively in favour of Donald Trump.

In terms of Mrs Clinton’s character, however, the matter is very much open and it is troubling. Mr Trump’s awfulness does not excuse Mrs Clinton’s shiftiness. Were she an aspiring staffer on the National Security Council, her career would now be over. Were she an ambassador awaiting confirmation, the Senate would reject her. America classifies too much information, admittedly, but much of it is classified for a reason: in some cases, to protect the identities of people who spy for America. Whatever caused Mrs Clinton to bend the rules, whether it was convenience, an IT flub or an active desire to keep her e-mail archive away from congressional subpoenas, her actions deserve condemnation.

This poses a risk to the campaign. Mrs Clinton is running for office on the grounds of being competent, responsible and prudent—the polar opposite of Mr Trump. To act carelessly and rashly was reckless. To appear reluctant to acknowledge her error, and then to have been found by Mr Comey to be wrong about the details, was unworthy of her.

Shortly after the primary campaign, the last time a pollster asked the question, Americans were more likely to call Mr Trump than Mrs Clinton honest and trustworthy. The numbers on voting intentions have been stable since the primaries concluded. Mrs Clinton has enjoyed an advantage of about five percentage points in the popular vote. Some believe that Mrs Clinton’s numbers on trust are so poor that they cannot go much lower. Because of her foolish misconduct, that proposition will now be tested.

Malware

The scandal ought to influence how Mrs Clinton runs her White House, if she does indeed find herself occupying the Oval Office in January next year. The temptations there will be different: plenty of people will be looking after her smartphones and e-mail servers. But when it comes to policing grey areas such as fundraising, the informal access granted to old friends, or the revolving-door from influence to employment and back again that White House staffers pass through, Mrs Clinton needs someone nearby who is not of her tribe. Whoever it is must impress on her and her entourage that in politics, the appearance of impropriety can cause as much harm as impropriety itself. Unfortunately, there is a lot of evidence that this is something Mrs Clinton tends to overlook.





Immigration and politics

Aussie rules

A points system would not reconcile Britons to immigration

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition





WHAT Switzerland is to watches and France is to beauty products, Australia is to immigration systems: a national guarantee of quality. Before Britain’s referendum on EU membership on June 23rd, Brexiteers invoked the Aussie brand to sell an alternative to the free movement of labour within the European Union. Leave the EU, they said, and Britain could enact an “Australian-style points-based immigration system”. Voters went for it. But they have been sold a dodgy product.

Albeit grudgingly, all Western countries let in refugees and foreigners whom their citizens have married. They also accept immigrant workers—but in very different ways. America tends to take people with offers of skilled work, as do European countries, at least when screening applicants from outside the EU. Beginning in 1979, though, Australia went in a different direction. It decided to favour people who look good on paper: a young PhD, say, or a greybeard with rare skills who is prepared to live in a snake-infested backwater. Points are assigned to personal characteristics; score enough and you get in.

If that is what Britons believe to be the Australian points system, here is some news from Down Under: it doesn’t work. Immigrants who look good to government officials often fail to impress employers. A few years after arriving, they are much more likely to be unemployed than people who came in with job offers (see article here and here). And the number of qualified applicants often exceeds the number the government allows in each year, leading to huge backlogs.

Pointless

These days Australia has a very different system—as does Canada, which created a points system earlier than Australia but, being Canada, does not boast about it. Although both still use points, they award lots for having a job offer. Their latest innovation is a “pool”. Many would-be immigrants to Australia and Canada no longer apply directly for visas. Instead they express an interest in moving, and if they seem promising the government lets them throw their names in. Companies can trawl that pool for workers; those they sponsor will shoot up the rankings and get in more quickly.

This is a good way of picking skilled immigrants. It can be quick and effective. It gives bosses some say on who gets in, but not too much say. Companies do not have exactly the same interests as countries: a firm might set its heart on a 64-year-old with an expensive medical condition. And if you let firms choose immigrants, you must decide whether to let them change jobs. No, and they will be exploited by their employer; yes, and you encourage crooked companies to sell visas.

Unfortunately, a points-based system for skilled workers would not reconcile Britons to immigration. It would make no difference to the numbers of two unpopular types of migrant—spouses from rural Pakistan and refugees. By design, it would not cover the sort of immigrant who trims cabbages for a living, and is blamed both for suppressing working-class wages and for cluttering doctors’ offices. If Britain leaves the European Economic Area, it could bar all unskilled workers. But that is improbable: a quarter of security guards and two-fifths of people working in food processing are immigrants.

Britain’s problem is not that it has a bad system for choosing skilled immigrants. It is that it routinely lapses into thinking that all immigrants are the same. Politicians set crude targets that include everybody. Amid the hosannas for Australia, Britons seem to have forgotten that their own government created a points-based immigration system in 2008. It was demolished by a politician who was trying to suppress all immigration, in a vain attempt to bring the net number below 100,000 a year. That politician was Theresa May—the front-runner to be Britain’s next prime minister.





War in Iraq

The dangerous chill of Chilcot

A foreign-policy calamity is laid bare, providing valuable lessons—and one red herring

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



BRITISH troops spent six years fighting in Iraq; the official inquiry into how they ended up there has taken nearly seven. Sir John Chilcot’s 2.6m-word report, published on July 6th, is—as foreseen—devastating. Assessments of Iraq’s weapons “were presented with a certainty that was not justified”; planning for after the invasion was “wholly inadequate”. The foreign-policy blunder of the century, billed as a war of necessity, in fact was “not a last resort”.

The report holds many lessons, including for this newspaper, which supported the invasion of Iraq: about the danger of impetuous decision-making; of failing to plan; and of making optimistic assumptions (see article). Yet it also carries a risk that the wrong lesson may be learned. As Britain begins the tortuous, regrettable process of disentangling itself from the rest of Europe, it is already in danger of turning inward. The Chilcot report will be read by many not merely as evidence of a badly conceived mission, thinly planned and poorly executed, but as proof that Britain and its Western allies should hasten their retreat from the wider world. That would be bad for all who share those countries’ liberal values.

Loud voice, small stick

The Chilcot report’s first lesson—one that David Cameron might have considered before rashly promising a referendum on membership of the European Union in order to pacify his Conservative Party—is that prime ministers should beware commitments that catch up with them later. Tony Blair promised George W. Bush in July 2002 that British forces would join an American-led invasion, believing spies’ assessments of Saddam Hussein’s chemical- and biological-weapons programmes. By the time he had to keep that promise eight months later, circumstances had changed. UN weapons inspectors wanted more time; the failure to get a second UN Security Council resolution cast doubt on the legality of action. Mr Blair found himself propelled into war by the military deadline set by the Americans.

The second lesson is the need for realism and planning. A lack of both infected every aspect of Britain’s Iraq-war decision-making. Plans were based on a best-case scenario in which foreign troops would be welcomed as liberators and a pluralist democracy would replace the Baathist system. Nor was there much realism about what influence Britain’s military contribution would buy it with America. Huge weight was placed on intelligence assessments that went unchallenged, and optimistic estimates of troop requirements led to a breakdown of order from which the occupation never recovered. The report describes how in Basra, under-resourced British forces made a “humiliating” agreement with a militia group in which detainees were released in return for a promise by the militia not to target British forces.



British military engagements and deaths, in graphics

The danger now is that pessimism rather than realism rules. Britain, shrinking away from Europe and bracing for turbulence at home, must not take a back seat in geopolitics. Instead the next government must be active in NATO and support its armed forces and its diplomats. As Syria has tragically shown, inaction can have dire consequences, too. The lesson of Iraq is not that military intervention in itself is wrong but that, if you are going to do it, you had better get it right. To resolve instead that other countries must now be abandoned to their fate would be the Iraq war’s second bloody legacy.





Letters




On female genital mutilation, law, Brexit: Letters to the editor





On female genital mutilation, law, Brexit

Letters to the editor

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com

No to FGM



We read your article “An agonising choice” (June 18th). Female genital mutilation is a harmful practice and a violation of the human rights of girls and women. It has no health benefits. Health-workers who carry out the practice are actively causing physical and psychological harm. It is crucial that they uphold the Hippocratic oath of “do no harm” and are aware that there is no medical justification for FGM. Promoting lesser forms of FGM potentially results in more and repeated injury. Girls may be subjected to FGM several times, particularly if the family or community are not satisfied with the result of the first procedure. The WHO supports health-workers in upholding the rights of women and girls and in working towards the total abandonment of FGM. With necessary support health-workers can be agents of change in communities where social and cultural norms have proved to be a tenacious obstacle.

FLAVIA BUSTREO

Assistant director-general

Family, Women and Children’s Health

IAN ASKEW

Director

Reproductive Health and Research

World Health Organisation

Geneva

What exactly does The Economist consider a “nick” on the female genitalia of young girls? And, what “form” of FGM do you stand for—“the least nasty version” or none at all? The least nasty version still violates the health and well-being of girls each year. To say that a “symbolic nick” is better than being “butchered in a back room by a village elder” does not fit with the context of what the issue comes down to: humanity.

We believe in community-led cultural alternatives to FGM through “alternative rites of passage” ceremonies. These have no forms of a cut, so girls are able to continue their education, which makes it less likely that they will become child brides. For us, there is no “least nasty version” of FGM, there is simply no FGM.

GITHINJI GITAHI

Global chief executive

Amref Health Africa

New York





Crime and time

“Bully pulpit” (June 25th) reported on the Catholic church’s lobbying against expanding the statute of limitations. But it is not an extension of the statute that is the target of opposition, but rather the proposed retroactive “reviver window” which would allow for the filing of claims that have run out of time. The statute of limitations is a cornerstone of the justice system. We should not succumb to mob justice and eliminate it, no matter how repugnant the alleged crime.

THOMAS STEBBINS

Executive director

Lawsuit Reform Alliance of New York

Albany, New York

Kazakhstan's future



The Economist’s analysis of the influence of major powers in Central Asia (“Stans undelivered”, July 2nd) did not recognise Kazakhstan’s unique role in the region as a bridge between East and West.

The “Great Game”you describe our country being subject to makes a neat headline, but that doesn’t make it true. We are not a silent bystander in anyone else’s strategy; we are a young country making its own independent way in the world.

Rather than a Great Game we believe in a Great Gain, where states co-operate to achieve regional prosperity, stability and security. The continuing threat of international terrorism and violent extremism seen tragically most recently in Turkey, America and my own country is precisely why it is important that states work ever closer together to defeat this evil.

We will continue to build good relations and strong economic ties with countries, big and small, to the east and west, north and south. We have close links with both Russia and China. Europe is our biggest trading partner and the United States our second biggest foreign investor after Europe.

Only by remaining relentlessly focused on co-operation with all states will we ensure a Great Gain for all.

ERLAN IDRISSOV

Foreign minister of Kazakhstan

Astana

Referendum addendum

In 1962, during the debate on the case for a referendum on whether to join the EEC, Lord Beloff argued that a referendum is meaningful only if clear alternatives are set before the electorate (“Adrift”, July 2nd). In the absence of such clarity, “the electorate would…be doing no more than indicating a very general bias one way or another.” The Brexit referendum failed the Beloff test. The central proposition of the Leave side did not offer a single coherent alternative vision and was largely dependent on the outcome of uncertain negotiations and unpredictable markets.



In these circumstances the referendum result could be interpreted as providing a blank cheque for the government to press ahead with the best deal that it can negotiate, with no requirement for further ratification from the electorate. That is scarcely tenable. The alternative interpretation is that the result simply indicates a bias towards leaving the European Union. This is more plausible. The result was an expression of discontent with the EU, but one that was conditioned by the attractiveness of the over-optimistic and deeply incompatible alternative futures outside the EU, depicted by the Leave campaign.

There is an old saying in the City of London: You buy on the rumour and sell on the facts. The Leave campaign provided the rumours. The government must now, over the next two years, deliver the facts. Only when the electorate has those facts before it can it sensibly be asked to take a definitive decision on whether to leave.

JOHN HAVARD

London

The Economist and most other serious publications take it as read that the Leave campaign was run almost exclusively on lies but the result must be respected despite the narrowness of the majority. Surely those two conclusions are incompatible? If a share prospectus was as mendacious as the Leave campaign, not only would a buyer be entitled to compensation but the sellers and their advisers would be liable to prosecution.

JEREMY HICKS

London



Some people who came to Britain from east Europe, and indeed west Europe, with their valuable skills are now worried about their future after Brexit. David Cameron, Theresa May and Michael Gove must make it clear what they propose to do for migrants. The alternative is a very real prospect of intercommunity friction, maybe even strife. Nationalistic sentiment has been unleashed. Firm action to maintain order must be taken now to stop the problem escalating. This would allay the fears of investors, already disheartened at Britain’s choice to leave the EU. To aid this, a ministry for migrant communities should be set up.

MAREK LASKIEWICZ

Leader

Polish Association in Great Britain

London

The European issue has been a festering boil for years and it needed to be lanced. David Cameron pledged to offer a referendum and he put it to Parliament where it was voted through overwhelmingly. It was Parliament that allowed this referendum.

SUZANNE WEBBER

Grateley, Hampshire

Article 50 is, in fact, about a changed trade relationship (“Article 50 ways to leave your lover”, July 2nd). The words “future relationship”, which includes a trade relationship, are there in the text. The central sentence of Article 50 is unambiguous, in spite of all the assertions to the contrary by those who wish it said something different. It does not say, as one European commissioner apparently maintains, that withdrawal must take place first and negotiations for a future relationship can begin only afterwards. Who would jump out of an aeroplane first and think about organising a parachute afterwards?

What it does say is that the arrangements for withdrawal must take into account the framework for the future relationship. That must therefore be decided first. This is standard procedure in cases of divorce. You cannot get divorced first and think about arrangements for the future (children, family home, etc) either separately or afterwards.

DAVID PUGSLEY

Cullompton, Devon



Your analysis is one-sided. The EU has many failures. The UK has no need to be linked to the economic models of Italy, France, Spain, Portugal and Greece. The British economy has the capability to thrive. Britain can and will trade with the rest of the world and with the EU. Not being shackled to second-rate bureaucrats in Brussels will be a massive boost in itself.

London is the only truly global city on the planet. Anyone who thinks it can be replaced by Paris or Frankfurt is either delusional or naive.

MARUF H. KHAN-NOORPURI

Dhaka, Bangladesh

The prediction by market pundits that Britain would Remain shows the perils of forecasting and reminds me of the adage: those who have knowledge don’t predict and those who predict don’t have knowledge.

VARAD SESHADRI

Sunnyvale, California

Nassim Nicholas Taleb has put it best: “When people vote the way of the intellectual-yet-idiot elite, it is ‘democracy’. Otherwise it is misguided, irrational, swayed by populism and a lack of education.”

ANAND PANDYA

Mumbai



A new entry for the Oxford English Dictionary:

Plebicide n. the self-inflicted ruin of a nation’s prospects or interests via a reckless act of direct democracy.

BRUCE STEEDMAN

St Helier, Jersey





Briefing




America’s forests: Ravaged woodlands





America’s forests

Ravaged woodlands

Stricken trees provide clues about how America will adapt to global warming—but little hope that it can be averted

Jul 9th 2016 | THE CASCADES, OREGON AND SIERRA NEVADA, CALIFORNIA | From the print edition



IT WAS the dead animals his team found upsetting, says Steve Lydick, surveying, from a high ridge in the western Cascade range, the burnt, blackened valley below. Dotted with charred boles, like used matchsticks protruding from the cracked, depleted soil, its sides drop to a stream from which the Stouts Creek fire, which consumed 25,000 acres of mixed conifer forest in southern Oregon last August, took its name. As the inferno roared through the valley, coyotes, bears, deer and rodents of all kinds rushed for the water. It fell to Mr Lydick’s colleagues in the Bureau of Land Management, a federal agency that manages almost a quarter of a billion acres in America’s 12 western states, to dispose of their remains. “Some found it pretty distressing,” he says.

It is a grisly image: ash-black water running through singed carcasses. It also seems paradoxically suggestive of how much harder it is to be moved, in any comparable way, by the vaster devastation taking place in America’s forests, owing to fire, pestilence and drought. All are indicators of a warming climate, to which decades of human intervention have made the forests—the fourth most expansive of any country—especially susceptible. These blights are therefore growing, especially in the semi-arid West.

Among the biggest tracts of public land in America, the western forests have for over a century inspired conflict between ranchers and rangers; loggers and greens; the federal government and some of those who hate it most. As a result they have helped shaped America’s environmental politics. Hence Barack Obama chose Yosemite National Park, in California, to issue his latest exhortation against climate change last month.

A heavenly place, symbolic of the country (“It’s almost like the spirit of America itself is right here,” the president enthused), Yosemite has all three problems; in 2013 it was scorched by California’s third-biggest wildfire ever, which consumed over a quarter of a million acres in all. Politicised, documented and culturally sensitive, the ravaging of America’s forests is an important gauge of man’s ability to mitigate and adapt to the warming he has caused.



The scale of the tree loss is staggering. Last year over 10m of America’s 766m acres of forest were consumed by wildfires, sparked by lawn mowers, campers or lightning (see chart). This was the biggest area burned since 1960, when records began, despite a firefighting effort that involved over 30,000 people and cost the federal government over $2 billion.

This year’s fire season was expected to be less severe, winter rain and snow having taken the edge off a four-year drought in California and Oregon that had turned their woods to tinder. Yet it is running at par with the average of the past ten years, which include the five worst years on record. In the year to July 1st, 2.1m acres of America were razed by nearly 26,000 fires; 19 large ones are currently blazing, mainly in the West (see map).



The growth of wildfires is a worldwide problem, with even bigger burns elsewhere. Siberia, Tasmania, Canada and Indonesia have seen record-breaking fires in recent years. According to Greenpeace, fire consumed over 7m acres of Russian forest in the year to May 23rd (the Kremlin offers much lower figures). The area of Canadian forest burning each year has roughly doubled since the 1970s; a wildfire near Fort McMurray, in Alberta, which started in May, has turned 1.5m acres of forest and 2,400 buildings to ash. Now heading north through Saskatchewan, the fire is reckoned to be Canada’s costliest natural disaster.

The devastation wreaked in American forests by insects is less headline-grabbing, but ecologically as dramatic. Last month the United States Forest Service (USFS), another of the federal agencies that together manage nearly half the land in western states, said that, since October, it had recorded 26m trees killed by the mutually-reinforcing effects of bugs and drought in the southern part of California’s Sierra Nevada range alone. That suggested 66m trees had died there since 2010.

Such destruction, caused partly by warming, will itself cause more warming. Many American forests are growing denser, in part owing to a reduction in logging, which makes them a significant carbon sink. They suck in greenhouse gases equivalent to around 13% of what America emits by burning fossil fuels. Yet the USFS predicts that within a couple of decades, because of slowing growth and climate-related blights, the forests will become an emissions source. That would have a commensurate impact on the climate; it would also be grim for America, whose long disdain for one of its greatest bounties, the forests on which its economy was built, is belatedly yielding to smarter, more collaborative sorts of forest management.

In much of the West fire is an important part of the natural system. The trees have evolved with it; slice through a 2,000-year-old giant sequoia, if you must, in one of the scattered groves of the Sierra Nevada where the world’s biggest tree is found, and its stump-rings would show burn-marks every 10-35 years. At such intervals, wildfires expunge disease, remove leaf litter and thin the understorey, creating space for new growth. They also moderate their own system, by preventing a build-up of fuel that can turn a restorative scorching into an inferno. Many plants are adapted to survive and take advantage of frequent burns. The sequoia’s thick bark makes it almost fireproof; it releases its cones in response to the heat of a wildfire and without this it may not reproduce.

Much of the West is still parched. This is largely a result of the combined effects of La Niña—a cyclical series of weather events that produces drier conditions in the southern forests of the West—and man-made warming. Climate change is estimated to have made California’s drought 15-20% more severe; in Alaska, where the average winter temperature has risen by over 3°C in the past six decades—over twice the average for the rest of America—its impact is greater. By accelerating the melting of winter snow, for example, in Alaska and the mountains of the West—the Rockies, Cascades, Sierra Nevada—hotter temperatures have made the fire season longer. Since 1970 the average duration has increased from 50 to around 125 days; in Alaska, which had its second-biggest year for fires on record in 2015, some of last year’s blazes are still alight.

Mismanagement is also fuelling the flames. Ever since 3m acres of Idaho, Montana and Washington went up in smoke in 1910, the government has suppressed fire zealously. It was said that any new blaze must be extinguished by 10am the next day. This has stopped some sequoias from reproducing for decades. It also removed the self-moderating effect of frequent fire from a landscape prone to burn.

Logging, followed by dense modern tree-planting, reinforced the effect. Where most western woods were once dominated by well-spaced large trees, they are now a tangle of smaller specimens, fighting over too little water, atop rising mounds of brush. Guy Fawkes could not have arranged things better.

The fire-suppression effort is still zealous. It has to be, loose zoning laws having encouraged construction of many houses in the inferno zone. As a result the number of wildfires is falling: from 250,000 in 1981 to 68,000 last year. But when a fire gets going, it can easily turn catastrophic.

The Stouts Creek fire was started on a searing late-July day by a spark from a mower. Within minutes it entered the surrounding forest, where it vaulted the tangled understorey to the upper branches, becoming a high-severity crown fire—the sort that leaves little but dead animals behind. The heat of the blaze created its own weather system: an anvil-topped pyrocumulus cloud rode the flames, shooting incendiary bolts of lightning into the nearby forest. At its height the fire devoured 1,000 acres an hour; it burned for a month.

That was a modest blaze by recent standards: a proliferation of mega-fires, which consume over 100,000 acres, is another feature of the new fire regime. Over the past decade there have been on average 10 megafires a year. Last year there were 15, including one in the Sierra Nevada that consumed over 150,000 acres, turned the sky over the Central Valley brown and occupied 4,000 firefighters. The total cost of such a blaze, including lost timber and the effects of pollution, is huge. A decade-old study of three fires in San Diego County, California, put their cost at $2.45 billion.

On a clifftop in the Sierra National Forest, Ray Porter, a USFS ranger, surveys a canyon, containing 30,000 acres of Ponderosa pine forest, that narrowly escaped last year’s mega-fire. But it has not been spared.

Six months ago the canyon was green with streaks of rusty brown, denoting where ailing trees had succumbed to mountain bark beetles. A critter that feasts on the inner bark of conifers, it seeks out trees which, because drought-stressed, are losing their ability to repel pests. Having established a beachhead in one, the gregarious Coleoptera releases pheromones to attract a swarm of reinforcements, which usually kills the tree. There is now hardly a dot of green visible in the canyon: almost the entire forest appears dead and brown. “If this is not the worst outbreak in America,” says Mr Porter, “I’d hate to see worse.”

Beetlemania

It is unexceptional. Since the 1990s, when such die-offs became more frequent, 42m acres of North American pine forest are estimated to have succumbed to barkbeetles, and the blight is growing. Aerial surveys of the Sierra Nevada show telltale rusty streaks seeping north like poison. Even species rarely affected by beetles, such as whitebark pine, are dying.

In the boreal forest spruce-beetle populations are also rocketing; in the southern pinyon pine forests a hungry bug called pinyon ips, not formerly known to kill trees, is killing many. Though relatively unscathed by fire, America’s wetter eastern states, where over 80% of the precolonial forest grew, are also bug-riddled. The hemlock woolly adelgid is ravaging their hemlock forests; a southern pine beetle, migrating northward, has reached New York.

The reasons for the surging pestilence are much the same as those for mega-blazes. Warmer, drier weather, including milder, shorter winters, has caused an explosion in bug populations, as well as in the number of stressed trees they feast on. The tangled state of America’s woods is another pro-beetle development, though its effect is more marginal. Wherever beetle populations soar, primary forests, of which the West has most of America’s last examples, are also dying.

Both problems, fire and pests, are liable to get worse as the climate warms. The USFS expects the area of forest burned to double by the middle of the century. Even so, it predicts that beetles will often kill more trees in a given year than fire. Even if the climate were stable, this onslaught would make it hard for the forests to regenerate. Mega-fires destroy seed stocks and nutrients over a vast area; when a pine forest dies abruptly from pestilence, it is usually replaced by grasses and shrubs which, in the absence of a natural fire cycle, can stop trees growing.

Putting out fires

Mitigating those effects would require a massive intervention to clear dead trees and plant new ones, which is currently unthinkable. Last year the USFS spent more than half its budget on firefighting, to the detriment of its ongoing effort to thin some 80m acres of dangerously overgrown forest. By 2025, the service estimates that 67% of its budget will be consumed by fires.

Even if the lost forest were replanted much of it would fail: because species distribution is changing as temperatures rise. Broadly speaking, a warmer, drier climate should force trees uphill and to higher latitudes; the Ponderosa pine will climb from the montane to the subalpine zones, displacing or finding refuge among white firs and lodgepole pines. Anticipating this, foresters are replanting trees at the highest elevations of their range. The effect of fire and bug-death has, in this way, created opportunity for a massive experiment in tree migration and regrowth. But it may not be a predictable, or happy, transition.

Whether a species can migrate may depend as much on factors such as soil type, distance from a seed source, the pace at which it reaches reproductive maturity and the vulnerability of higher-elevation vegetation to infiltration as on temperature alone. The rate of warming will be even more important. It took the Ponderosa pine 11,000 years to migrate from New Mexico to Wyoming after the most recent Ice Age: it will not keep stride with rapid warming.

A study of USFS data suggests nearly 60% of tree species are experiencing range contraction at both their northern and southern boundaries. Only 20% are making the predicted northward shift. So forest ecosystems will not migrate wholesale—Birnam Wood-to-Dunsinane-style—but in disordered versions of their current states. Climate envelope modelling suggests high-elevation species, such as whitebark pine and Rocky Mountain fir, could be pushed to the brink.

The losses will be partially offset by new growth: America’s forests will be vast and productive for a long time yet. As its snows melt and permafrost thaws, the Arctic is getting greener, so Alaska should grow more and bigger trees. In the eastern states, where trees have been creeping back ever since the more fertile Midwest was opened to the plough in the mid-19th century, their recovery will continue. Overall, however, they will be younger and more fragile, a probable cause of warming, not a means to prevent it, and perhaps less extensive, especially out West. “I’m just upset my grandkids are not going to see what I saw: beautiful forests in the West,” says Mike Wheelock, a veteran woodsman with Republican bumper-stickers on his truck, whose company helped extinguish the Stouts Creek fire.

What could avert that decline? Plainly, nothing will, unless global warming is halted or slowed. Mr Obama said as much in his speech at Yosemite, in which he sought to channel the reverence many Americans feel for their national parks into concern for the climate that governs them: “Rising temperatures could mean no more glaciers at Glacier National Park.” To that end, he also invoked two architects of America’s publicly owned forests, Theodore Roosevelt, the founder of 150 of the 154 national forests, and his inspiration, John Muir: “We’ve got to summon that same vision for the future.”

Bug in the system

It is not hard to guess what Roosevelt would have done about carbon emissions. A believer in enterprise, and the government’s duty to regulate it, he would have taxed them: “In this great work [of environmental protection],” he declared in 1910, as the vast fires of that year were raging, “the national government must bear a most important part.” The fact that, a century later, America may elect as president a man who claims to believe global warming is a hoax invented by the Chinese looks like a setback not merely for democracy, but for human evolution. Foiled by Donald Trump’s cynical party, Mr Obama has done less to cut emissions than he would have liked. Yet, closer to the woods, there is progress.

After decades of conflict—which peaked in the 1990s, when a row between loggers and greens over an endangered owl led to violence, a shutdown in logging across the West and the near-collapse of the USFS—many former foes now collaborate to manage forests better. Since 2009, when Congress passed legislation to encourage such partnerships, over a score have been formed between businessmen, greens, politicians and federal agencies to oversee thousands of acres of public forests. One result has been a hardening acceptance of the need to thin them, including by controlled burning.

Separately, over the past 15 years or so, similar partnerships have been formed in many cities to improve management of their forested watersheds. The best, for example in Denver, Flagstaff and Santa Fe, include provisions for downstream water-users to help pay for forest management. “It turns out that bringing people together to reach a consensus on what is to be done to manage a landscape really works,” says Tom Tidwell, chief of the USFS.

The watershed of Ashland, a former mill-town in southern Oregon, which was in the thick of the owl crisis, provides a good illustration. “For two decades we couldn’t move in these forests without being sued,” says Donna Mickley, the local USFS ranger. The result, in 2010, was a forest management agreement between the forest service, the city government and two NGOs, the Nature Conservancy and Lomakatsi Restoration Project.

This looks like a watershed for the Ashland watershed. The foresters and greens work together to survey, thin and improve the forest; the city has introduced a water tax—equivalent to $1.50 on each household bill—to help pay for the work. Locally based, broadly supported and businesslike, the scheme provides a model for managing climate change that is well-suited to American pragmatism and civic traditions.

A big question is whether such progress can help build a consensus for more serious emissions-cutting. Bipartisan support for the new forest collaborations is encouraging. “It doesn’t seem to make a difference what party the local official is from,” says Mr Tidwell. Yet there is a long way to go. Indeed, the lack of much public disquiet over the arboreal havoc out West is striking.

“The American, the daily witness of such wonders, does not see anything astonishing in all this,” wrote Alexis de Tocqueville, marvelling at the new continent’s vast forests and their rapid clearance. “This incredible destruction, this even more surprising growth, seem to him the usual progress of things in the world.” That was in 1831; it is largely true today.





United States




Warfare: The queen and her drones

Stem-cell clinics: A dish called hope

Competitive eating: Glorious gluttony

Education: O-levels

Religious-liberty laws: Left, right

Lexington: Ride ’em, cowboy!





Warfare

The queen and her drones

Barack Obama hopes to leave behind settled rules on when drones can be used

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



ON January 23rd 2009, just three days after his inauguration, President Barack Obama authorised his first drone strikes. The targets were two houses in the Waziristan region of Pakistan, a semi-autonomous area covered by jagged mountains. The first drone dropped a missile on top of one of the homes, searing a hole through the roof and killing five suspected al-Qaeda militants. According to the Bureau of Investigative Journalism, a British-based news outlet that compiles reports on drone strikes, the second hit the wrong target, killing at least five civilians.

America’s armed forces began using drones away from battlefields in 2002, under George W. Bush. After taking office Mr Obama scaled up the programme, authorising over 470 drone strikes in Pakistan, Yemen, Libya and Somalia. Though journalists and non-governmental organisations reported on the strikes, for years Mr Obama declined to recognise that the military was using armed drones outside Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, which are considered areas of “active hostilities”. “It was the worst-kept secret in the world,” says Peter Bergen of the New America Foundation, a think-tank. It was not until 2012 that Mr Obama acknowledged, on a social network, that this was happening.

On July 1st Mr Obama took another step towards transparency by releasing the administration’s estimate of how many “non-combatants” have been killed in drone strikes outside war zones. According to a short document released by the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), between 2,372 and 2,581 combatants and between 64 and 116 non-combatants were killed in such strikes between Mr Obama’s inauguration in 2009 and the end of 2015. These numbers are considerably lower than those compiled by other organisations. The DNI document attempted to explain the gap, stating that, “the government uses post-strike methodologies that have been refined and honed over the years and uses information that is generally unavailable to non-governmental organisations.” “So what they’re saying is, ‘We have more information, we can’t tell you about it, just trust us’,” says Hina Shamsi of the American Civil Liberties Union.

Along with this tally, Mr Obama issued an executive order requiring future administrations to make such declarations annually. The president wants to leave behind a settled body of laws and norms governing areas such as surveillance and warfare, where technology has made things possible that his predecessors could not do. He is doing so quietly: July 1st was the Friday of the Independence Day weekend, when few Americans had their minds on drone policy. “Short of putting it out on Christmas Day, it’s hard to think of a day when it would get more buried,” says Mr Bergen.

Their precision compared with manned air strikes is still hotly contested, but the Obama administration’s drone strikes have become more accurate over time. According to the New America Foundation’s calculations, in 2009 drone strikes in Pakistan killed 385 militants and 63 civilians. Since 2013, when Mr Obama published guidance requiring that drone pilots have “near certainty” that non-combatants will not be harmed before firing, drone strikes in Pakistan have killed 352 militants and only six civilians. Although the new guidelines probably played a role in bringing down the non-combatant death-count, technology helped too (see chart). Newer drone models, such as the MQ-9 Reaper, can kill suspected terrorists without harming their friends or family in the next room.



But even if drones were infallible, the intelligence they use to identify targets sometimes falls short. In 2012, 68-year-old Mamana Bibi was wandering through an open field in Pakistan with her young granddaughter when she was killed by a drone strike that seemed to be aimed directly at her. The American government never acknowledged the attack. A year later, a drone mistakenly killed 13 civilians attending a wedding in Yemen. Most recently, an American drone inadvertently killed Warren Weinstein and Giovanni Lo Porto, development workers from America and Italy, respectively. The pair had been kidnapped by al-Qaeda and were being held in a compound on the border of Afghanistan and Pakistan when a drone dropped a bomb on them in January 2015.

Lawfare

Beyond expressing horror at such fatal mistakes, plenty of lawyers doubt the legality of the drone programme. America is officially engaged in armed conflict with al-Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan and with IS in Iraq and Syria. In all other countries it is meant to abide by peacetime laws, killing only when immediately necessary to save a life. In Pakistan, Yemen, Libya and Somalia, however, the armed forces seem to be operating according to the more permissive laws of armed conflict, where the requirements for lethal force are lower. Hostilities between a country and a non-state actor, such as the Taliban or IS, are considered armed conflict only when violence passes a specific threshold and the armed group is organised enough to adhere to the laws of war.

Mr Obama’s advisers have done little to assuage such misgivings. In 2012 John Brennan, who was then a counter-terrorism adviser at the White House, stated: “As a matter of international law, the United States is in an armed conflict with al-Qaeda, the Taliban and associated forces, in response to the 9/11 attacks, and we may also use force consistent with our inherent right of national self-defence.” But some contend that the administration has not proved that its actions outside of Afghanistan, Syria and Iraq pass the objective international law requirements to be considered “armed conflicts” where the laws of war are applicable.

“Drones have enabled the US to convert the whole world into a war zone, stretching the laws of war far more than they’re meant to be stretched,” argues Elizabeth Beavers of Amnesty International, a pressure group. Mary Ellen O’Connell, of the University of Notre Dame Law School, says that Mr Obama’s use of drones will make it harder for him to criticise other countries for spurning international norms. “He has made international law weaker and easier for other countries to violate.” Considering 19 countries are estimated to possess armed drones, including Iraq and Iran, some clearer rules and norms about their use are overdue.





Stem-cell clinics

A dish called hope

The flourishing, unregulated industry in expensive, experimental treatments

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THE patient testimonials sound incredible: a mother with a severely autistic child, a young man struggling to live with cystic fibrosis and a disabled patient with multiple sclerosis. All claim healing through the power of stem-cell therapies, which are sometimes described in adverts as “miraculous”. A paper published on June 30th by Paul Knoepfler of UC Davis and Leigh Turner of the University of Minnesota in Cell Stem Cell found about 350 businesses in America selling stem-cell therapies for a wide range of ailments, many more than previously thought. This has reignited a long-simmering debate about the oversight of stem-cell clinics or, rather, the lack of it.

In one corner are patients, injured American football players and proponents of rugged individualism. These include Rick Perry, a former governor of Texas, who received them for a back injury. In the other corner is the drug regulator, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which put so much heat on the Texas clinic that treated Mr Perry, Celltex, that it moved to Mexico. Also in the FDA’s corner are a large number of scientists and doctors, who argue that clinical trials are the only standard that allows putative medicines to be distinguished from outright quackery.

Stem-cell clinics mostly use adult stem cells from the patients themselves (for example, from fat tissue), grown in a dish and then reinjected. These are different from embryonic stem cells and they do not require the destruction of an embryo. However, some companies do advertise placental and amniotic stem cells. The sources of such cells are unknown.

The promise is real enough. For example, earlier this year a study showed that patients with end-stage heart failure fared far better when given stem cells extracted from their own bone marrow. Stem cells seem to home in on damaged or inflamed tissues and play a variety of roles in repairing them. However, some of the treatments being sold promise to help neurodegenerative diseases for which no cell therapy has yet proved effective.

Patients have been lining up to receive them, and in some instances paying tens of thousands of dollars. The clinics maintain that what they are doing is safe, though without proper oversight it is hard to know if this is true. Problems have been known to crop up. One clinical trial which injected olfactory stem cells into a woman with paralysis found that, eight years after her unsuccessful treatment, she had developed growths of nasal tissue on her spine. There have been reports of complications, and even a few lawsuits. Another concern is that desperate patients are simply throwing away their money.

The discovery of a flourishing industry in America will put pressure on the FDA to resolve the impasse over oversight. At the heart of the debate is whether stem cells are biological drugs, and thus regulated by the FDA, or whether they are tissue transplants which are not (and do not require clinical trials). Although they would seem to be tissue transplants, to qualify as such stem cells need to be “minimally” manipulated and also carry out the same functions in the treated tissue as they do in the tissue from which they were extracted.

The FDA is preparing to pounce. In October it issued draft guidelines. It says most of the stem cells involved will require rigorous approval before they can be used in patients. There will be a hearing on the guidelines in September. This is likely to become a media circus, with patient advocates likely to attend and extol the benefits of the treatments they received.

It is this sort of feeling that is driving the REGROW Act, an attempt by lawmakers to force the FDA to do away with the need for proper clinical trials for stem cells. This would create a fast-track system, similar to the one already in place in Japan, which grants conditional approval to proposed treatments with few data on safety or efficacy. The Alliance for Regenerative Medicine, a lobby group, opposes the act, saying that scientific trials are needed to ensure safety. The FDA needs to tread carefully, though: too much pressure on these clinics will not cure the problem, but merely drive it back over the border.





Competitive eating

Glorious gluttony

A tale of inexorable progress

Jul 9th 2016 | CONEY ISLAND, BROOKLYN | From the print edition



A CENTURY ago, on the corner of Surf and Stillwell Avenues outside Nathan’s Famous hot-dog stall, four immigrants challenged each other to a hot-dog-eating contest to prove who was the most patriotic. Jim Mullen, from Ireland, gulped down 13 dogs and buns in 12 minutes. This legend was undoubtedly made up by some savvy publicist, but Coney Island’s annual eating contest has become legendary. Every July 4th, 40,000 show up in person and more than 1m tune in on ESPN, the sports cable channel, to watch men and women defy digestive limits.

Last year Joey “Jaws” Chestnut, an eight-time champion, was knocked off the top of the food chain by Matt “Megatoad” Stonie. The boisterous crowd, many wearing foam hot-dog hats and waving American flags, chanted “Brooklyn!” and “USA!” as they watched him attempt to take back the coveted mustard belt. George Shea, the event’s loquacious master of ceremonies and head of Major League Eating, explained that this was more than sport. “Competitive eating”, he said, “is the battleground upon which God and Lucifer wage war for men’s souls.”

Competitive eating began when America became more settled and more successful. It became a way of celebrating a good harvest or a bumper catch at sea. Town fairs and church picnics held pie-eating contests (no hands allowed). In coastal areas, crawfish and oyster-eating competitions were more common. Speed-eating became as American as baseball.

Mr Shea and his brother Richard operate more than 80 contests around the world, from hard-boiled eggs and deep-fried asparagus to calamari and Twinkies. They have sponsors like 7-Eleven and (inevitably) Pepto-Bismol; among their national partners is Hooters, home of the chicken-wing contest. Spoilsport scholars decry speed-eating as a self-destructive form of behaviour. But it is wildly popular.



No longer do Nathan’s employees cajole portly passers-by to enter the contest. Today, eaters must qualify to take part. Almost all are slim and fit. Juan “More Bite” Rodriguez is a personal trainer. Eric “Badlands” Booker, the largest competitor at 365lb(166kg), performs better when he loses weight. Most consider themselves athletes and train accordingly. Mr Chestnut runs and lifts weights, besides drinking a gallon of water every day to expand his stomach. Mr Stonie, meanwhile, studies nutrition to understand better how his body works. A “reversal of fortune”, ie, regurgitation, means disqualification.

Nearly all competitors use a version of the techniques pioneered by Takeru Kobayashi, a Japanese hot-dog guzzler. He arrived on Coney Island in 2001, shattering all records. He ate 50 dogs and buns. The year before, the winner ate a paltry 25 (see chart). Mr Kobayashi’s method was to break the hot dogs in two and stuff them in his mouth with one hand, while his other hand dunked the bun in water to make it easier to swallow. This, coupled with shaking and gyrating, helped a 112lb man consume nearly 8lb of bread and sausage.

Mr Chestnut says that, like any ageing athlete, he has had to change how he trains. The changes paid off. He took back the mustard belt by wolfing down 70 dogs and buns in ten minutes. Mr Shea summed up his achievement thus: “He is American exceptionalism. He is America itself.”





Education

O-levels

A visit from Michelle Obama seems to improve test scores

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



TEENAGE girls are hard to impress. Unless you are Michelle Obama, that is. In 2009, on her first foreign trip as First Lady, Mrs Obama visited Elizabeth Garrett Anderson School, a London state (or public) school for girls, about three-quarters of whom are eligible for free school meals. She told a star-struck assembly that she also came from humble origins, explaining how she worked her way from a poor part of Chicago to the Ivy League, a top law firm and (with help from Barack) the White House. “I’m standing here…because of education,” Mrs Obama said. “I thought being smart was cooler than anything in the world.” And unlike many luminaries asked to rouse pupils, the First Lady kept in touch. Mrs Obama invited the girls to see her again in 2011 when she visited Oxford University. There, she told pupils: “All of us believe that you belong here.” One year later a dozen pupils flew over to the White House.

Her message seems to have worked. In a paper published on July 1st, Simon Burgess, an economist at the University of Bristol, analysed the school’s exam results in the years after Mrs Obama’s visits. The 15- or 16-year-olds sitting their GCSEs did much better than girls in the previous year. From 2011 to 2012, for example, the boost was equivalent to each pupil moving from eight C to eight A grades. Those improvements were much bigger than the average increases in performance across London state schools, suggesting that the effects were specific to Elizabeth Garrett Anderson.

It is impossible to prove that Mrs Obama caused the improvement in results. The class of 2012 may have been unusually bright. There may have been a change of teachers. Perhaps it was a fluke. But Mr Burgess thinks not. After controlling for such possibilities and looking at the size of the increase, he concludes: “[The effect] was extremely unlikely to have been generated just by chance.”

Assuming the First Lady did boost results, this could have broader implications for education. The importance of both parents’ and children’s expectations is well established: see the relative success of Asian-American pupils, or Britons of Indian descent. Less understood is how aspirations can be fostered. One approach has been to offer incentives for pupils to work harder and for parents to check on their children. But the work of Roland Fryer, an economist at Harvard University, has found that paying parents and pupils in return for better grades does not always lead to improved results.

A newer set of programmes in American schools, however, tries to foster “intrinsic motivation”, which is more durable. One Chicago scheme, Becoming A Man, involves counselling for troublesome teenage boys in “social-cognitive skills” such as self-control. A recent study found that it boosted school attendance and cut crime. And while the message is important, so too is the messenger. Mrs Obama is not only famous, but also carries legitimacy. As one pupil of Elizabeth Garrett Anderson told the Guardian back in 2011, “She made it. And so can we. That’s not just something we’ve heard now. We really actually felt it.”





Religious-liberty laws

Left, right

Thirty years ago, progressives embraced religious exemptions. No longer

Jul 9th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

Progressive protester

ONE day after releasing their final rulings of the term, the justices of the Supreme Court returned for an encore on June 28th. The occasion was an event that occurs roughly 7,000 times each year and normally turns few heads: a refusal to hear a case. But in the matter of Stormans v Wiesman, the justices’ “no thanks” was accompanied by a rare and sharp dissent from the court’s three most conservative members. Writing for John Roberts (the chief justice) and Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito warned that the denial was “ominous”. If the court’s refusal to take up Stormans “is a sign of how religious liberty claims will be treated in the years ahead,” Mr Alito wrote, “those who value religious freedom have cause for great concern.”

The plaintiffs in Stormans are the devout Christian owners of Ralph’s Thriftway, a grocery and pharmacy in Olympia, Washington. The Stormans family, along with two other pharmacists, brought a lawsuit in 2007 when Washington beefed up its rule requiring pharmacies to fulfil prescriptions for medications approved by the Food and Drug Administration. They claim their rights to free exercise of religion under the First Amendment are violated by a new regulation barring pharmacies from “refus[ing] to deliver a drug or device to a patient because its owner objects to delivery on religious, moral, or other personal grounds.” Most states allow pharmacies to refer women to a nearby drug store where they can get such prescriptions, the plaintiffs pointed out, and Washington could do the same.

In 2012 a federal district court agreed with the Stormans, noting that “the rules exempt pharmacies and pharmacists from stocking and delivering lawfully prescribed drugs for an almost unlimited variety of secular reasons” but withhold exemptions only “for reasons of conscience”. As a result, “the onus of the rules falls almost exclusively on religious objectors”, forcing them “to choose between their religious beliefs and their livelihood.”

In its review of this ruling in 2015, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals roundly disagreed. The rules, it found, “do not create a regime of unfettered discretion that would permit discriminatory treatment of...religiously motivated conduct.” With emergency contraception, time is of the essence, and the state may require all pharmacies to supply it. Besides, the rule applies to pharmacies rather than pharmacists; if a pharmacist cannot, in conscience, supply the pills, a colleague may do so.

Reaction to the Supreme Court’s decision to let this ruling stand was swift: liberals cheered, the right jeered. “When a woman walks into a pharmacy,” a lawyer from the American Civil Liberties Union said, “she should not fear being turned away because of the religious beliefs of the owner.” A writer in the American Conservative, a magazine, saw it differently: the justices had decided that “Christians can no longer be pharmacists,” he wrote.

This stark left-right divide is familiar from recent court battles over the contraceptive care provisions of the Affordable Care Act. In 2014, in Burwell v Hobby Lobby Stores, the Supreme Court split along ideological lines when it upheld the right of some companies to refuse to supply their employees with birth control for religious reasons. But it was not always thus. In the Warren and Burger courts of the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, religious accommodation was a liberal tenet. In a case in 1963 Adell Sherbert, a Seventh-Day Adventist, lost her job in a textile mill because she refused to work on Saturday. When Ms Sherbert was denied unemployment compensation she sued. The Supreme Court found that South Carolina had interfered with her religious liberty while lacking a compelling reason for doing so. Under this formulation, known as the “Sherbert test”, the court went on to vindicate Amish and Jehovah’s Witness litigants, decisions that liberals praised as much-needed judicial protection of vulnerable religious minorities.

The story took a different turn in 1990, when Antonin Scalia sharply reduced the protections of the free-exercise clause. In Employment Division v Smith, two members of a Native-American church were told they had no First Amendment right to unemployment compensation after being fired for ingesting peyote as part of their religious observance. When someone’s ability to exercise his religion takes a hit from a “generally applicable and otherwise valid” law like a narcotics statute, the court held, that’s tough luck.

The Smith decision was roundly condemned, leading Congress overwhelmingly to adopt the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) in 1993. This restored the principle that the government may not infringe on a right unless it has an exceptionally good reason for doing so and uses a narrowly tailored means to accomplish its goal. The Supreme Court subsequently held this applied only to federal, not state, laws. So while RFRA served as the legal basis for the conservative challenges to Obamacare, it did not provide a safe harbour for the Christian pharmacists in Washington. Instead, the Stormans tried their hand at an ill-fated constitutional claim.

Douglas Laycock, a law professor at the University of Virginia, thinks Justices Elena Kagan and Stephen Breyer (“and maybe all of them”) might have voted to grant Stormans had the court been at full strength. But with only eight sitting justices, he says, there may have been “reluctance to take on a fundamental issue about the free-exercise clause.” Mr Laycock says that Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v Hialeah, a case from 1993 in which the Court reprimanded a Florida town for targeting animal sacrifice in Santería (while permitting the killing of animals for almost any other reason), shows that Smith did not gut the free-exercise clause. The facts leading up to the change in pharmacy rules in Washington, he asserts, “were as bad as Lukumi”. The rule was clearly aimed, he says, to stick it to religiously observant pharmacists.

Nelson Tebbe, a professor at Brooklyn Law School, disagrees. The “court was wise to pass Stormans over,” he said. The facts are “very messy” and do not make the case a “perfect vehicle” for clarifying the scope of a fundamental right.

Despite that, the fate of the case sheds a clear light on the transformed political landscape of religious liberty in America. With Christian evangelicals and Catholics opposed to abortion, contraception and gay rights now headlining religious-freedom cases, and tiny religious minorities off centre-stage, liberals regard religious accommodations with increasing suspicion. Conservatives are their new champions.





Lexington

Ride ’em, cowboy!

The bruising sport of rodeo holds lessons for America’s conservatives

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



TO THE crowds at the Cody Stampede—a four-day rodeo that draws thousands to Wyoming over the Independence Day weekend—the bull-rider Bryce Barrios is just a name among many, drawing cheers with a confident, prizewinning ride on a bucking, wheeling animal weighing three-quarters of a ton. Among fellow bull-riders Mr Barrios, a 21-year-old Texan who looks like a schoolboy once he doffs his helmet and armoured vest, means a bit more. He was named national Rookie of the Year in 2015: a hint that, just maybe, he will leave the pack of perhaps 600 cowboys who eke out a living on the circuit into the world of champions competing for six-figure purses.

To devotees of rodeo, young cowboys like Mr Barrios mean something more precious. They see them as guardians of the gritty-yet-chivalrous values of an older America. Among those waiting in the earth-floored, dung-scented arena to greet the bull-riders on July 3rd is Senator John Barrasso of Wyoming, a wiry, genial Republican who as an orthopaedic surgeon spent years patching up rodeo-battered cowboys. “They’re young, they consider themselves bulletproof,” explains Dr Barrasso fondly. He recalls a popular belt buckle that says: “Wyoming Is What America Was”. In the senator’s telling, that America was built on “independence, resilience and self-reliance.”

Mr Barrios politely tells the senator that this was his second Wyoming rodeo of the day, and that he and two colleagues are now driving eight hours to Denver, there to catch a flight to a contest in Arizona (not all bull-riders are cautious drivers, he admits). Cody is a profitable stop: second place earns Mr Barrios $6,674.30 in prize money. Brought up on a ranch, he missed a season after breaking his leg at 18. All around him men sport alarming splints and braces, strapped to elbows and knees. Rodeo doctors sometimes meet competitors asking for dislocated shoulders to be popped back in for the second time that day. Medical notes are littered with the acronym AMA, as cowboys head to the next event Against Medical Advice.

As rodeo announcer, Boyd Polhamus guides the Cody Stampede on horseback from the arena floor. Interviewed between shows, he says the sport “takes us back to the values we had as a nation in 1880.” Mr Polhamus paints a romantic portrait of a West “that believed a handshake was as good as a contract, when faith was practised openly.” The announcer is proud that rodeo scorns the all-shall-have-prizes culture: many competitors are thrown off almost at once, or fail to lasso their steer. “If they win, they’ve earned it,” he rumbles.

On duty as Miss Rodeo America, Katherine Merck rides round the arena in sequinned white boots, an embroidered blue shirt and red cowboy hat. But she must also work, herding steers after roping events. She thinks it matters that cowboys pay their own entry fees for each event ($250 is typical) and mostly walk away with nothing: it makes for “less of an entitlement culture.”

Elsewhere in this election season, nostalgia for a simpler America has led to resentful politics, and charges that someone has stolen the country’s greatness. In contrast, rodeo folk sound both exceedingly conservative and pretty upbeat about the future. It probably helps that partisan confrontations hardly trouble such one-party towns as Cody (in the 2012 presidential elections the county of which Cody is the seat gave Mitt Romney, the Republican, 76.4% of the vote). Only faint echoes of divisive subjects intrude on the holiday weekend. Among the celebratory parade floats is one that not only salutes the armed forces but—startlingly—recreates a military funeral, complete with a flag-draped coffin, mourning comrades and an honour guard who fire loud funeral volleys as they trundle down Cody’s main street.

Most important, rodeo is a tradition that has adapted to survive. Go back a generation or two, and competitors were typically ranchers’ children or hired hands. Now many come up through high school and college rodeo teams, with eyes not just on glory but on scholarships awarded to rodeo-athletes who may never work on a farm (Miss Rodeo America is at law school). The industry is “far more aware” of animal welfare, with rules requiring a veterinarian at every professional rodeo, says Del Nose, a former champion and rodeo coach at Northwest College, near Cody. With a good roping horse now costing $50,000-60,000, rodeo cowboys have ever more reason to care for animals, adds Mr Nose’s wife and business partner, Becky.

Bred to buck

By custom, Cody’s holiday parades are watched by Wyoming grandees from the roof of the Irma Hotel, built by William “Buffalo Bill” Cody, the scout, soldier and impresario. This year the swells on the Irma include former Vice-President Dick Cheney, once a congressman for Wyoming. His 16-year-old granddaughter competes in rodeo barrel races, a timed horseback charge around three oil drums. Mr Cheney approves of rodeo culture, which teaches his granddaughter to be responsible and look after animals, and to withstand “intense” competition. “I like the people she hangs out with,” he says.

The competition is growing more intense. Another bigwig on the Irma roof is Jerry Nelson, an oil man with a sideline in breeding champion horses and bulls for professional rodeos. Decades ago broncs might be saddle-horses that proved too mean to ride. Now animals are bred to buck. Mr Nelson has even cloned horses, though he murmurs: “I’m not sure what God makes of that.” The result is that rather than rodeo dumbing-down to stay popular, animals are harder to ride each year.

The future is not cloudless. “I see ticket sales going up, but the number of events going down,” says Mr Nelson. Smaller events are especially vulnerable. But by being willing to change and focusing on what really matters, an American tradition is surviving. There is a lesson there for conservatives everywhere.





The Americas




Violence in Rio: A sporting chance of safety

Education protest in Mexico: A battle to feed young minds

Argentina’s economy: The cost of truth

Bello: No Brussels here





Violence in Rio

A sporting chance of safety

Brazil’s carnival city may keep the lid on crime during the Olympics, but the longer term looks murkier

Jul 9th 2016 | RIO DE JANEIRO | From the print edition



THREE little girls cower, covering their ears. A mother urges calm, as shots ring out. The images were captured by mobile phone on July 4th from a cable car hoisted above Complexo do Alemão, one of Rio de Janeiro’s notorious favelas (shantytowns), and shared on social media. They epitomise worries about lawlessness plaguing a city which, in less than a month, will host South America’s first Olympics.

It was not an isolated incident. The next day a policeman was killed in a shootout with drug gangs, the 56th officer to die this year in Rio de Janeiro state. Muggings are up. In the past week armed thugs carried out four arrastões (mass hold-ups) in the city. Thieves grabbed a lorry full of kit belonging to German TV networks.

In a televised interview with CNN the mayor, Eduardo Paes, slammed the state government—long run by his own centrist Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB)—for doing a “terrible, horrible job” on security (a task which falls to states, not federal authorities). Cops fed up with being paid in arrears greet arrivals at Rio’s international airport with a banner in English that reads: “Welcome to Hell”.

Not without cause, crime has always been as closely associated with this beautiful, hedonistic city as carnivals and Copacabana beach. Rio is by far the most violent place ever to put on the Olympics—though it is also worth recalling that Brazil is the first host country that is neither rich nor autocratic (see chart 1). The hope was that the authorities would use the run-up to the games to make it safer.



They have done so, up to a point. Since the lawless 1990s, crime has fallen across southern Brazil. Thank rising prosperity, better policing and demography, with fewer young men prone to mischief. (A crime wave in the poor north-east has nudged the national murder rate up slightly.) Rio sees half as many violent deaths today as it did while vying for the Olympics in 2007-09 (see chart 2). But since 2012 progress has stalled, and may go into reverse.



Pundits list several factors. After early success in 2008-12, Rio’s “pacification” policy—evicting gang leaders from favelas with heavily armed troops, then creating community-based policing units—has flagged. The policy’s second leg, involving better schools, sanitation and medical care, rarely met expectations. Denizens of the affected areas mistrust the police, who are responsible for a fifth of violent deaths in the state. A report from Human Rights Watch, an advocacy group, says some of these killings resemble executions.

Some candidates in the state elections of 2014 sensed pacification fatigue and denounced the policy. They lost to Luiz Pezão of the PMDB, which pioneered it. But signs of the policy losing public support have tempted gangs into resuming violence so as to destabilise pacified areas and discredit the whole approach, notes Claudio Ferraz of Rio’s Catholic University.

Then comes Brazil’s deep recession. With incomes pinched, more Brazilians have turned to crime. As tax revenues collapsed and the oil price depressed royalties, Rio had less money to react. To keep order in vulnerable favelas, resources have had to be shunted from better-off areas in the South Zone, home to Rio’s famous beaches and most of its hotels. On July 3rd the Botafogo neighbourhood saw a rare case of an arrastão in the South Zone.

As the Olympics’ main organiser, Mr Paes insists that visitors need not fear. The federal government is giving the state 2.9 billion reais ($860m) in emergency help with security. That should cover police wages for the time being. Some 27,000 soldiers and national guardsmen will help keep order. A smaller deployment during Rio’s Pan American games in July 2007 coincided with a dip in crime. The latest spike in robberies may be criminals lining their pockets before an August lull. Mauro Osorio, who runs the Rio Observatory at UFRJ, a university, adds that gangs and police have tended to keep a truce during big events (that may be why the German TV equipment was promptly recovered).

What happens afterwards is less clear. Pacification could yet work, but it is costly. Francisco Dornelles, the acting governor since Mr Pezão was diagnosed with cancer in March, lacks money and legitimacy. Federal aid will barely dent this year’s state budget deficit, projected at 19 billion reais. Police frustration could boil over—into what, no one knows—especially if pay stops again. Meanwhile, recession goes on biting. With luck, a return to the rampant lawlessness of old can be avoided. But such a nightmare is not inconceivable.





Education protest in Mexico

A battle to feed young minds

Why teachers are so disobedient

Jul 9th 2016 | MEXICO CITY | From the print edition

PEOPLE in one of Mexico’s poorest states breathed a sigh of relief when over 170 tonnes of food were flown in at the start of July to restock local shops. The scarcities in Oaxaca were not caused by a natural disaster or a besieging foreign power. They followed a blockade by teachers, indignant over education reforms, who have once again shown how effectively they can paralyse commerce. In between bursts of lethal clumsiness, the authorities have mostly left the protesting pedagogues free to man their barricades.

All this causes frustration that goes beyond the shoppers of Oaxaca. Across the country, many Mexicans see fixing education as the most important of 11 structural reforms launched by the president, Enrique Peña Nieto. The need to shake up the system is widely accepted. In many schools, unions are in charge of recruiting, teaching jobs are more or less hereditary and bad teachers are almost impossible to sack. Small wonder some 55% of Mexican 15-year-olds lack basic proficiency in mathematics, according to the 2012 tests of the Programme for International Student Assessment. The mean for the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries, is 23%.

But Mexico’s militant union, the National Co-ordinator of Education Workers (CNTE), objects in particular to having a unitary test for all teachers. Its power base is in four poorish states, including Oaxaca; it says a country-wide exam is unfair on those who teach in demanding places. Its own influence is at stake. Under the terms of the reform, many of its activists (not all of them are really teachers) would lose their professional status. It has been railing against change since 2013, and sealing off highways is a well-practised tactic.

This time, it all turned uglier than usual. In early June two CNTE leaders were arrested on charges of money-laundering and aggravated robbery respectively. Union members cried foul and protests intensified. On June 19th police challenged a barricade outside the town of Nochixtlán in north-west Oaxaca; in the resulting clash, eight protesters died.

The government wobbled. The interior minister, Miguel Ángel Osorio Chong, met union members, but Aurelio Nuño, the education minister, was less keen on parleying. Meanwhile, roadblocks remained; as of July 1st there were 26 of them, with 3,500 people involved.

For historical reasons, Mexican governments struggle to handle such situations in a measured way. Memories persist of student protesters massacred in 1968 and 1971; the ongoing “national trauma” makes the state queasy about using force, says Francisco Berlín Valenzuela, a political analyst.

And when the authorities do try cracking down, things can go awry, as the events at Nochixtlán show. An investigation is in progress, but the town has joined the list of places where atrocities have been blamed on state actors, along with Ayotzinapa in the state of Guerrero where 43 students went missing in 2014. As Alejandro Hope, a security analyst, puts it: “The government has no confidence that state and federal police will perform a clean operation.”

On July 1st Mr Osorio gave an ultimatum of sorts, saying that “before long” decisions would be taken to unblock strategic roads. Four days later, the number of blockades had fallen below ten (or so the government claimed) and the minister met union leaders again, offering a dialogue with the education ministry.

People sympathetic to the teachers fear more draconian moves. José Gastón García of Oaxaca state’s Universidad del Mar says the government could pass a law likening the teachers’ action to terrorism. But both sides seem keen to avoid more violence, and a negotiated dismantling of the blockades looks more likely. Then real arguments about the future of education in Mexico can begin.





Argentina’s economy

The cost of truth

The unflattering light of day

Jul 9th 2016 | BUENOS AIRES | From the print edition

Looking reality in the face

DURING her eight years as Argentina’s president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner had a way of dealing with nasty facts: denying them. When annual inflation reached 27%, she said the number was wrong. “If it were as high as they say it is,” she scoffed in September 2012, “the country would explode.” But truth will out: by the time she left office last year, a 100-peso note—the most valuable—fetched just $10, less than a third of its level when she took office. Unwilling to admit this plunge, Ms Fernández (whose assets have been frozen by a judge probing currency transactions) refused to issue bigger bills. Queues formed at ATMs; with a capacity of just 8,000 notes, some machines had to be refilled twice daily and repaired monthly.

Mauricio Macri, the country’s president since December, prefers to cast a colder eye on reality. On June 30th a 500-peso note appeared at his government’s behest. The central bank won praise for producing it, with a nice image of a jaguar, so fast. It will be a blow to armoured-truck operators, who did well by moving wads of cash around the country. This helped Brink’s, an American firm in that business, to boost its Argentine revenues by 60% last year. But on the streets of Buenos Aires, the note is welcome. It will soon be possible to withdraw up to 2,400 pesos ($160) per transaction. “Hopefully it will cut queues,” sighed Mariela, a hospital worker, as she waited with 28 others to use a newly-replenished cash dispenser. “This is a waste of time.”

Not all Mr Macri’s clear-sighted moves are so popular. Some of his efforts to normalise the economy—such as easing currency controls and removing subsidies on electricity, water, gas and transport—have exacerbated the inflation he inherited. On June 15th INDEC, the national statistics institute, revealed that prices went up by 4.2% during May alone. These were the first figures published by INDEC since Mr Macri took office; he has been working to make the agency more reliable. Annual inflation figures will not be out until next June. Worryingly, the picture emerging in the freshly polished mirror is of an economy going the wrong way. New numbers show that growth, private employment, manufacturing and investment have all fallen since Mr Macri came to office. His country is officially in recession.

All this jars with a pledge in the first half of the year that Argentines would reap the rewards of his economic policies in the second. Some economists, including Ramiro Castiñeira of Econométrica, a consultancy, say the president was too quick to promise progress. He retorts that he was misconstrued. “Things don’t happen from one day to the next,” he said on July 2nd. “I didn’t say that all of Argentina’s problems will be resolved in the second half of the year.”

Ordinary Argentines seem equally cautious. According to a poll by Management & Fit, a consultancy, 37% believe the economy will recover in the coming months; only 28% think their own situation will get better. Mr Macri, whose approval ratings have fallen to 44%, is hoping that the statistics improve by the year’s end. If not, Argentines may end up trusting him no more than his predecessor.





Bello

No Brussels here

How Latin America may prosper from a different kind of integration

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR decades Latin America’s democratic politicians have invoked the European Union (EU) as a model to imitate, though they have proved much better at talking about integration than practising it. Now, just when the European project is suffering a nervous breakdown, there are small signs of more togetherness on the other side of the Atlantic. If this progress is to be sustained, it will be by doing things differently from the Europeans.

Closer integration would have clear economic benefits. On average, Latin American countries trade less with each other than Asian countries do and also less than one might expect, according to the IMF. It hasn’t helped that in this century politics split the region into rival blocs. Hugo Chávez used Venezuela’s oil money to create ALBA, an anti-American grouping of 11 mostly small countries. Mercosur, a trade group based on Brazil and Argentina, evolved into a protectionist club of mainly leftish governments. In response, in 2011 Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru formed the Pacific Alliance of free-market economies. Each has a trade accord with the United States, and also with one or more Asian countries.

Now Chávez is dead, his oil money has vanished and ALBA is on the defensive. The centre-right has come to power in Argentina, with the election of Mauricio Macri, and in Brazil through the impeachment of Dilma Rousseff. Both governments are seeking to boost trade, notably by negotiating an agreement with the EU (though, without Britain, that may founder on the agricultural protectionism of France and others).

On June 30th Mr Macri flew to Puerto Varas, in Chile’s lake district, to join the presidents of the Pacific Alliance at their annual meeting. His trip prompted talk of convergence between the alliance and Mercosur in a new era of liberal trade for Latin America. Chile’s centre-left government is especially keen to promote co-ordination between the two blocs. But Heraldo Muñoz, Chile’s foreign minister, stresses that the Pacific Alliance and Mercosur “are two different projects”.

That is true both formally and geopolitically. Like the EU, Mercosur is a customs union and has a (largely inactive) parliament. It fudges even more than Europe. Its common tariff is full of holes; it has admitted new members, like Venezuela, which do not comply with its rules. The glue of Mercosur is a strategic partnership between Brazil and Argentina, which do a significant amount of trade with each other. That is not going to change.

The Pacific Alliance’s aim is to create an area of “deep integration” involving the free movement of goods, services, capital and people among its members. Its progress has been cautious but realistic. In May its members abolished tariffs on 92% of their trade in goods and harmonised rules of origin (ie, the amount of local content required to qualify) to encourage the creation of value chains among their countries. Helping business to make the most of that is now a priority, says Mr Muñoz. But the merger of the allies’ stockmarkets has been hampered by tax and regulatory differences. Like Mercosur, the alliance members have abolished tourist visas within the bloc, and are working to recognise each others’ professional qualifications. Work visas are still required, though normally granted.

The alliance is unique in being based on policy affinity, rather than geography, says José Antonio García Belaunde, who was Peru’s foreign minister at the time of its creation. It takes decisions by consensus and has set clear rules. While trade among the four is still slight, it is likely to grow. The alliance’s brand is powerful: it has attracted 49 observer countries (most recently Argentina). At Puerto Varas the presidents agreed to ask the observers to help with education, innovation, the internationalisation of small businesses and the easing of trade procedures.

Mercosur looks set to move in the alliance’s more liberal direction. But that doesn’t mean a merger. The alliance is open to new members, but only if they accept its rules. In a world of big blocs, integration has many potential benefits for Latin America. But only if it is well done. The lesson of Brexit is that integration must be “flexible, concrete…and not bureaucratic”, says Mr Muñoz.

Latin American governments do not want to cede sovereignty to a supranational body. Unlike in Europe, neither history nor geography has encouraged them to do so. Mercosur has a small secretariat; the Pacific Alliance is purely inter-governmental. As Mr García puts it: “There’s no Brussels in the region.” If it is to happen at all, Latin American integration will be very different from the EU. It is time to adjust the rhetoric to that reality.





Asia




Mainstream politics breaks down: The churn down under

Change of command in the Philippines: Talk Duterte to me

Cambodian politics: Sex, power and audiotape

Indian politics: Modi-fication

Hindi movies: Yes, he Khan

Terrorism in Asia: Jihad’s new frontier





Mainstream politics breaks down

The churn down under

A general election leaves Australia without a stable government

Jul 9th 2016 | SYDNEY | From the print edition



WHEN Malcolm Turnbull sought a second term for his conservative Liberal-National coalition government by calling an early general election, he promised Australians a break from nearly a decade of dysfunctional politics and short-lived national leaders. The prime minister—Australia’s sixth in a decade—asked voters to deliver a mandate for “strong, stable majority government” so that he could take them to the “greatest years in our history”.

Instead, on July 2nd, they delivered a humiliating verdict. At best, Mr Turnbull may be lucky enough to have a tiny majority with which to form a new government. At worst, he could face a hung parliament with various independents holding the balance of power—and deciding his fate.

Almost a week after Australians cast their votes, the outcome remained unclear. The government entered the campaign with 90 seats, giving it a majority of 15 in the 150-seat lower chamber, the House of Representatives. With four-fifths of the vote counted, according to the Australian Electoral Commission, Mr Turnbull’s government was leading in 74 seats, two short of a majority. The opposition Labor Party, which had 55, was leading in 71. Independents and small parties were ahead in another five seats. One independent, Bob Katter, said he would support Mr Turnbull.

The prime minister had much riding on the election. A lawyer and successful businessman, he is a man of no very fervent views, but likes enterprise, is socially liberal and leans, like many Australians, towards republicanism. Last September he unseated the divisive Tony Abbott, a social conservative and ultraroyalist, as the Liberals’ leader and prime minister. At the time, Mr Turnbull promised a “different style of leadership”—one that was more inclusive, less dogmatic and, above all, showed greater economic direction.



At first Mr Turnbull seemed to be rescuing the government from its woeful prospects under Mr Abbott. Opinion polls showed its popularity soaring. His liberal views on gay marriage, support for making Australia a republic and for a market-driven approach to tackling climate change won him widespread support. As prime minister, though, he disappointed many supporters by pushing these issues to one side, and he ignored them in his campaign. Many saw this as a price for appeasing the coalition’s conservative wing in deals that installed him as leader. The economic direction never came. Soon, the government’s popularity had sunk to put it neck-and-neck with Labor.

As the election results were coming in, a contrite Mr Turnbull took “full responsibility” for the government’s poor performance. But he also suggested that it reflected more than popular dissatisfaction with him. There was, he said, “a level of disillusionment with politics, with government and with the major parties”. Indeed, Liberal and Labor leaders alike have failed to respond to a steady erosion among Australians of traditional political loyalties.

Until a decade ago, Australia’s post-war governments were mostly long-serving and stable (despite three-year parliamentary terms, among the world’s briefest). But the left-right, class-defined labels that marked out the old Labor-Liberal divide have long faded. A country built upon immigration, first from Europe and more recently from Asia, Australia is, at least in its cities, ethnically very diverse. Meanwhile, the big parties have floundered over complex new issues, including how to deal with climate change (per person, Australians are huge emitters of carbon), changing social mores and asylum-seekers.

A kaleidoscope nation, with a two-tone politics: no wonder more young Australians than ever have disengaged from politics. Despite compulsory voting, about a third of 18- to 24-year-olds avoided casting their ballots at this election by not registering for the electoral roll, says Alex Oliver of the Lowy Institute, a think-tank in Sydney. Revolving-door leaders turn many others off. In a recent Lowy poll, two-thirds of Australians rated “dysfunction in Australian politics” as being of equal concern as terrorism and threats to national security.

In their halcyon days the mainstream parties used to share most of the vote between them. This time almost a quarter of votes went to independents and small parties. Ian Marsh, of the University of Technology in Sydney, calls this a “legitimacy crisis” for the big parties. The rise of social media and frequent opinion polling appears to have destabilised them further.

Who wants to be a prime minister?

The breakdown of tribal affiliations in how people vote is hardly unique to Australia. Neither are the mainstream parties’ responses, which are as brutal, and as counter-productive, as anywhere in the West: when opinion polls show popularity plunging, governments on both sides have taken to turning on their leaders instead of confronting their policy dilemmas. Labor MPs replaced Kevin Rudd with Julia Gillard, and vice versa, before either had completed a single term as prime minister. Mr Turnbull then took a leaf out of the Labor playbook by ejecting Mr Abbott.

Josh Frydenberg, a senior minister in Mr Turnbull’s government, says a more frantic polling and media culture has made politics “more personal and aggressive”. Saul Eslake, an economist, puts it more bluntly: instead of offering a “compelling vision”, Australia’s political leaders focus simply on holding on to power.

Mr Turnbull offered a broad enough vision. A self-made millionaire, he told voters that “opportunities have never been greater, nor our horizons wider”. With the economy growing at 3% and unemployment below 6%, Australia has weathered the end of a commodities boom underwritten by Chinese demand better than many expected. Mr Turnbull proposed as his core policy cuts in company taxes over ten years, arguing that this would stimulate jobs and growth. But voters in regions that have been left behind were unconvinced about how this would help them.



The election’s strongest newcomer was a party founded by Nick Xenophon, a centrist who had entered the Senate, the upper house, eight years ago. His home state of South Australia was once a hub of steelmaking, carmaking and shipbuilding. But manufacturing’s share of jobs has halved in Australia over the past 26 years, and South Australia has been hit especially hard. His platform mixes populist protection for industry with more immigration to stimulate growth (yes, the case can be made). Rebekha Sharkie, a candidate on his slate, took the prized Liberal seat of Mayo, near Adelaide. Another came close to capturing the formerly safe Liberal seat covering the steelmaking city of Whyalla.

Meanwhile, the opposition leader, Bill Shorten, emerged as a stronger campaigner than anyone had expected. He argued for Labor’s old strengths, such as supporting public health and education, while his shadow treasurer (finance minister), Chris Bowen, worked to persuade voters that Labor could match the coalition in fiscal probity.

Labor won three Liberal-held seats that cover much of Tasmania, another struggling state. Linda Burney, a Labor candidate who won a suburban constituency of Sydney, becomes Australia’s first indigenous woman to sit in the lower house.

Whatever the outcome in the House of Representatives, the new Senate could prove among a new government’s biggest headaches. In March Mr Turnbull won parliamentary approval to simplify a convoluted system of proportional representation under which Australians elected the upper house.

Normally, half the Senate’s 76 members face voters at the same time as the lower house in its three-year cycle. But Mr Turnbull called this election as a “double dissolution”: an election for all members from both houses at the same time. He expected that the voting reforms would rid the Senate of independents and so-called micro-parties that had often blocked government legislation.

This was another miscalculation. The new Senate might end up with up to nine members unaligned to the big parties, including possibly three of Mr Xenophon’s candidates, depriving the government of a majority there. It could yet doom Mr Turnbull’s planned cuts in corporation tax.

Mr Turnbull remains “quietly confident” of winning a majority, once all the votes are counted. But even if he does, his slim margin could damage his authority in his divided party and embolden his conservative enemies. Australia’s era of churning political leaders seems far from over.





Change of command in the Philippines

Talk Duterte to me

Deciphering the new president’s tough-guy language

Jul 9th 2016 | MANILA | From the print edition



CHIEF among the traits of Rodrigo Duterte that won him the presidential election in May was his forthright manner of speaking. Yet the meaning of his aggressive, expletive-laden talk was often obscure. What would he really do as president? Filipinos are starting to get a glimpse.

In one respect—his promise to give the police a free hand to kill criminals, notably suspected drug-traffickers—the man sometimes nicknamed “Duterte Harry” seems to have been taken at his word even before his inauguration on June 30th. In the first six weeks after the election, the police shot dead suspected drug-traffickers at the rate of nine a week, over four times the rate in the preceding four months. A day after being sworn in, Mr Duterte reassured officers paraded in front of him that they had the right to kill suspects who threatened their lives by resisting arrest. “Do your duty—and if, in the process, you kill 1,000 persons because you were doing your duty—I will protect you,” he said. He later took aim at their bosses, accusing five serving and former police generals of being “protectors” of drugs gangs. (They deny the claim.)

In other matters, though, Mr Duterte appears to be more restrained. He and his newly appointed ministers said they would honour the previous government’s peace accord with Muslim insurgents in the southern island of Mindanao, Mr Duterte’s political bailiwick. Until recently he had been vague about his intentions in the region, where the rebel Moro Islamic Liberation Front has agreed to make peace in return for new arrangements for autonomy in predominantly Muslim areas. But in his inauguration speech Mr Duterte declared: “My administration is committed to implement all signed peace agreements.”

A pressing question is the country’s relations with China and America—particularly the dispute with China over its extensive claims to the islands, reefs and atolls in the South China Sea. On July 12th the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) in The Hague is due to issue a much-anticipated opinion on a complaint against China brought by the former Philippine president, Benigno Aquino. At one point in his election campaign Mr Duterte said he would ride a jet-ski to plant the Philippine flag in areas that it claims as its own, and was ready to die doing it. At other times he said only direct negotiation with China could settle the confrontation.

In recent days the government has indicated that it prefers the second approach. The foreign minister, Perfecto Yasay, told a press conference that he hoped China would negotiate after the PCA ruling: “I’m hopeful that China would do this, notwithstanding the fact that it has said that it will not respect the decision of the arbitral tribunal,” he said.



A guide to the Philippines, in charts

Mr Yasay added that the Philippines would stick to a military pact with America called the Enhanced Defence Co-operation Agreement. Under the accord, Mr Aquino had widened the scope of the two countries’ Mutual Defence Treaty of 1951 to allow American forces to operate from Philippine territory.

America has declined formally to take sides in the many disputes in the South China Sea, but has challenged China’s aggressive island-building by occasionally sailing and flying close to disputed islands in the name of freedom of navigation. Before taking office, Mr Duterte had appeared to question the utility of the alliance. He said America would not die to defend the Philippines. Recently he asked the American ambassador in Manila: “Are you with us or are you not with us?”

Many of Mr Duterte’s intentions remain obscure—in part because he refuses to talk to journalists, complaining that they misinterpret him. On economic policy the self-proclaimed socialist quoted two American presidents in his inauguration speech: Abraham Lincoln, expressing mildly laissez-faire views; and Franklin Roosevelt, expressing gently left-leaning sentiments. For those puzzling over how the two quotations amount to a coherent policy, the president added, helpfully: “Read between the lines.”





Cambodian politics

Sex, power and audiotape

A crackdown in Cambodia leads to a curious siege

Jul 9th 2016 | PHNOM PENH | From the print edition

Hun Sen, in fined form

ON A wet afternoon several dozen activists keep watch outside the offices in Phnom Penh of the Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), the main opposition group. For six weeks Kem Sokha, the party’s vice-president, has been holed up inside—sleeping in an office and daring authorities loyal to Hun Sen, prime minister for 31 years, to come and get him. One supporter says he is there to act as an observer, should the government make a move; he thinks plain-clothes police officers are lurking a little way down the street.

The stand-off is the latest chapter in a strange saga that started in March, when recordings of flirtatious telephone conversations, purportedly between Mr Kem Sokha and his hairdresser, were leaked online. The courts say he has failed to comply with a summons for questioning in connection with the case. The details are murky, but the ruling Cambodia People’s Party (CPP) has suggested that the tapes implicate the opposition politician in soliciting a prostitute. The hairdresser is suing him for $300,000, which she claims he promised to give her. Separately, a social-media starlet and once-vocal opposition supporter claims she was defamed by criticism of her heard on the tapes.

Several foreign ambassadors have trekked to Mr Kem Sokha’s hideout, embarrassing the government. Perhaps the CPP was hoping to drive Mr Kem Sokha into exile, along with the CNRP leader, Sam Rainsy, who did not return from a foreign trip in November after authorities said he might be made to serve a two-year jail sentence for defamation dating to 2011. The case hinges around a speech in 2008 in which Mr Sam Rainsy claimed that the then foreign minister had colluded with the genocidal Khmer Rouge regime (which the ex-minister denies); many thought Mr Sam Rainsy had been pardoned.

The legal troubles of Mr Sam Rainsy and Mr Kem Sokha look like being part of a wave of politically motivated prosecutions to neuter the opposition ahead of local elections next year and a national vote in 2018. At least 20 opposition MPs, members and supporters are behind bars on various charges—all of them arrested or convicted within the past 12 months. Three of them are serving 20-year sentences.

In April four people working for Adhoc, a local human-rights charity, were imprisoned, too. They are accused of trying to influence the testimony of the hairdresser, to whom they had offered legal advice and some financial support. Naly Pilorge of Licadho, another human-rights group, says the crackdown has been uncommonly swift and broad.

All this highlights the collapse of a truce struck by Cambodia’s two main parties in the middle of 2014. Back then the CNRP agreed to end a boycott of parliament and to wind down large protests that had erupted after a fairly narrow victory won by the CPP in an election the previous year. The opposition was promised seats on the election commission, which had long looked like an arm of the ruling party. Recent proceedings against a member of the newly reformed commission may be an attempt to recapture it for the government.

Mr Hun Sen insists that the courts are independent and that no Cambodian is above the law. In June he made a great show of paying a fine which netizens thought should have been slapped on him for failing to wear a motorcycle helmet during a public ride-about publicised on his Facebook page (he is pictured arriving at a police station).

The prime minister growls that his opponents are plotting a “colour revolution” of the sort seen in former Soviet republics—though there is little evidence of that in the small weekly protests staged outside prisons by black-clad human-rights campaigners. Media regulators are said to be renewing a campaign to ensure that all articles mentioning the prime minister include his long-winded royal title, “Lord Prime Minister and Supreme Military Commander”, which had been set aside when foreigners mocked it.

The Lord Prime Minister’s mood is unlikely to be improved by a report published on July 7th by Global Witness, a campaigning group, which attempts to quantify the scale of the Hun Sen dynasty’s interests in the Cambodian economy. The researchers found that the prime minister’s family members had registered interests in 114 companies across 18 sectors, with a combined share capital of more than $200m; they have “total or substantial” control over 103 of these companies. Global Witness reckons this is probably only the “tip of the iceberg”, since its research relied on government records of only those holdings which had been formally declared.

A backroom deal is still possible. Statements from senior CPP members suggest that some in the party think the campaign against Mr Kem Sokha has gone too far. Tensions have dropped a notch since the start of his seclusion. On July 1st a court released three environmental activists who had been imprisoned since last August after mounting a campaign against sand dredging, sentencing them to time served. But such tumult so early in the electoral cycle bodes badly, whatever happens next.





Indian politics

Modi-fication

A swelling cabinet suggests that politics trumps reform

Jul 9th 2016 | DELHI | From the print edition

NARENDRA MODI, India’s can-do prime minister, swept to victory two years ago promising “minimum government with maximum governance”. His incoming team boasted just 45 ministers and ministers of state, compared with the unwieldy 77-person crew fielded by the previous government. But on July 5th, following his second reshuffle since taking office, Mr Modi’s council of ministers ballooned to an even wobblier 78.

Running such a sprawling, untidy republic does require a lot of people. Only 27 of Mr Modi’s ministers will actually sit with him in cabinet meetings. The other 50 are junior ministers, tied to specific portfolios. Government loyalists say the extra hands will make it easier to carry out the prime minister’s ambitious reform agenda. Many among India’s noisy chattering classes fear the opposite is true.

Elections loom next year in several crucial states. These include the biggest, Uttar Pradesh, with some 200m people, as well as prosperous Punjab and Mr Modi’s home state of Gujarat. Last year his Hindu-nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) bombed at the polls in Bihar, a state famed for convoluted politics based on group affiliations such as caste and religion. That made Amit Shah, the party’s grizzled president and Mr Modi’s closest henchman, determined to widen the BJP’s appeal well beyond its base among higher-caste Hindus. The party has made special efforts to woo Dalits, or “untouchables”, who make up a crucial bloc of voters in Uttar Pradesh.

Small wonder that among 19 newly minted ministers, ten are from what India officially classifies as “backward” castes, and three are from Uttar Pradesh. Controversial ministers were moved to less visible posts, and technocrats replaced by figures with more populist appeal. The minister of state for finance, Jayant Sinha, an outspoken former investment banker, will now be a junior minister for civil aviation. Two BJP stalwarts with little background in finance will share his old post.

With three years to go before a general election, Mr Modi’s choice raises questions about how much he will get done. An editorial in Mint, a financial daily, sniffed: “Jumbo cabinets are not exactly the optimal solution to governance challenges.”





Hindi movies

Yes, he Khan

India’s biggest film stars have locked up the best release dates

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Salman Khan wrestles with stardom

AS NIGHT follows day and Eid al-Fitr follows Ramadan, so there is another certainty for India’s Muslims marking the end of the month of fasting: the release of an action-drama extravaganza starring Salman Khan, one of the country’s most bankable stars. “Sultan”, about a down-and-out wrestler, was released worldwide on July 6th.

Mr Khan, who likes to play the beefed-up good guy with near-superhuman fighting powers, a way with women and a mischievous sense of humour, has won a huge following, especially among India’s 180m Muslims. He represents one of Bollywood’s triumvirate of stars, all called Khan (unrelated to each other). Each dominates a different annual holiday. Shah Rukh Khan, a favourite of the middle classes, is the hero of the Diwali weekend. Aamir Khan, more highbrow, dominates Christmas. Between them, the trio have released a film on 14 of the past 15 big festive weekends, occasionally switching round. Other actors and their producers must launch their films at other, less profitable times, such as Independence Day—or await an off-year for the Khans.

Holidays have always been popular release dates for Hindi movies—children are out of school and purse strings are loosened. But other factors are encouraging blockbuster weekends. One is that digital piracy makes it vital for films to maximise box-office revenues before they are leaked online.

Bollywood has become more formalised since it gained “industry status” in 2001, allowing banks to lend to it (as opposed to gangsters and sundry businessmen seeking glamour or legitimacy). As the industry churns out more big films, a successful launch is more important than ever. With a “carpet-bombing” publicity strategy, the opening weekend of a blockbuster can account for as much as 60-70% of box-office takings, says Neeraj Goswamy of Viacom18 Motion Pictures, a big studio. (It also allows makers of duds to recoup some of their money before word gets out that a movie is rubbish.)

The spread of multiplexes and digital projection makes huge releases possible. In the past, a major Hindi film might be seen on hundreds of screens over several weeks. “Sultan” is rumoured to be Bollywood’s biggest-ever release, with about 5,000 (mostly digital) prints worldwide.

Beyond the proven success of the Khans at Diwali, Christmas and Eid, Bollywood’s producers still rely on superstition to find success. “Lucky” stars are cast in guest roles. Actors and producers routinely misspell their own names to comply with the arcane rules of numerology, in which letters are assigned a number: Ajay Devgan, an action star, can become Ajay Devgn; and Ritesh Deshmukh turns to Riteish Deshmukh. No big films are released in the first fortnight of the year. That is considered bad luck—even with a Khan topping the bill.





Terrorism in Asia

Jihad’s new frontier

Islamic State looks east, but struggles to find fertile ground

Jul 9th 2016 | DELHI, DHAKA AND SINGAPORE | From the print edition

After the killing in Bangladesh, the mourning

ISLAMIC STATE’S motto, “Enduring and expanding”, would seem to explain recent grim headlines from across Asia. A restaurant massacre in Bangladesh on July 1st; a grenade attack on a Malaysian nightclub a week earlier; a suicide-bomb in the Indonesian city of Solo on July 5th; and the decapitation in the Philippines of two Western captives, in April and June. All bear the ugly stamp of the jihadists.

A recent IS video—in Tagalog, Malay and Bahasa Indonesia, as well as Arabic and English—urges jihadists who cannot travel to the so-called caliphate in Iraq and Syria to join the fight instead in the Philippines. Another in Bengali praises the restaurant murderers and promises more such attacks. Squeezed on its own turf, IS is looking east—as well as seeking to wreak havoc in the Middle East and spread fear across Africa and the West.

Yet while the terror map of Asia now prickles with freshly inserted IS pins, a closer look suggests a slightly less alarming picture. The recent incidents were either claimed by IS or ascribed to the group by local police. No recent terror act in Asia, however, appears to have been the work of trained operatives working within an identifiable command structure. And although, with the exception of the Philippines, all these incidents took place in Muslim-majority countries, no local Asian affiliate of IS appears likely to win many hearts and minds.

The killings at a smart restaurant in Dhaka, the Bangladeshi capital, were chilling. The attackers spared most of their Muslim captives but systematically slaughtered 20 others, among them nine Italians and seven Japanese aid consultants. IS gleefully posted smiling portraits of the young killers, all striking a similar pose clutching assault rifles. But a closer look reveals that they took turns holding the same gun, a cheap, lower-calibre copy of the ubiquitous Kalashnikov.

In November the IS online magazine, Dabiq, warned that “soldiers of the Caliphate” would “rise and expand in Bengal”. In April the magazine carried an interview with the “emir of the caliph’s soldiers in Bengal”, who said they were “sharpening their knives to slaughter the atheists, the mockers of the Prophet, and every other apostate in the region”. The ultimate aim, he said, was to attack India and foment chaos there.

Massacring diners in a neighbouring Muslim country seems an unlikely way to achieve this. A more obvious approach would be to establish terrorist cells in India. In May an IS video featured a fighter in Syria of apparently Indian origin who declared that the group would liberate India’s 180m Muslims from Hindu rule, and called on them to rise up. Indian police say that since the beginning of this year they have busted at least three groups linked to IS. The most dangerous seems to have been a cell in the city of Hyderabad. Police say that five men now in custody wrote e-mails pledging allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the IS “caliph”. They had stashed precursor chemicals for explosives, though the quantities were modest.

Elsewhere, IS shows a similar lack of professionalism. Police in Malaysia initially attributed a small grenade explosion on June 28th at a pub near the capital, Kuala Lumpur, to gangland motives. It injured eight patrons. Only when IS claimed responsibility on Facebook did authorities admit that this was, possibly, the group’s first attack in the country. Police have rounded up 15 suspects, two of whom were said to have received orders from a Malaysian recruit in IS territory. Police say they have foiled nine other terror-related plots in the past two years, and arrested some 160 suspects since January 2015.

Recent incidents in Indonesia have not shed glory upon IS, either. The suicide-bomber in Solo managed only to kill himself and injure a policeman. Again, police assert he was following long-distance orders, this time from a known Indonesian fighter in IS territory. Security in the country has been tightened since January, when jihadists linked to IS killed four people at a busy shopping district in Jakarta, the capital. Two of the four assailants blew themselves up prematurely. Police gunfire quickly dispatched the others.

In the unruly island of Mindanao in the Philippines, IS seems to have made more headway. This is in the context of a long-standing low-intensity conflict between security forces and Muslim separatist groups that resemble criminal gangs as much as holy warriors. The same group that beheaded two Canadian hostages, and which continues to hold a Norwegian one, has also kidnapped local fishermen for ransom.

Not a bay in Bengal

Tellingly, the jihadists’ biggest “success” has been in Bangladesh. Despite a string of brutal, religiously motivated murders in recent years, the ruling party has insisted on blaming political rivals, or even the victims themselves, rather than more obvious culprits. It has also ignored complaints from parents that their teenage children were disappearing, or had been brainwashed, at the hands of jihadist cults.

Wherever police have taken their work more seriously, IS has not fared well. The bigger challenge, given that the bulk of the world’s 1.6 billion Muslims live in Asia, is how to blunt the appeals that IS now makes in their own languages. Speaking last month, Indonesia’s minister of defence noted that in a survey in December 2015, 96% of Indonesians said they were adamantly opposed to IS’s ideology. Its latest attacks will not have diminished that share. The government’s task, said the minister, was to address the 4% who declined to state their view.





China




Pollution: Beijing v belching chimneys

Bad planning: A bigwig purged

Anti-smoking legislation: Butts resist kicks





Pollution

Beijing v belching chimneys

The central government is pressing heavy industry to clean up

Jul 9th 2016 | TANGSHAN | From the print edition



SOMETHING has been amiss recently in the city of Tangshan, the source of about one-tenth of China’s steel output and (literally) eye-watering levels of pollution. Through much of May and June, no smoke billowed out of the mills near the railway station, two hours east of Beijing. In the sidings, wagons full of coal and steel girders sat idly. Hundreds of feet up in the air, vividly decorated kites fluttered against an unusually blue sky. A city whose industrial heritage includes China’s first mechanised coal mine, first freight locomotive and first cement plant has found itself in an incongruous position. It is hosting a vast international flower show laid out across an abandoned coalfield, overlooked by a gaudy metal phoenix that appears to be clinging to—or strangling—a smokestack.

To keep the air clean for the event, the local authorities have sporadically suspended steel production (playing havoc with futures prices in Shanghai). Their efforts look like a crafty way of disguising the effects of the country’s economic slowdown and industrial overcapacity, which have undoubtedly taken a toll on Tangshan’s steel industry. But for the workers, the subtext may be starker still. Bamboos sprout out of railway bridges; children clamber on lotuses sculpted out of steel. A noticeboard among the blossoms suggests that Tangshan’s days as a steel town are numbered (40 years after the city itself was flattened by an earthquake that killed hundreds of thousands of people—the phoenix symbolises its rebirth). The city is striving for “the transformation from industrial...to ecological civilisation”, it says. In other words, it welcomes people to a kitsch, rose-scented future (unlike the Tangshan pictured).

The country’s industrial bases are coming under pressure from three mutually reinforcing efforts by the central government: to rebalance the economy towards a less energy-hungry mode of growth, to curb pollution and to control carbon emissions that cause global warming. The upside is that on good days citizens can at least breathe cleaner air. Besides, China’s carbon emissions from energy use are estimated to have fallen last year for the first time in 17 years, according to research by BP, an oil company. The question is: can these environmental gains be sustained?

The goal: less coal

Two of China’s most influential advisory groups, the National Centre for Climate Change Strategy (NCSC) and the Energy Research Institute (ERI), have suggested ways they can be. On July 7th they said the country should ensure that carbon emissions will peak in 2029. To achieve that, they say, it should price carbon at 60 yuan ($9) a tonne or more (China has several regional carbon markets, but prices are lower than that). They also want the government to require that a minimum share of electricity production must come from renewable energy, such as wind and solar power. Such measures would hasten the shift away from coal and heavy industry.

Coal is the focus of both the government’s climate goals and its “war on pollution”. Currently, half of the coal burned anywhere is burned in mainland China. However, its use is expected to fall for a third year in a row in 2016, partly because of the slowdown in industrial activity, and also because of the increasing amounts of energy generated by wind and sun, says Lauri Myllyvirta of Greenpeace, an NGO. He adds that pressure from Chinese citizens to curb air pollution has, in recent years, forced the government to limit the use of coal in industrial areas. This year it ordered a three-year suspension of the building of new coal-fired power plants in 15 regions with notable overcapacity.

That may be too little, too late. Mr Myllyvirta says that in the 15 months before the partial moratorium, local governments had authorised the construction of more than 210 coal-fired power plants, with the potential to generate about 200 gigawatts (more than the total power-generating capacity of Germany), as officials sought to boost investment and economic growth whatever the environmental cost. That is on top of existing overcapacity, which he puts at about 200GW. As the NCSC and ERI pointed out, coal’s share of primary energy use is likely to stay at roughly half, even if their recommendations are adopted.

But top-down efforts to rationalise coal consumption in power plants and steel mills—however inadequate—are being complemented by pressure from the bottom up. Ma Jun, a prominent environmentalist who heads the Institute of Public and Environmental Affairs, is using the NGO’s “Blue Map” app, with the help of real-time data released by the government, to show which industrial complexes are violating air-quality standards. Users can then denounce polluters through social media.

Mr Ma says some firms have admitted their mistakes, but in many cases local governments have tried to hide the problem, believing that GDP growth targets are more important than environmental ones. This year the central government launched its first crackdown, sending inspectors to Hebei province, home to Tangshan. Reportedly they closed down 200 companies and ordered the arrest of 123 people, some for allegedly fabricating information about pollution-control measures. On July 5th Hebei responded to the inspectors’ criticisms by pledging to “put environmental protection in a more prominent position”.

The central government has begun to use environmental law as “a stick” to encourage the shift to a service-oriented economy, says Mr Ma. But the authorities are still so concerned about minimising job losses and maintaining social stability that he is unsure whether their mindset has changed for good. He says it is unclear whether lower pollution levels in Beijing this year are because of a fundamental improvement, or because of the weather (smog is still ever-present).

Another culprit for air pollution and carbon-dioxide emissions is oil. As an energy source in China it is dwarfed by coal, but its use will rise as China’s consumers become richer and travel more. As the industrial economy has slowed, so has the use of diesel for trucking freight. But oil demand will continue to grow as more people drive cars and fly on planes. In the longer term, however, fuel-efficiency standards will rise, public transport will improve, denser urbanisation may dent the appeal of owning cars and electric vehicles may become more popular.

Such is the importance of energy-intensive industries such as coal, iron, steel and cement to China’s economy that it is hard to imagine the country continuing to grow unless they rebound. In that case, anti-pollution measures will have to be even tougher. The government is sending the right signals: officials say that high-level inspection teams will be sent to other provinces, too. “In the past environment inspections were like a slap in the face, but now it is like having a knife to the neck,” said a glass-factory manager in Hebei to Xinhua, a state news agency. Few believe that the central government is quite as serious as such words suggest. But local officials will not want to find out the hard way.





Bad planning

A bigwig purged

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



There was once a zealous official who used party-speak to name each of his five children: Planning, Policy, Guideline, Direction and Completion. Ling Jihua (“Planning”) rose to serve as chief aide to Hu Jintao, who was then China’s president. Now Mr Ling has become one of the highest-ranking officials to be felled in an anti-graft campaign led by Mr Hu’s successor, Xi Jinping. On July 4th he was jailed for life for taking $11.6m in bribes, illegally obtaining state secrets and abusing his power. He had been politically sidelined in 2012 after his son fatally crashed a Ferrari in Beijing while reportedly driving two women (one was naked). But Mr Ling was never tried for what Mr Xi might consider his biggest crime: belonging to the wrong faction.





Anti-smoking legislation

Butts resist kicks

The state tries to curb tobacco, which it also peddles

Jul 9th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



CHINA has long been a smoker’s paradise: cigarettes are dirt-cheap and regulations so poorly enforced that even small children can buy them. The country is home to one in three smokers worldwide. Recently, however, there have been some changes. Last year the city of Beijing banned smoking in all indoor public spaces. This helped clear the air in most of the capital’s bars and restaurants. Combined with a slight increase in tobacco taxes nationwide, it contributed to a rare fall in cigarette purchases: people bought around 60 billion fewer of them in 2015 than in the previous year, according to Euromonitor, a market-research firm.

An anti-smoking law that is now being considered for national implementation, however, looks like less of a step forward. Its first draft, in 2014, proposed to stop smoking in indoor public places countrywide and put the onus on businesses—not just individuals—to comply. Any establishment persistently flouting rules could have its business licence revoked. But a new draft, seen by health professionals, would permit the creation of dedicated smoking areas indoors. Since it is difficult to seal such spaces, that would mean non-smokers would still be exposed to fumes. It would make enforcement hard, too. It is “the kind of smoke-free law you have when you really don’t want a smoke-free law,” says Angela Pratt of the World Health Organisation (WHO) in Beijing.

The proposed law aims to protect the estimated 700m people in China who are routinely exposed to second-hand smoke. President Xi Jinping appears to back it. His wife is an anti-tobacco campaigner and he has barred officials from smoking in public or buying cigarettes with public money. He apparently encouraged the introduction of the capital’s smoke-free law.

Yet even Mr Xi appears weak before the arm of his own government that peddles cigarettes. The state-owned China National Tobacco Corporation controls the production and sale of all tobacco in China. That the government profits from puffing perhaps explains why it has taken so few anti-smoking measures since China signed the WHO’s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in 2003. Packets carry only tiny written health warnings (with no graphic pictures), and taxes remain low. The company’s arguments echo those of tobacco firms elsewhere. It warns that cutting smoking will harm the economy, since tobacco taxes account for 7.5% of fiscal revenue at all levels of government (in Yunnan they account for about half the provincial tax take). Unlike elsewhere, China’s monopoly has a ministerial seat, which means it can shape legislation.

Until the state divorces itself from the tobacco industry it will be hard to campaign seriously against smoking. Around 1m people die from tobacco-related diseases each year in China, yet public awareness of the dangers remains low, particularly with regard to second-hand smoke. It does not help that the two most famous smokers in China’s recent history—Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping—are well known for their longevity, and that many senior officials smoke. Zhongnanhai, the leadership’s headquarters, is also the name of a popular cigarette brand.

The government wants to pass the national anti-smoking law by November, when Shanghai will host a global conference on health promotion organised by the WHO. The timing of the bill’s launch is intended to show participants that the country is dedicated to healthy living. In its current form it will fail.





Middle East and Africa




Kurdistan: Dream on hold

Iraq and Syria: Islamic stateless?

Zimbabwe’s begging bowl: Bailing out bandits

Divorce in Nigeria: Rings fall apart





Kurdistan

Dream on hold

Despite a string of military successes, the Kurds are nowhere near independence

Jul 9th 2016 | ERBIL | From the print edition



PESHMERGA militiamen pile armchairs and sofas high on a removal van as they decamp from the dam above Mosul to the plain below. Mosul, Iraq’s second city and the nerve centre of Islamic State (IS), lies in their sights. Thanks to coalition arms, training and air power, the peshmerga, Iraqi Kurdish troops whose name means “one who confronts death”, now surround it on three sides. Together with Baghdad’s army, they are also closing in from the fourth side, the south. “Whatever we take, we hold,” says a peshmerga intelligence officer, surveying IS dugouts from a trench on the front line.

For 28,000 square kilometres (11,000 square miles) behind him, Kurdish flags now fly over the remains of deserted and destroyed Sunni Arab villages and towns. Time and again, the peshmerga have chased the jihadists out. In Syria, too, Kurdish forces boast similar gains. Thanks to the war on IS, they control some 600km of Syria’s 800km northern border with Turkey. In March they declared their own autonomous region there, Rojava. In Turkey and even in Iran, Kurdish armed groups have ended years of ceasefire and taken up arms. Rarely in their century-old bid for statehood has the dream of carving a Kurdistan from the rumps of four states appeared so nearly within reach.

Mayhem in all four has helped their cause. In Iraq the area ruled by the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) has been beyond the effective control of Baghdad since 1991; only Kurds over 40 now speak Arabic there. Having struck oil, the KRG’s leaders sell it independently of Baghdad, exporting it through their own pipeline to Turkey. “Iraq is over,” says Heman Hawrami, a confidant of the KRG’s president, Masoud Barzani. “Statehood is the only practical solution.”

Yet if so, why do they delay declaring it? In a referendum in 2005, 99% of KRG voters chose Kexit. A decade on, Kurdish officials say they need a second vote, but will not name a date.

Infighting is the main reason for delay. Having taken back control of their territory in Iraq and Syria, the Kurds have proved incapable of sharing it. The alphabet barely has enough letters to cover the acronyms of all their quarrelsome factions. A Syrian analyst counts 45 in Rojava alone. In Iraq there are almost as many.

An opportunity squandered

Had they matched IS’s unity and determination, the Kurds could have erased the lines the Western powers drew on the map after dissolving the Ottoman empire, and declared a unified Kurdistan. Instead, on either side of Iraq’s northern border with Syria, Kurdish militias now train their guns on each other, hungry for control of the territories and oilfields they have captured from IS or the Assad regime. The People’s Protection Units (YPG) hold Rojava as well as bases in Mount Sinjar, west of Mosul, on Iraq’s side of the border. Opposing their advance, Mr Barzani has cobbled Syrian Kurdish exiles into his own “Rojava Force”. “We’re upholding Sykes-Picot borders,” says one of its commanders wryly, using the shorthand for the partition of the region into various Arab states but not a Kurdish one.

Barzani the autocrat

In Iraqi Kurdistan, the core of their putative state-in-waiting, the two dynasties that fought a nasty civil war back in the 1990s are also at loggerheads again. At a highland checkpoint on their old demarcation line, the smiling portraits of the two old clan leaders, Mr Barzani and Jalal Talabani, face each other some 300 metres apart. But their men now appear to be hell-bent on reviving hostilities. From Erbil, their capital, Mr Barzani’s forces expel dissenters eastward. The banished include the Speaker of the KRG’s parliament, who dismisses Erbil as “occupied” and wants parliament moved to “liberated” Sulaymaniyah, Mr Talabani’s base in the east. Partisan satellite channels fan the flames. In June the offices of Rudaw, a pro-Barzani news agency, was firebombed. Barham Salih, a former KRG prime minister, warns that “Kurdistan is degenerating into warlordism and corrupt fiefdoms.”

Such rivalries make it all the easier for regional powers to turn the Kurds into their pawns. In 1996 Mr Barzani’s men rode the tanks of their former murderer, Saddam Hussein, into Sulaymaniyah. Mr Talabani needed Iran’s forces to win it back. Today Iraq is preoccupied with its own fighting, and the chief puppeteers are again Turkey and Iran. Trade follows geopolitics: Erbil’s huge malls offer Turkish brands, whereas shelves in Sulaymaniyah are stacked with Iranian goods. Turkey’s pipeline through Erbil gives Mr Barzani control of KRG oil revenues, but also makes him dependent on the Turks. Loth to lose influence, Iran is helping Mr Talabani’s men finance a second pipeline from its refineries in Kermanshah to the oilfields of Kirkuk, which Mr Talabani’s forces control.

Harder power is at play too. Iran and Turkey are training, arming and directing rival Kurdish militias, say Kurdish intelligence chiefs from both sides. Mr Barzani echoes Turkey in describing the YPG as the Syrian arm of the PKK, the Kurdish armed group waging a bombing campaign against the Turkish state. For three months earlier this year, Mr Barzani joined Turkey in closing the border. He imposed a siege on the YPG at the height of its war with IS. “Our wounded came to the borders and were forced to go back,” protests the YPG’s political representative in Sulaymaniyah.

While Mr Barzani works with Turkey to thwart the PKK and its ally the YPG, Mr Talabani (with a nod from Iran) helps build them up. Both armed groups operate from his territory, and the PKK is said to have helped him bolster his hold on Kirkuk. Some say their mission to join up the disparate Kurdish dots fits in with Iran’s hopes of pushing west to the Mediterranean like Darius I, an ancient Persian king.

In the meantime, the rivalry between Turkey and Iran is prising Kurdistan apart. Neither country wants to allow the birth of a Kurdish state that could inspire and lend material assistance to their own Kurdish separatists. Western support for the Kurds, too, has its limits. Since 1991, when the UN set up a modest Kurdish haven in Iraq’s snow-capped mountains, Western powers have been the Kurds’ guarantors.

Trouble within

But in their single-minded focus on IS, they have turned a blind eye to Kurdish infighting, sent copious arms and provided the air cover to expand Kurdish control in Syria and Iraq. A slew of Arabic towns have acquired Kurdish names. (Kobani, the Kurdish name for Ain al-Arab, is said to derive from the mispronunciation of Company, after the railway contractors who worked there.) “The US is subsidising Kurdish bad practices,” says Bilal Wahab, a Kurdish academic in Sulaymaniyah.

Kurdish nervousness is entirely understandable. Twice over the past century, in 1922 and 1946, Kurds have declared their own state only to see stronger powers crush it within months. Even so, they might have done more to prepare their institutions for government. Too often, the leaders of the KRG have replicated the bad practices of their neighbours. Having taken control of the production and sale of oil, the Barzanis seem bent on concentrating power in their own hands. “La Familia” is the nickname Kurds have given to the president, his son and intelligence chief, Masrour, and his nephew and prime minister, Nechirvan. Journalists and judges, who might have been able to hold them to account, collect salaries to do their bidding. And since Mr Barzani began selling his own oil he has dispensed with the need for a budget. Parliamentary requests to scrutinise the accounts are ignored. “I’m not allowed to ask,” says Taha Zanganeh, the deputy oil minister.

As long the revenues kept rolling in, no one quibbled much. The KRG posted solid growth for years. Its rulers built luxury hotels and apartments, fancying they were creating a second Dubai. In 2013 Mr Barzani won cross-party support for a two-year extension of his second presidential term, before succumbing to hubris. No sooner did he begin exporting oil than Baghdad cut off the money it used to transfer to help fund the KRG, some $10 billion annually.



Oil prices have also plummeted. As the coffers emptied, the critics brayed. Since parliamentarians gathered to debate the future of the presidency last year, Mr Barzani’s party has boycotted parliament, denying it a quorum; he has also barred its Speaker from Erbil. On the streets, the security forces silenced protests by opening fire. In effect, Mr Barzani now rules a one-party state under the faction he has led for 37 years. His rule has been without a mandate for the past year.

His finances are a shambles, too. The tiny KRG (population around 5m) has an astonishing $20 billion of debt, and its banks have exhausted their liquidity, says Qubad Talabani, the deputy prime minister and son of Jalal, appointed to devise a reform programme. In a bid to survive, he says he has halted 4,000 projects worth $5 billion, built up arrears with contractors and 1.4m government employees and beneficiaries, and cut salaries by up to 75%. The region has plunged into recession. The oil companies have downsized sharply; Total, a French firm, has walked out. Returning exiles educated in the West are leaving again, along with a larger illegal flow. In lieu of salaries, some peshmerga are said to have sold their American weapons to IS.

Yet the KRG is worth saving. It retains a surprisingly tolerant multi-faith air, where ministers sip vodka and orange on a Ramadan afternoon in restaurants playing Lebanese love songs. It has generously opened its gates to 1.8m refugees and displaced people who thronged to the KRG from more miserable parts of the Middle East.

Ironically, Baghdad may yet provide a breathing-space. When Mr Barzani went it alone with his oil exports, some Baghdad officials said good riddance, counting up the savings from cutting the KRG’s subsidies. As their economic crisis intensifies, though, Kurdish officials are heading back to Baghdad to seek a share of its IMF loan and continued payments for the displaced. They stand a good chance of getting them. The Talabanis, who have long adopted a more pragmatic approach to Baghdad than the Barzanis, advocate a final attempt to make Iraq work. After all, says the redundant Speaker of the Kurdish parliament, “we don’t need another failed state.”





Iraq and Syria

Islamic stateless?

The jihadists are losing their caliphate, but they remain deadly

Jul 9th 2016 | CAIRO | From the print edition



THE self-proclaimed caliphate of Islamic State (IS) is weakening fast. In June the jihadists were kicked out of Fallujah by the Iraqi army, then pounded by air strikes as they fled. American-backed rebels in Syria have surrounded the group’s fighters in the northern city of Manbij and are eyeing Raqqa, its de facto capital. In total, IS is now thought to have lost half of the land it seized in Iraq and 20% of its territory in Syria. It is on the verge of losing its main stronghold in Libya, too.

The biggest fights are still to come: for Raqqa and Mosul, in northern Iraq, the two biggest cities under IS control. IS fighters are expected to defend them ferociously. More than just land is at stake. Apart from its savagery, IS has distinguished itself from other jihadist groups—and indeed, surpassed the likes of al-Qaeda—by capturing territory and governing it. As it loses that land, and any chance of building an Islamic Utopia, its appeal to disaffected Muslims may dwindle. So the group is adapting.

In many ways IS is becoming more like a conventional, stateless, terrorist organisation. In an abrupt and remarkable shift, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the group’s spokesman, said in May that IS does not fight for territory. It would defend Raqqa and Mosul, of course, but it is also preparing to revert to guerrilla tactics. And Mr Adnani repeated an appeal for followers to hit the group’s enemies abroad. “The smallest action you do in their heartland is better and more enduring to us than what you would [do] if you were with us,” he said.

Several individuals and groups have responded to his call. Attacks in places such as Orlando, Istanbul, Dhaka, Baghdad and Jeddah have killed hundreds in the past month. Some were directed by IS; others were merely inspired by it. All have distracted attention from the group’s failures in Iraq and Syria, leading some to predict that the attacks will increase. “The next 12 months most likely will be bloodier than the past 12 months,” says Fawaz Gerges of the London School of Economics.

The group’s strategy is not as reactionary as it may seem. IS has been dispatching volunteers to the West for years. Recent attacks in Paris, Brussels and Istanbul were the work of mature networks. The American-led coalition has put pressure on the group’s finances and diminished its capacity to plot and train, but IS can still sow terror, says John Brennan, the director of the CIA. “The group would have to suffer even heavier losses of territory, manpower and money for its terrorist capacity to decline significantly.”

Many analysts think that a completely stateless IS would lose most of its appeal. Its setbacks seem already to have had an effect. In February an American intelligence report attributed a big fall in the number of IS fighters to casualties—and desertions. But Will McCants of the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, believes the loss of territory may motivate supporters. He points to the group’s experience in Iraq in the late 2000s, when it appeared defeated. “That was the moment when a lot of jihadists began to take up its flag,” he says.

Back then IS was affiliated with al-Qaeda. But the groups fell out in 2014—even al-Qaeda thought IS too extreme. They are now fighting each other in Syria, and competing for recruits and affiliates. The results may demonstrate the appeal of IS. Take Boko Haram, the Nigerian jihadist group, which had links to al-Qaeda before declaring its allegiance to IS in March 2015. Now analysts think it may switch sides again. “Moving forward, al-Qaeda is a much stronger brand in almost every region,” says Daveed Gartenstein-Ross of the Foundation for Defence of Democracies, an American think-tank.

Within the next year or so IS is likely to be pushed out of Raqqa and Mosul. As the pressure mounts, “we judge that it will intensify its global terror campaign to maintain its dominance of the global terrorism agenda,” says Mr Brennan. But it is unlikely to give up its goal of a caliphate, not least because the conditions that allowed IS to form in the first place have not changed much. Divisive and ineffective governments still rule in Syria and Iraq. Who will keep IS from returning to its lost cities?





Zimbabwe’s begging bowl

Bailing out bandits

The IMF is ready to throw the Mugabe regime a lifeline. Bad idea

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



“RIGHT now we literally have nothing,” Zimbabwe’s finance minister told French radio. Patrick Chinamasa was touring European capitals this week begging for money from donors. The “we” he was referring to was presumably not President Robert Mugabe’s inner circle, who between them probably have enough money to pay off all of Zimbabwe’s arrears to the IMF. Rather, he meant the government of Zimbabwe, which is indeed broke.

In 2009 Mr Mugabe’s inept and murderous regime printed so much money that inflation topped 500 billion per cent at its peak. When no one would accept Zimbabwe dollars that did not even make good tissue paper, the government abandoned its own currency and adopted the American one instead. This worked well for a while, largely because the opposition won a share of power between 2009 and 2013. Economic policies improved dramatically and growth was a healthy 10% a year.

But then Mr Mugabe’s cronies rigged elections in 2013 and took back full control of the country. They celebrated by doubling the size of the civil service. After three years of misrule and dazzling corruption, the treasury is bare again. Government employees have not been paid for weeks. Soldiers and police are restless. Some are helping themselves: there are now more than 20 police roadblocks shaking down tourists between the country’s main crossing-point from South Africa and Victoria Falls, its biggest attraction. This week civil servants took to the streets, and protests have broken out across the country.



The government cannot print money any more, and commercial bankers would rather be buried in a fire-ants’ nest than lend it any. So Mr Chinamasa is asking Western taxpayers to chip in. As The Economist went to press, he was hoping to finalise a deal to borrow about $1 billion to pay off Zimbabwe’s arrears to the World Bank, the IMF and the African Development Bank, which in turn could then start lending to Zimbabwe again.

Western governments worry that if they let Zimbabwe’s economy collapse, it will cause regional chaos. Far better, some argue, to stump up some cash and thereby strengthen the hand of “reformers” within the ruling party, ZANU-PF, such as Mr Chinamasa. This idea has the backing of the staff and board of the IMF, who say they are impressed by what they have seen so far of Zimbabwe’s economic reforms. Staff at the IMF think that if Zimbabwe gets some cash and speeds up reforms then its economy could leap ahead by about 8% a year. Without this it would bump along, they reckon, at about 4%.

Many observers think this is naive: that the government has misled them both about the true state of the economy and its own willingness to adopt tough reforms. “The IMF is being taken for a ride,” says Tony Hawkins, a Zimbabwean economist, just as they were “in 1982, 1991 and 1997”.

After talking to the government, the IMF estimates that Zimbabwe’s economy has grown slowly but steadily since 2013 and is now about 7% bigger than it was then. Yet this is hard to square with other numbers coming out of Zimbabwe. Take beer sales. Delta, a brewer that sells 98% of the lager in Zimbabwe, now sells about 30% less than it did in 2012, despite having cut the price several times (see chart). It seems unlikely that this is because ordinary Zimbabwean drinkers have traded up to champagne.

The government does not provide anything like timely employment figures (it last checked in 2014), but one proxy comes from the National Social Security Authority, which collects payroll taxes. Last year it took in 7% less revenue than in 2014. Tendai Biti, an opposition politician who served as Mr Chinamasa’s predecessor in the finance ministry between 2009 and 2013, reckons that the economy may be as much as 30% smaller than the official estimates. He also thinks the government is running much larger deficits than it claims (up to a colossal 12% of GDP), by paying civil servants late and not disclosing all of its liabilities. Mr Chinamasa says this is a lie.

The IMF says the Zimbabwean authorities have “met their commitments” under an IMF staff-monitored programme. But these “commitments” consist mostly of promising to enact reforms, such as curbing public spending and making procurement more transparent, rather than actually doing so. Shortly after the IMF’s board praised Zimbabwe’s progress, the central bank shocked everyone by saying it planned to print new notes, “backed” by a $200m loan, to ease a shortage of hard currency. With a straight face, Mr Chinamasa told the BBC that paying exporters in funny money would incentivise them.

History teaches that aid money cannot buy reform unless the recipient government actually believes in it. Does that apply to Mr Mugabe’s regime? These are the same people who have been in charge of the country, alone or in coalition, for 36 years. Their policies have included grabbing white-owned commercial farms (the main source of export earnings) and giving them to cronies, and threatening to seize half of all companies owned by white Zimbabweans and foreigners (who seem reluctant to invest despite Mr Chinamasa’s assurance that their money is welcome).

By Mr Mugabe’s own admission, $15 billion has been stolen from the country’s diamond mines in the past seven years. Global Witness, a watchdog, accuses ruling-party bigwigs of large-scale diamond looting. Mr Chinamasa says Zimbabwe’s economic woes are all the fault of Britain and America.

The last time the Mugabe regime ran out of money, it lost an election and ended up sharing power. This time, donors risk helping it prolong its misrule.





Divorce in Nigeria

Rings fall apart

Official statistics vastly understate Nigeria’s divorce rate

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



JOSEPH ADUWO reckons he is well shot of his spouse. “My wife…fought with nine persons in a day on our street, wearing only bra and underpants. She is a shameless streetfighter,” he told a Lagos court. It duly dissolved their union.

Official statistics suggest that divorce is exceedingly uncommon in Nigeria. Just 0.2% of men and 0.3% of women have legally untied the knot, according to the National Bureau of Statistics. And well under 1% of couples admit to being separated. Yet such counts exclude the vast majority of Nigerians, whose traditional marriage ceremonies are not governed by modern law, says Chief Robert Clarke, a barrister.

In the mostly Muslim north of the country, men may take up to four wives (so long as they obey the Koranic injunction to treat all equally). Often the younger wives are not yet 18. When a husband wants to trade one of his spouses for a younger model, he need only repeat the words “I divorce you” three times to be freed. In 2008 one pensioner split from 82 of his 86 partners to put himself back on the right side of Islamic law.

Regardless of what the Koran says, politicians in Kano, the north’s biggest city, think divorce is breeding “vices in society”. One former governor came up with an innovative solution. In 2013 he married off 1,111 widows and divorcees in a public ceremony costing just under $1m. Another 2,000 brides were lined up by the state government for marriage late last year.

Couples also marry young farther south, but women there tend to be a little more empowered. Olayinka Akanle, a professor of sociology at the University of Ibadan, reckons that when things fall apart they demand separations more readily than in the north. For instance, one Lagos wife had her marriage dissolved on the basis that her drunken husband confused their cooking pots with the toilet. Another woman complained that her banker spouse spent too long stuck in traffic (hardly his fault, he might reasonably claim; Lagos jams are awful).

Other deal-breakers include a wife’s failure to bring cooking utensils from her father’s house. “How will a woman get married without a grinding stone?” her husband lamented. One woman filed for divorce having found her husband to be rather too well endowed. And a trader complained that his wife was not as buxom as he had thought. “I detest those small-size boobs,” he said after a disappointing three months. “It is better to end the marriage.”





Europe




France on edge: Hot time, summer in the cité

German inheritance law: Free will

Scandinavia and Russia: Just visiting

The Balkans and the EU: Balking at enlargement

Labour law: Going posted

Charlemagne: Looking to Mutti





France on edge

Hot time, summer in the cité

A season of strikes, terror and football tests France’s sangfroid

Jul 9th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



THIS time, nothing was left to chance. Shopkeepers rolled down their metal shutters. Glass panels at bus shelters were boarded up. Squads of riot police closed off access roads with walls of transparent panels. In the end, this week’s trade-union march, the 12th in four months against a controversial labour law, was more theatrical than menacing. There were Che Guevara flags, clenched fists and stickers that read “work is a crime against humanity”. A middle-aged woman clutched a banner proclaiming: “What power does, the street undoes”. But the numbers were few, and trouble minimal.

Yet the massive security presence and hermetically sealed streets reflected an anxiety about public order that has become strangely normal this summer. During demonstrations across France these past four months, police have detained 837 people, mostly for violence against the security forces, participation in an armed gathering, or theft and vandalism. As the numbers of protesters have dwindled, the violence, usually caused by infiltrators known as casseurs (vandals), has worsened. Tear gas and water cannons have been deployed on elegant Parisian boulevards. At one demo a police car was set alight with officers inside (they escaped). At another, 15 windows of the Necker children’s hospital were smashed in.

The street protests will now pause as unionists head off on their summer break. Manuel Valls, the Socialist prime minister, decided this week to use a constitutional provision to force the labour law through parliament without a vote. This could have triggered a no-confidence vote in his government, but it was narrowly averted. Polls suggest that most French people have had enough of demos and strikes, which at one point touched oil refineries, railways, rubbish-collection and Air France pilots.

A return of calm to the streets may ease daily life during the tourist season. But it does not end apprehension about public security. In reality, union unrest was only one concern in a complex mesh that has made this summer a challenge for France. The underlying threat remains terrorism, and the alert level is still at its highest (“imminent attack”). Last month two police-force members were murdered in a terrorist attack in a suburb west of Paris. “France is today, clearly, the country the most threatened” in Europe by Islamic State (IS), said Patrick Calvar, the head of the internal intelligence service, to a parliamentary commission in May.

Security services have been especially worried about the Euro 2016 football tournament, the continent’s biggest, which ends on July 10th after 51 matches in ten French cities, and the Tour de France cycle race, which runs until July 24th. This is not because of specific known threats, says a former intelligence boss, but because in France “the threat is permanently high.” Tight perimeter security at football stadiums, and at the walled open-air “fan zones”, has rendered such venues relatively secure—despite hooliganism at early matches. But fears continue over “soft” targets such as public transport, shopping streets and other crowded places. “We know that [IS] is planning new attacks,” said Mr Calvar.

The French response to this threat has been two-fold: a strengthened military and security presence backed by sweeping powers granted to the police under the state of emergency imposed last November, together with reinforced intelligence. Under Operation Sentinelle, 10,000 soldiers are on patrol across France, putting a strain on the armed forces. Soldiers have become a familiar sight on the Paris underground, and up and down the Champs-Elysées. At the same time, the government has boosted intelligence spending. The number of domestic agents will rise from 3,200 to 4,400 by 2018.

The call to armes

A dozen attempted terrorist attacks have been thwarted in France in the past year. The shortcomings of counter-terrorism operations, however, were underlined on July 5th by a cross-party parliamentary inquiry into the attacks in Paris on November 13th. Sébastien Pietrasanta, the Socialist rapporteur, pointed to the “limited impact” of the state of emergency. It enabled the police to make some useful searches and arrests at first, but these no longer justify the emergency powers. The government may lift it after the Tour de France ends. Moreover, said Mr Pietrasanta, Operation Sentinelle was “unsustainable in the long run”, and soldiers were “worn out”.

On intelligence, the rapporteurs underscored the weakness of French on-the-ground information-gathering. This was exacerbated by the dismantling in 2008 of the Renseignements Généraux, the former network of domestic field agents, and its merger into the new internal service. The consequence has been an over-reliance on communications surveillance, and an under-detection of “weak signals” via informants on the ground. Better co-ordination and streamlining of the various counter-terrorism bodies was also needed.

The government will now examine the findings. In the meantime, if France enters the sunny season without further calamity, there will be relief but no sense of complacency. More than 1,200 French citizens have participated in jihad in Syria or Iraq—and, worryingly, 244 have returned home. The task for France is immense and imposes real strains, not least of getting the balance right between alerting, and alarming, the public. Even if the state of emergency is lifted after July 26th, the threat will remain at its highest. The long summer of anxiety is not over yet.





German inheritance law

Free will

Taxes on Germans who inherit businesses often come to nought

Jul 9th 2016 | BERLIN | From the print edition



WOLFGANG GRUPP embodies the values of the Mittelstand—the mid-sized firms, often family-owned, that employ 60% of German workers. Permanently tanned and dressed to the nines, he is the third generation in his family to run Trigema, Germany’s largest maker of T-shirts and tennis clothes. He takes pride in the fact that all 1,200 of his employees are in Germany, and all are well-paid. He is grooming his son and daughter, educated at a Swiss boarding school and the London School of Economics, to run the firm with the same sense of social duty.

That is why Mr Grupp insists that businesses such as his must be exempt from inheritance tax. People who inherit cash or shares, he argues, can easily spend it. But when his children inherit Trigema, they “can’t start eating the factory”. Hitting such heirs with tax might force many to sell, he says, and then German business would “soon be finished”—especially if the bargain-hunters come from America, that land of vulture capitalism.

Such faith in the social superiority of family firms is the reason why Germany exempts most heirs of businesses from inheritance tax, provided they do not lay people off for seven years. That, however, can lead to rather perverse outcomes. Heirs of non-business wealth face a steep tax schedule that rises to 50% at the top. Inheritors of businesses often get away with paying nothing.

This means that even though Germans pass on more than €200 billion ($221 billion) of wealth each year, their government collects very little inheritance tax: €5 billion to €6 billion a year, less than 1% of overall tax revenues. At a time of anxiety about inequality, favouring Mittelstand heirs seems outrageous to many Germans. In 2014 the country’s constitutional court agreed, ruling that Germany must reform its inheritance tax.

Think-tanks from across the political spectrum leapt at the chance to propose major reforms. A glance across Europe reveals many options. Countries such as Austria, Portugal or Cyprus no longer have any inheritance tax at all. Others, such as France, Spain and Belgium, tax inheritances at relatively high rates (though with complex loopholes). A third group, including Greece and Germany, is in the middle, combining low tax rates with small exemptions (Greece) or high rates with big and complicated exemptions (Germany).

All the reform proposals, from both the right and the left, followed the generally sensible taxation principle of broadening the base and lowering the rates. For example, the Greens, an opposition party on the centre-left, are proposing a radically simplified 15% flat tax on inheritances. To avoid the spectre of heirs having to sell the firm to pay tax, this plan would allow them to spread payments over many years.

Alas, the reformers did not reckon with the lowest-common-denominator politics of Germany’s “grand coalition” between centre-right Christian Democrats, centre-left Social Democrats and the conservative Bavarian party, the CSU. All three already have their eyes fixed on next year’s federal elections. The Social Democrats want to soak the rich; the CSU wants rather to protect family businesses.

In the resulting compromise the coalition “once again missed an opportunity” for serious reform, says Clemens Fuest of the Ifo Institute, a think-tank in Munich. The new system tightens some loopholes: it will no longer be possible to move the family Van Gogh from the living room to the business’s offices and declare it tax-exempt. And heirs of businesses worth more than €26m will have to show that they cannot pay the tax out of their private wealth to get off free, while those inheriting more than €90m will get no exemptions at all. But there are so many other tweaks that the new system will raise only an additional €235m, a pittance. Stefan Bach of the German Institute for Economic Research thinks the regime is so similar to the old one that it will get into trouble with the constitutional court again.

There remains a glimmer of hope. Germany’s council of 16 federal states, its analogue of an upper house, must still approve the new law on July 8th. But the states, including most of those where the Greens share power, seem set on blocking it. That could lead to a new round of fudging. Or it may cast Germany’s inheritance tax into legal limbo, says Dieter Janecek, the Greens’ economic spokesman. That might give the flat tax a chance for a comeback. Where there’s a will, there’s a way.





Scandinavia and Russia

Just visiting

Russian aggression is pushing Finland and Sweden towards NATO

Jul 9th 2016 | HELSINKI AND SUWALKI | From the print edition



VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russia’s president, rarely visits the European Union these days. When he does, it is unclear whether he wishes to mend fences or issue threats. During a visit on July 1st to Finland, which has a 1,340km (883-mile) border with Russia, Mr Putin did both: he made reassurance sound like a threat. Even as NATO was running military drills in the Baltics and preparing for its summit in Warsaw on July 8th, Mr Putin told his Finnish counterpart, Sauli Niinisto, that he considered Finland a “priority” partner for Russia, spoke of “friendship”—and advised him to keep out of NATO and even follow Britain out of the European Union.

Coming from a revisionist Russian leader, the word “friendship” has a menacing echo in Finland. After Stalin’s unsuccessful attempts to invade Finland in 1939, 1940 and 1944, the Soviet Union in 1948 imposed a “Friendship Treaty” which limited Finnish sovereignty. It was only abandoned in 1992. But while Finland later joined the EU, it stayed out of NATO—something that many Finns now regret. Mr Putin’s military interventions in Georgia in 2008 and Ukraine in 2014 have overturned the post-cold war order. Now he wants to impress on Finland that the security of its borders depends on Russia.

It is not just empty rhetoric. Late last year, Russia allowed some 2,000 asylum-seekers of various nationalities through its side of a checkpoint, forcing the Finns to admit them lest they be trapped in no-man’s land. Given how tightly Russia controls its checkpoints, Finnish officials concluded that the Kremlin was sending a signal that it could respond to any move to join NATO by asymmetrical means. Teija Tiilikainen, director of the Finnish Institute of International Affairs, says it “looked like part of a Russian ‘hybrid action’”—the Russian strategy of using non-military methods to achieve military goals. Finland has also been subject to Russian cyber-attacks.

Perhaps Mr Putin’s most threatening statement was his claim that Russia had “no troops stationed closer than 1,500km from the Finnish border”. (This was a gaffe; while Russian troops are not concentrated on the long stretch of the border, its new Arctic Brigade is stationed a few kilometres from Finnish Lapland.) If Finland were to join the alliance, Mr Putin warned, Russia would bring its troops back. “NATO would probably be happy to fight Russia to the last Finnish soldier,” he quipped.

Sweden, too, has remained militarily neutral and refrained from joining NATO, though it enjoyed secret American guarantees of protection during the cold war. But Russia’s menacing posture is now driving Finland and Sweden to deepen their military co-operation, and sparking debate in both countries about joining NATO. Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, helped prod the debate during a visit to Helsinki in June by saying that Russia “will never attack a member state of NATO”—hardly reassuring for non-NATO countries.

Finland does not think Russia will attack it, not least because of Finland’s military strength. But it is nervous about an accidental escalation, or a spillover of the rising tension in the Baltics. NATO has been beefing up its presence there; it is particularly worried about the Suwalki Gap, a 100km stretch along the Polish-Lithuanian border between Belarus and the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. The gap is currently guarded by a Polish anti-tank artillery squadron equipped with outdated Soviet-era arms. A Russian thrust through to Kaliningrad would cut off overland access from western Europe to the Baltics.

“At present the Baltic states are effectively indefensible,” says François Heisbourg of the International Institute for Strategic Studies, a think-tank. If Russia takes the gap, the only way to supply them would be through Sweden and Finland.

Finland knows that joining NATO would be seen as a red line by Moscow, and might provoke an asymmetrical response. Mr Niinisto has promised to hold a referendum on NATO membership should the government decide to favour it. At present, public opinion would most likely be against it. But this could change if Sweden, Finland’s closest ally, were to join.

In the meantime, Finland’s policy consists of discussing NATO membership and improving its ties and deepening its bilateral military relationship with America, all while trying to maintain a special relationship with Russia. (Mr Niinisto was the first European leader to fly to Sochi to meet Mr Putin after Russia’s seizure of Crimea, a step which raised many eyebrows in Europe.) Finland considers the possibility of joining NATO to be a tool of deterrence. But as Jukka Salovaara, a senior Finnish diplomat, says: “If the situation deteriorated quickly, there would be no time to apply.”

Finland is justifiably proud of handling its difficult eastern neighbour while transforming itself into a prosperous Western country, with one of the strongest territorial armies in Europe. But what worked against the Soviet Union may not work against Russia, which has made an art of unpredictability and “asymmetrical” action. The risk is Russia may interpret Finland’s ambiguity as a sign of hesitance and weakness rather than strength.

It was when NATO failed to offer Georgia a membership action plan in 2008, but left the door open, that Russia struck. Shortly thereafter, a joke started making the rounds in Finland. Vladimir Putin lands at Helsinki airport and proceeds to passport control. “Name?” asks the border guard. “Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin,” answers the Russian president. “Occupation?” asks the border guard. “No, just visiting,” answers Mr Putin. After Ukraine, says Risto Penttila, a Finnish policy expert, people stopped laughing.





The Balkans and the EU

Balking at enlargement

A powder-keg region worries that Brexit may block its path to Europe

Jul 9th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



BACK when the European project was in top gear, it was largely driven by the continent’s fear of Balkanisation. Now, the Balkans fear what they dub “Britainisation”: the risk that Brexit will block their efforts to get into the European Union. On July 4th the leaders of the western Balkan countries met in Paris with François Hollande, Angela Merkel and various EU officials to discuss their accession bids. The Balkan leaders were “in shock”, said a senior diplomat. Since the end of the wars of the 1990s, joining the EU has been their foreign-policy priority. They wanted to know whether Britain’s decision to leave had poisoned Europe’s appetite for enlargement.

The first omen was not good. After the referendum, Britain failed to grant its consent for Serbia to proceed to the next stage of its membership negotiations. British officials soon reversed the decision, and EU officials put it down to post-referendum chaos.

The Paris meeting, the third in a series, was a German initiative—like much else in the Balkans these days. It included various feel-good gestures. The EU announced €150m ($167m) in aid for infrastructure and other projects. A youth-exchange organisation was launched to help reconcile the region’s formerly warring nations. But the meat of the conference was the encounter between Mrs Merkel, Mr Hollande and the Balkan leaders, notably those from non-EU countries: Serbia, Albania, Kosovo, Bosnia, Macedonia and Montenegro.

The EU’s aim in giving these Balkan states a path to membership has been to guarantee the peace in a region that has long been a source of European crises. Mrs Merkel and Mr Hollande insisted that this policy holds, and enlargement will carry on. Edi Rama, Albania’s prime minister, insisted: “No one knows where [Britain] will end up, but it is sure Albania will end up in Europe.”

Yet even if the EU does not halt enlargement, it may be too preoccupied by Britain’s exit and Euroscepticism elsewhere to make much progress. That would be a shame. As Goran Svilanovic of the Regional Co-operation Council, a Sarajevo-based multilateral body, puts it: “In geopolitics, there is no vacuum.” Russia, Turkey, China and radical Islamists are gaining as EU influence fades. Those worried about migration should recall that Balkan collapse touched off Europe’s previous refugee crisis—and Balkan co-operation was needed to bring order to the current one. “The decision of Great Britain has changed nothing,” said Mrs Merkel. One hopes not.





Labour law

Going posted

The EU may force labour exporters to pay local union wages

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

On the welding floor, no one can tell you’re Hungarian

THREE years ago, the STX France shipyard in Saint-Nazaire was on the brink of closing down. Then it landed contracts to build a fleet of giant ships for the cruise lines Royal Caribbean and MSC Cruises. Thousands of locals expected to be hired. But many were disappointed: between a quarter and a third of the jobs went to Poles, Hungarians and others from central and eastern Europe. While French workers command high wages under the country’s sectoral labour agreements, these “posted workers”—contracted in their home countries to work in another European Union country—need only receive the local minimum, under EU law.

That may be about to change. The European Commission is trying to shrink the gap between local and posted workers’ pay. Western European countries have welcomed the move. Eastern ones, unsurprisingly, are trying to block it.

The number of posted workers in Europe rose by 44% between 2010 and 2014, to 1.92m. Most come from eastern Europe and work in construction or manufacturing; the top destination countries are France, Germany and Belgium. Besides paying posted workers less, employers make their social-security contributions in their home countries, where they are much lower than in the west: the average in Poland is 18% of wages, compared with 38% in France.

Jean-Claude Juncker, the European Commission’s president, promises to fight the undercutting of local labour standards by foreign workers, which the commission terms “social dumping”. In March, Marianne Thyssen, the EU’s employment commissioner, set out revisions that would force companies to pay their posted workers not the minimum wage, but the same wages guaranteed for local workers under sectoral labour agreements, which are much higher. (In Saxony, a German construction foreman earns over €19 per hour; a foreman posted from Poland may earn just €11.05.) But ten former Soviet-bloc countries (plus Denmark, a frequent odd-man-out on European issues) invoked the EU’s “yellow card” mechanism, which lets them temporarily stop measures that they think intrude on national prerogatives.

Since then the revision has been frozen. On July 3rd France’s prime minister, Manuel Valls, threatened to stop applying the directive on posted workers altogether unless the changes go ahead. This could mean requiring firms to pay them French union wages or simply deporting them. Britain’s vote to leave the EU lends the issue urgency: since the referendum, Mr Valls has been calling for a Europe with more social benefits as a way to fight rising euroscepticism.

Supporters of the revisions say posted workers are often exploited. In a typical example, a Bulgarian couple picking fruit on a French farm had to work 16 hours a day in cold weather with only light clothing; their employer deducted the cost of flights home from their wages, in effect trapping them. The EU Agency for Fundamental Rights says this is not unusual.

Yet many western European countries, and their trade unions, are worried less about the plight of eastern European workers than about competition for their own. In Germany “many good jobs in the construction industry” have been destroyed, says Dietmar Schäfers, vice president of IG BAU, a trade union. Small businesses say it is hard for them to employ posted workers, giving larger firms an advantage. And playing up the threat of low-paid foreign workers is political gold for anti-migrant eurosceptic parties such as France’s National Front.

Lower wages are, indeed, an eastern European selling point. (One Polish trade-union association calls low pay “one of the competitive advantages of Polish companies”.) Since 1996, as the EU has expanded from 15 to 28 members, the ratio of highest to lowest national median wages has gone from 3:1 to 10:1. But researchers at Belgium’s Leuven University say the use of posted workers is helping to reduce the gap, since migrant workers make more abroad than they would have done at home. It is especially important for European countries hit by severe recessions, like Greece and Spain, whose workers can still find jobs in unaffected countries. And there is no evidence that posted workers drive down wages in destination countries.

Blocking the extra-national operations of firms from weaker economies risks creating a two-tier economic system. Raising the floor for pay will not eradicate fraud. Companies may simply exploit loopholes, such as a clause excepting postings of less than six months. And it may not do much to stop exploitation. That depends on better enforcement by authorities in sending and receiving countries. (New rules on monitoring, passed in 2014, did not go into effect until June 18th.)

The commission has until the end of July to review the proposal. If it dismisses the yellow card, the measures will harm the eastern European workers they are supposed to protect. And by restricting the free movement of labour, they would undermine the European project, which is already looking shaky.





Charlemagne

Looking to Mutti

With Britain stumbling towards the exit, it falls to Angela Merkel to give the European Union new shape

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



AS IN crises past, Europe this week turned its gaze towards Angela Merkel, looking for clues to how the German chancellor plans to keep the continent from cracking up. Amid all the uncertainty that has followed the Brexit referendum, one thing seems clear: with Britain leaving the European Union, or dithering over how to do so, Germany’s already awkward weight in the remaining club of 27 will grow even heavier. Henry Kissinger’s (probably apocryphal) question about whom to call when you want to call Europe no longer needs asking: obviously, you dial Berlin. That seems reassuring to some, unbearable to many. France, Italy and Spain henceforth “take their lead directly from Chancellor Angela Merkel”, sneers Marine Le Pen, France’s Eurosceptic-in-chief, “without running through Brussels.”

For all the sudden interest in her views, Mrs Merkel is in no hurry to supply them. Her slow, measured style is one reason she was able to accumulate such power in the first place. The Germans have even coined a verb in her honour: “to merkel” means to delay decisions while time diminishes problems to a manageable size, and opponents make valuable mistakes. Since the referendum on June 23rd she has thus been simultaneously tough on Britain (“no cherry-picking” during negotiations, she promised the Bundestag) and lenient (seeing “no reason to be especially nasty”). If it were up to her, she would say no more for now.

Domestic politics, however, will force her to break her silence sooner than she would like. Germany’s next federal election is not until September 2017. But the junior partners in Mrs Merkel’s grand coalition, the centre-left Social Democrats (SPD), have taken the Brexit vote as a cue to begin their anti-Merkel campaign early, using the European question to differentiate themselves.

Now that the pesky Brits can no longer play their habitual obstructionist role, the SPD wants the EU-27 to push hard for deeper European integration and centralisation. In a joint paper Sigmar Gabriel, the SPD’s boss (and Mrs Merkel’s vice-chancellor, as well as her presumptive challenger), and Martin Schulz, president of the European Parliament (and another potential SPD candidate against Mrs Merkel), call for “refounding Europe”. The European Commission in Brussels, so loathed by Eurosceptics everywhere, must become “a real European government”, elaborates Mr Schulz. This new and improved EU, they contend, must pour huge investments into roads, power grids and data cables in southern member states to reduce youth unemployment there and boost growth. This is a form of German hegemony that would delight France, Italy and Greece.

But they won’t get it. The Social Democrats are only the junior partners in Germany’s coalition, and Mrs Merkel’s Christian Democrats are pulling in the opposite direction. For now it is Wolfgang Schäuble, the finance minister, who is voicing the party’s views. Mr Schäuble, originally a European federalist in favour of ever closer union, has concluded that the referendum signals that Europeans will not stomach yet more centralisation, as he told a German newspaper, Welt am Sonntag. What, he asks pointedly, does “refounding Europe” even mean? Rip up the treaties and start anew? That would take time the EU does not have. And anyway, “Now is not the time for visions.”

The EU, he thinks, must instead pick a few big problems and prove to its disenchanted citizens that it can solve them: controlling refugee flows and securing the bloc’s external borders, say, or tying national energy grids together. And “if the commission fails to act, then we will just take control and solve problems among our governments,” he adds. In the jargon of Eurocrats, this threatened “intergovernmental” approach is the direct opposite of the “supranational” path favoured by federalists. It moves power from the commission, the EU’s central executive body and civil service, to the European Council, made up of the leaders of the separate member states.

As in the euro crisis, such a shift raises the profile of those leaders, and especially of Mrs Merkel. Germany’s policy elite is aware, indeed worried, that perceptions of her dominance could elicit a backlash. If other leaders team up to balance her power, it will stir old German fears of isolation. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, the foreign minister and another leading Social Democrat, calls this a recurrent “simultaneity: an expectation of Germany, but also a fear that Germany becomes too strong within Europe.”

Southerners spend, Germany pays

Yet insiders say that since the referendum, Mrs Merkel has been preoccupied by a greater fear: that the EU is arriving at a form of German hegemony in which Germany is expected to take on the union’s burdens and responsibilities, while everyone else picks and chooses among its benefits. In the euro crisis German money and guarantees have stood behind the common currency. In the refugee crisis Germany maintained its “welcome culture” while others closed their borders. In the coming Brexit negotiations Britain may demand access to the single market without granting freedom of movement to EU residents, while Germany and its welfare system remain open to all.

In a Europe overshadowed by Brexit, Germany is thus feeling the dilemma of hegemony that America has known for seven decades: the temptation to use its power in its own interests conflicts with the duty to use that power to preserve global order. In Europe that means containing the EU’s “centrifugal forces”, as Mrs Merkel said repeatedly in the week after the referendum.

But the order she has in mind seems like the looser Europe once favoured by the British, not that of the federalists. “What is ‘the Union’?” she asked rhetorically at a press conference on June 28th during the European summit. It is the council, the commission and the parliament, she answered, and of those, in German, the first is masculine, the second feminine, the third neuter. Perhaps Germany’s “Mutti” intends to be Europe’s father figure.





Britain




The Conservative leadership: The battle for Downing Street

Sterling: How low can it go?

The Brexit procedure: Article of destiny

The Chilcot report: Iraq’s grim lessons

Bagehot: ¡Hasta siempre, comandante!





The Conservative leadership

The battle for Downing Street

Theresa May now seems the most likely person to lead the Tories, and the country, but she will have to fend off a pro-Brexit rival

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



SOMETIMES a day seems a long time in Britain’s currently febrile politics. This week the leader of the UK Independence Party, Nigel Farage, resigned (for a third time), after achieving the party’s goal of winning the June 23rd referendum on leaving the European Union. The Labour Party continued its drawn-out suicide course (see article). And the race began to succeed David Cameron as Conservative leader and prime minister.

The favourite is the home secretary, Theresa May. Despite backing the losing Remain side in the referendum, she won the support of 165 Tory MPs, half the total, in the first round of voting on July 5th. The second round was held as we went to press. After an extraordinary bout of mutually assured destruction among Brexiteers had eliminated Boris Johnson, a former mayor of London, it seemed likely that Mrs May’s rival would be Andrea Leadsom, the energy minister. Michael Gove, the justice secretary, was still hoping to edge past her.

The final choice will be made by a postal ballot of the 150,000-odd Tory party members, with the result coming on September 9th. The race is hard to call because, although Mrs May has a clear lead among MPs, party members may prefer a Brexiteer. Since no candidate wants a general election, the winner will become Britain’s next prime minister.

In the space of just a few weeks Mrs May has become the preferred choice of the Tory establishment. George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer, once held that mantle. But his fervent and at times over-the-top campaigning for Remain blew up his chances. Other Remainers such as Stephen Crabb, the work and pensions secretary, were deemed unready. In contrast, Mrs May’s backing for Remain was cautious and understated, and her previous reputation was as a Eurosceptic. She now says that “Brexit means Brexit”.

She is seen as brisk and efficient, but not especially warm. She is not a gregarious type or a frequenter of the House of Commons tea room, still less of its bars. Unlike Mr Cameron and lots of Tory MPs, she is state-educated, though like so many she is an Oxford graduate (in geography). Like Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, she is the daughter of a church pastor. Her only frivolity is her famous leopard-print shoes.

Her political career has been similarly unflashy. When she was picked to chair the Conservative Party in 2002, she told the party conference that too many voters saw the Tories as “plain unattractive” and the “nasty party”. She supported Mr Cameron’s later efforts to detoxify and modernise the party’s image. She now wants “a country that truly works for everyone”.

What has really made her name is her time as home secretary since May 2010. The Home Office is a notorious graveyard for political careers, and it often sees rapid turnover. Yet in August Mrs May will become the longest-serving home secretary since the 19th century. No politician since Palmerston in 1855 has moved directly from home secretary to prime minister. But Mrs May’s reputation has been enhanced by her stint. She has managed the rare combination of social progressivism (she was an early backer, by Conservative standards, of same-sex marriage) with a hard line on law and order. Nor has she been afraid to challenge vested interests, including the police. She will not have minded much when Kenneth Clarke, a Tory grandee who is a former home secretary as well as chancellor, was picked up on a microphone this week calling her a “bloody difficult woman”.

Mrs May has also argued strongly against excessive immigration, for instance in a jarringly rabid speech to the 2015 Tory party conference. She has said she wants to take Britain out of the European Convention on Human Rights, though she has dropped that goal in her leadership campaign. But her broader views have been coloured by her experience of the value of co-operation with other European countries on crime and the fight against terrorism. In her pro-Remain speech in April, she stressed the security case for continuing membership of the EU. And in 2014, when she was negotiating a British opt-out from EU co-operation in justice and home affairs, she was careful to opt back in to such sensible measures as the European arrest warrant.

Her biggest problem with party members will be that most of them voted for Brexit. And the strongest card of her rival will be an insistence that the forthcoming negotiations with the EU should be handled by a Brexiteer. In 2013 Mrs Leadsom said leaving the EU would be a “disaster”, but she claims her time as founder of the pro-reform Fresh Start group turned her in favour of Brexit. She stresses her status as a working mother (Mrs May has no children). Her main weakness is lack of experience (she has never been a cabinet minister); questions have also been raised over her City credentials. She is not much liked in the party, her ministerial record is patchy and, unlike with Mrs May, civil servants who have worked for her have not been impressed. Mr Gove scores better on all these counts.

Mrs Leadsom also favours getting on quickly with Brexit, promising to trigger Article 50, the legal route to it, as soon as she takes office. Mrs May, more cautiously, wants to defer this until the end of the year (see article). More than her rivals, she understands the value of full access to the EU’s single market and the trade-off that Britain may have to make between preserving this and limiting EU migration. She has had to soften her line that the status of EU nationals already in Britain should be a matter for negotiation; she now says they can stay so long as Britons abroad get reciprocal rights. But the irony she might appreciate most is that a Brexit-induced recession may now cut immigration sharply.





Sterling

How low can it go?

Already at a 30-year low, the pound is vulnerable to further depreciation

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THE day after the EU referendum, sterling fell by 8% against the dollar in a frenetic day of trading. Since then the pound’s drift has been more sedate, but no less persistent: on July 6th it reached $1.29, the lowest level in three decades. It would be no surprise if the pound continued to slide.

Investors have sold sterling assets in the expectation that the Bank of England will loosen monetary policy to cope with the looming economic slowdown. Indeed, on July 5th the bank reduced capital requirements for banks, in a bid to stave off a credit crunch. In principle this will create £150 billion ($195 billion) of extra lending capacity. At the next meeting of its monetary-policy committee, on July 14th, the bank may also cut interest rates below their current level of 0.5%, or implement extra quantitative easing.

Though its value has fallen relative to the dollar, by other measures the pound is hardly cheap. The “trade-weighted” sterling index, which is adjusted for the currencies of Britain’s other trading partners, is still about 5% higher than it was at the peak of the financial crisis (see chart). The euro has also been knocked in the post-referendum panic, meaning that sterling’s losses against the currency of its biggest trading partner have been trimmed.

Political ructions following the Brexit vote may put further pressure on the pound. In the run-up to the referendum, traders talked of a “Brexit premium”. Sterling was weaker against the dollar than the expected path of interest rates in Britain and America implied. But since the referendum the Brexit premium has looked relatively stable, even though a messy divorce from the EU now seems to be on the cards. If investors come to fear a loss of Britain’s political stability, sterling could fall still further.

However, what may seem like Britain’s biggest vulnerability may turn out not to be so. The current-account deficit is now at an all-time high of 7% of GDP. At its simplest, this measures Britain’s net borrowing from abroad. Were foreigners to pull money from Britain en masse, the pound would plunge. Happily, though, the risk of this is smaller than it was a few years ago. The liabilities Britain has taken on to finance its cumulative current-account deficits are largely made up of equity and long-term debt. Such capital is stickier than deposits or short-term debt, which can vanish in a trice. Still, foreign inflows into areas like London property may tail off (see article).

Capital Economics, a consultancy, reckons that the pound will end up at around $1.20. If so, moans about the cost of imported gadgets or foreign holidays will only get louder. Unfortunately, the Brexiteers’ retort—that a weak pound is good news for exporters and thus the economy—is unconvincing. The experience of 2008-09, when exports barely responded following sterling’s depreciation, is telling: the hit to confidence and credit from Brexit is likely to hurt exporters more than a weak pound helps them.





The Brexit procedure

Article of destiny

Who can trigger Article 50?

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

FIRST came economic and political turmoil. Now, inevitably, come the lawyers. Mishcon de Reya, a London-based law firm, backed by David Pannick, a senior barrister, is preparing a court challenge to claim that the government cannot lawfully invoke Article 50 of the Lisbon treaty, which allows a country to leave the European Union, without a formal act of Parliament. In theory, such an act might be blocked in one or both parliamentary chambers, since both have a pro-Remain majority.

The argument is, first, that the June 23rd referendum was not legally binding, which is correct. But second, Mishcon de Reya and Lord Pannick assert that, once Article 50 is invoked, it may lead within two years to formal Brexit without any further parliamentary action. That would contradict the 1972 European Communities Act, which gives supremacy to EU law: hence the need for a new act. Yet most constitutional experts disagree. Foreign policy has always been a matter of royal prerogative, exercised by the prime minister or foreign secretary. Martin Howe, another senior barrister, insists that the Brexit referendum vote not merely permits, but mandates, the invocation of Article 50, without the need for a further parliamentary vote.



Daily chart: Britain votes to leave the European Union

In the end, political reality will trump the lawyers. The next prime minister may face overwhelming pressure to hold a parliamentary vote before invoking Article 50. It is hard to imagine that MPs would choose to overturn the decision of the referendum. The real issue is exactly when the article should be invoked.

When it is, a two-year deadline is set, and most of the bargaining power is handed to the other 27 EU countries, which get to agree on the terms for Brexit without Britain having any vote on them. But delaying the process has problems of its own. Other EU leaders are likely to insist that there can be no formal negotiations until Article 50 is invoked, precisely because it gives them greater leverage. And if the formal process is put off until the end of the year it will fall slap in the middle of heated campaigning for the French presidential election next spring. The Netherlands, Germany and (probably) Italy are also heading for tricky elections next year. Domestic political considerations will make it even harder for other EU leaders to be helpful to the next British prime minister, whoever he—or, more likely, she—is.





The Chilcot report

Iraq’s grim lessons

The official inquiry into the war delivers a scathing verdict on its planning, execution and aftermath

Jul 6th 2016 | From the print edition



THERE has been no shortage of reports and inquiries into the Iraq war, which broke out in 2003. But after nearly seven years of toil, Sir John Chilcot and his fellow commissioners have published what future historians will regard as the definitive account of what happened and why. The lessons the Iraq Inquiry draws from 2.6m words of painstakingly accumulated evidence have almost as much relevance to American policymakers as they do to their British counterparts. The picture it paints, for all the familiarity of its main elements, is a devastating one of individual and institutional failure. The verdict on Tony Blair, Britain’s prime minister at the time, is not that he is a liar and a war criminal (as many contend), but a man steered by a fatal combination of hubris, wishful thinking and moral fervour into an ultimately disastrous course of action.

The most damning of the inquiry’s conclusions is the overarching one that, based on Britain’s professed goal of disarming Saddam Hussein (it was never explicitly regime change), military action in March 2003 was not, as Mr Blair claimed, a last resort. The attempt to deal with Iraq’s putative weapons of mass destruction (WMD) without going to war was not yet over: the UN inspection team lead by Hans Blix was getting better co-operation from the Iraqis and was pleading for more time; there was no imminent threat from Saddam; there was strong UN Security Council backing for continued inspections. In short, the inquiry judges, although military intervention might have been required in the future, an adaptive strategy of containment had plenty of life left in it.

But Mr Blair was in thrall to the military timetable set by George W. Bush, and the promise the prime minister had made him in July the previous year to “be with you, whatever”. If Britain had decided on the eve of the invasion to withdraw its forces, the damage to the relationship with America would have been far greater than if Mr Blair had earlier exercised more caution in his commitment to the enterprise.

Too good to check

That lack of caution, combined with a disregard for process that bordered on the feckless, was a recurring theme in the run-up to the war. Mr Blair never had any doubts that the intelligence assessments of Iraq’s WMD and missile programmes were accurate. The belief that the Iraqi regime had chemical and biological weapons, was determined to preserve and enhance them, and had developed sophisticated methods of concealment was deeply ingrained. The intelligence was not fabricated, but nor was it questioned or challenged in the way it should have been, given how much was resting on it.

Regarding the “dodgy dossier” of September 2002, the inquiry does not suggest intelligence was improperly included in it or that the British government improperly influenced its text. The problem lay in the judgments made by the Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC), which assesses the output of the intelligence-gathering agencies, and “owned” the dossier, and Mr Blair’s use of the words “beyond doubt” in his foreword. By then, MI6 and Mr Blair were pumping each other up. When Mr Blix’s inspectors failed to find any WMD, the JIC, gripped by “groupthink”, put it down to the Iraqis’ talent for subterfuge. As the date of the invasion drew near, concerns about the quality of sources had crept in, but the spooks still reckoned the weapons would be found and they would be vindicated.

The report warns of the dangers of explicitly using intelligence to support a policy decision without repeatedly testing the assumptions underlying it, and of allowing a degree of certainty to be conveyed which such assessments rarely withstand.

On the still-vexed question of the legality of the war after the failure to obtain a resolution from the UN Security Council authorising the use of force, the inquiry demurs from expressing an opinion. But it is scathing about the contortions performed by the then-attorney-general, Lord Goldsmith, to come up with the goods. When the armed forces said that they needed more than just his view that a “reasonable case” could be made that resolution 1441 revived the authorisation in a previous resolution dating from the first Gulf war in 1990, he swiftly came up with what he called a “better view”. This was based on little more than Mr Blair assuring him that Iraq had committed further material breaches of resolution 1441.



British military engagements and deaths, in graphics

After determining that it was neither right nor necessary to invade Iraq in March 2003, the main focus of the inquiry is on the preparations for what followed. It is hard to exaggerate the sheer awfulness of what emerges from the report. Everyone in government, not least Mr Blair, paid constant lip-service to the need for proper planning for the aftermath of the invasion. The Ministry of Defence declared in December 2002 that the post-conflict phase of operations would be “strategically decisive”; the military planners made the case for a major civilian component in the post-conflict deployment. But nothing happened. Both the Foreign Office and the Department for International Development looked away. No individual or department was assigned even to look at the issues or suggest ways of mitigating known risks.

The assumption was that America would draw up the plan and that the UN would have a big post-conflict role, bringing in other countries to share the burden of peacekeeping and reconstruction. Even in the face of strong resistance from Washington to the idea of the UN taking over (matched only by the UN’s disinclination to do so), the British government sat on its hands, reluctant to contemplate the warning from officials that it could soon find itself “drawn into a huge commitment of UK resources for a highly complex task of administration and law and order for an uncertain period”.

What made matters worse was the very late decision for British forces to enter Iraq with the Americans from the south, after Turkey said it would not allow the coalition to enter from its territory. The British, who had expected to find themselves working with their old friends the Kurds, were landed with Basra and three other mainly Shiite south-eastern provinces, while the Americans stormed on to Baghdad. There were several consequences, all bad. The larger-than-planned-for force (three brigades) needed for the south had to be cobbled together at the last moment; there was only patchy understanding of the place they would be going to and little time to analyse the risks; and Basra was a long way from Baghdad, where all the post-invasion decisions would be made.

“With you, whatever”: Blair’s promise

Astonishingly, despite acceding to British generals’ demand to “go in big” (Britain contributed about 30% of the tanks for the invasion), Mr Blair extracted no promise from Mr Bush about joint decision-making. The result was that the Coalition Provisional Authority in Baghdad was an almost wholly American show and the junior occupying power had virtually no ability to influence policy decisions, such as the disbandment of the Iraqi army and “de-Baathification”, which were to have terrible results. The inquiry leaves it an open question whether a stronger British voice would have made things better.

It might not have if the performance of the army, once the successful initial military campaign was over, is any guide. Like their American counterparts, British generals were complacent about what they expected to be a fairly benign security environment and were taken by surprise when it deteriorated precipitously after the invasion. A shortage of the right equipment quickly became evident when British soldiers started being blown up by local militias. Yet little was done to improve matters, not because of a lack of money but because the army had not prepared itself psychologically for a long occupation.

The issue of the lightly armoured Snatch Land Rover illustrated the generals’ thinking. Serviceable in Northern Ireland, they became “mobile coffins” in Iraq because of their lack of resistance to improvised explosive devices. Yet the army resisted replacing them with something better: it thought it would be leaving in a year or so, and wanted to preserve a costly new armoured fighting-vehicle programme which was later cancelled.



Surge, then scram

A lack of helicopters was exacerbated when the generals succeeded in pushing for the ill-fated deployment of 3,300 troops to Helmand, one of Afghanistan’s most volatile provinces. Less than a year after the invasion of Iraq, they had concluded that there was little more they could achieve there and that Helmand offered the prospect of doing some proper soldiering. The inquiry says that from the middle of 2005, decisions on resources in Iraq were being shaped by the anticipated demands of the campaign in Afghanistan.

A direct result of this policy was what the report describes as the “humiliating” decision in 2007 to acquiesce to militia dominance in Basra by exchanging detainees in return for an end to the targeting of British forces. Just as the ultimately successful American surge was getting under way, the remaining 4,000 British troops were holed up at Basra airport, preparing to quit. It was a shaming and miserable end to Britain’s involvement in Iraq.

In a 6,500-word statement issued after the report’s publication, Mr Blair claims that it makes clear “there were no lies, Parliament and Cabinet were not misled, there was no ‘secret deal’ with America, intelligence was not falsified, and the decision was made in good faith.” True, up to a point. But Mr Blair forfeits sympathy when he continues: “The aftermath turned out more hostile, protracted and bloody than we ever imagined.” Hindsight is not an excuse that the inquiry accepts. Before contemplating any similar undertaking, it advises, there must be a clear understanding of the theatre of operations; a hard-headed assessment of risks; realistic objectives; and sufficient resources. It concludes: “All of these elements were lacking in the UK’s approach to its role in post-conflict Iraq.”





Bagehot

¡Hasta siempre, comandante!

The Labour Party is heading for a split

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



JEREMY CORBYN’S hero is Salvador Allende. The Labour leader loves to recall his peregrinations in Chile in 1969 and 1970, when the left-winger swept to power on a wave of popular support. “I went on the May Day march in Santiago…and noticed something very different from anything I had experienced,” Mr Corbyn said in 2013. “What Popular Unity and Allende had done was weld together the folk tradition, the song tradition, the artistic tradition and the intellectual tradition.” The problem, he went on, was that the forces of the “deep state” (soldiers, spooks, tycoons) lived on nonetheless, so were able to depose Allende in 1973.

Corbynistas today fear their man will go the way of his hero: overthrown by his troops (Labour MPs, in his case) in a “coup” backed by shadowy business interests. As The Economist went to press they were closing in on the presidential palace: they just had to settle on a challenger, or a “Pinochet”, in the words of Paul Mason, an excitable pro-Corbyn commentator. Angela Eagle and Owen Smith, soft-left types who recently resigned from Labour’s shadow-ministerial line-up along with 63 of their colleagues, seemed the likeliest putsch leaders.

This showdown became near-inevitable last September, when Mr Corbyn won his party’s leadership thanks to a surge of new, left-wing members into the party. His formative trip to Chile explains why. It ignited his abiding enthusiasm for Latin American popular movements (he even speaks to his cat, El Gato, in Spanish). If he and his Mexican wife were to leave Britain, he says they might move to the Bolivia of Evo Morales, a leader of indigenous descent propelled to the presidency by Andean peasant farmers. Mr Corbyn is a longtime supporter of Hands Off Venezuela, a British outfit that lobbies for the ailing chavista regime.

Such movements epitomise Mr Corbyn’s democratic ideal. They consider themselves less election-fighting machines than revolutionary upswells; multitudes that primarily exercise power not through the legislature but through the charismatic influence of their leaders and by taking to the streets to give voice to popular anger. They seek to “prefigure”, or embody, a different sort of society by creating their own deliberative structures: from assemblies and single-issue campaigns to occupations and co-operatives. This style of politics is attractive to those on Labour’s left, like the current leader, who for decades have deemed their party’s boring “parliamentary road to socialism” inadequate, and its leadership hijacked by right-wing entryists such as Tony Blair. For them, MPs owe their first legitimacy not to voters but to the movement: to the members and the leader they have elected.

Hence the now-unfolding conflict. Over the ten months of his leadership Mr Corbyn has made only token efforts to render his party appealing to the electorate. His priority has been to coddle his left-wing activists: boosting their role in policymaking (through online polls, for example); telling them what they want to hear in his public pronouncements; sponsoring Momentum, a party-within-a-party that hassles and threatens moderate MPs with deselection; and offering an underwhelming reaction to the anti-Semitism infecting parts of Labour’s grassroots.

The last straw for many MPs was his half-hearted role in the anti-Brexit campaign. Some even accuse him of deliberately sabotaging it. Two days after the vote his shadow foreign secretary, Hilary Benn, told Mr Corbyn he had no faith in his leadership; Mr Corbyn sacked him, triggering waves of shadow-ministerial resignations and, on June 28th, a motion of no confidence in Labour’s leader that was supported by 172 of the party’s 230 MPs, many of them by no means Blairite. Since then Mr Corbyn has rejected successive entreaties to resign, reconstituted his shadow cabinet from the dregs of his parliamentary support and seized on the publication of the Chilcot inquiry into the Iraq war (which he opposed) to rally his supporters. The result is a giant rift in the party, with Mr Corbyn, some trade union leaders and most members on one side, and most MPs on the other. At the time of writing final attempts by Tom Watson, the deputy leader, to negotiate a compromise had come to nothing.

Always likely from the moment Labour’s members elected a chief so dismissive of his MPs and their mandates, a split now looms. If a moderate takes on Mr Corbyn in a leadership contest and wins, there is talk of Unite, Britain’s largest union, whose bosses are close to Labour’s left, underwriting a new party formed of loyalist MPs and Momentum. More likely, the moderate candidate will lose. Polls of Labour’s members show that, although Mr Corbyn lost support during the referendum campaign, he would still beat Ms Eagle, his most popular prospective challenger. If he clings on, or one of his allies runs in his place and wins, some moderate MPs plan to declare independence. They might forfeit the party’s infrastructure, but would not struggle to find funding and, if larger in number than the rump Parliamentary Labour Party, could form the official opposition.

Both sides are tooling up. Moderates are taking legal advice about who would keep Labour’s name, logo and assets following a split. Recruitment drives by both sides have increased Labour’s membership by 100,000, or about one-quarter, since June 23rd.

Viva la revolución

The coming months will be ugly. They may culminate in centrist MPs abandoning a party that has abandoned them, and at a time when Britain needs a strong, united opposition. Still, the confrontation is welcome. Labour has long been an awkward coalition of anticapitalists and social democrats, undermining and frustrating each other. With the Tories drifting rightward and the centre ground looking sparse, Britain could use a centre-left party capable of holding the government to account and, as Brexit negotiations begin, pressing it to keep the country as open and dynamic as possible. Whether by defeating Mr Corbyn or splintering off, Labour’s moderates now have a chance to create such a force.





International




Immigration systems: What’s the point?

Marriage and citizenship: Get hitched or hike





Immigration systems

What’s the point?

The countries that invented points-based immigration systems have concluded they do not work

Jul 9th 2016 | OTTAWA | From the print edition



BRITAIN’S Conservative Party was languishing in opposition when, in 2005, it hit upon a winning idea. If elected, it would introduce an “Australian-style points system” for work permits. So popular was the pitch that a Labour government created such a system three years later; the immigration minister, Liam Byrne, even flew to Sydney to launch the scheme, although it did not last long. Campaigners for Britain to leave the European Union repeated the promise this year. It was their most detailed policy proposal, and may well have carried them to victory.

“There’s something deep in the British psyche about the Australian system,” says Mr Byrne. But points-based immigration regimes look most attractive from a distance. The countries that invented them concluded some time ago that they are flawed, and have tweaked them radically. They have also discovered that points systems do not completely cure xenophobia.

Canada created the world’s first points system, in 1967. Would-be immigrants who scored highest on youth, education, experience and fluency in English or French were offered permanent residency. In 1979 Australia created a similar system. Both countries were abandoning racist schemes that had favoured whites (Australia ran one called “bring out a Briton”). Henceforth, the aim would be to lure talent, wherever it was from.

The new systems soon attracted admirers. New Zealand built a points-based immigration system in 1991; Britain, the Czech Republic, Denmark and Singapore began to experiment. But it gradually became clear that Australia and Canada were much better at attracting accomplished immigrants than at using their skills.

Employers were unimpressed with the new arrivals’ qualifications and foreign work experience. In Australia, 13.5% of recently arrived immigrants who had applied from overseas under the points system were unemployed in late 2013, compared with just 1% of those who had come in with a job offer. Pure points systems “don’t work”, says Madeleine Sumption of the Migration Observatory at Oxford University.

Another problem in Canada was that the number of applicants exceeded the number allowed in each year. At the worst point, applicants for the Federal Skilled Workers programme were waiting up to eight years for a decision. Businesses complained that superb applicants were languishing behind merely decent ones.

To deal with these flaws Australia and Canada have transformed their immigration systems. Both now weigh local work experience and job offers more heavily. Between 2002-03 and 2014-15 the number of Australian visas granted on the basis of job offers rose five-fold, from 9,700 to 48,300 (see chart). In Canada, the points system has been reworked so that any skilled applicant with a job offer scores higher than any applicant without.



Both countries have also inverted the process of applying for visas. Instead of putting applicants in a queue, they now invite people merely to express an interest in migrating. Those who pass an initial points test are put into a pool, where they can remain for a year or two. Every so often the best candidates are skimmed off and invited to apply for visas. Companies and provinces can trawl the pool, looking for promising immigrants to sponsor. Anybody they pluck out is likely to get a visa quickly.

These reforms seem to have had some effect. Immigrants to Australia are still less likely than natives to be economically active, but the gap has closed—from 9.8 percentage points in 2002-03 to 6.3 points in 2013-14. Canada’s huge backlog has gone: many of those stuck in the queue were ejected and given their fees back.

Businesses are less happy, though. In Canada, a firm that wants to offer a job to a foreigner must prove that it tried and failed to hire a Canadian—a slow, costly and sometimes daft process. Kumaran Thillainadarajah, an immigrant entrepreneur who founded a firm as a student, had to explain why he and not a native should be chief executive. The system is too cumbersome, says Sarah Anson-Cartwright of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce. She looks enviously at Britain, which has a fast-track visa scheme for technology workers.

Less popular still is the surge of temporary foreign workers, many unskilled. Canada created a scheme for them in 1973, mostly targeting agricultural workers and carers. In 2002 it was expanded to other jobs, and employers were allowed to pay immigrants 15% less than Canadians. The number of temporary migrant workers rose two and a half times between 2002 and 2013, to 127,000.

Amid protests from trade unions, which argued that Canadian workers were being undercut, the government announced a clampdown. Firms would have to explain why they could not hire Canadians, and those with more than ten staff would be barred from employing lots of temporary foreign workers. But the state has quietly retreated on both reforms. Fish-processing factories in eastern Canada no longer need to prove that Canadians do not want their jobs. Meat-packers and mushroom-growers are now demanding equal treatment.

Britain’s experiment with a points-based system in 2008 was also thwarted by business pleading. The scheme was never as flexible as Australia’s or Canada’s. But at least it was simple—until the lobbying began. Firms moaned that vital foreign workers were blocked because they lacked the required qualifications. Carve-outs were duly created: butchers and ballet dancers were given special treatment and footballers were not required to speak English. What remained of the system was then bulldozed by a Tory-led government that had pledged to slash immigration.

A simple immigration system that attracts global talent, calms the natives and gives businesses the workers they crave seems an impossible dream. Perhaps it is also a foolish one. Governments cannot know what kind of immigrants their economies will require because they do not know how their economies will evolve. There will always be special pleading and exceptions. As Mr Byrne puts it: “Migration systems are complicated because people are complicated.”





Marriage and citizenship

Get hitched or hike

As Britain and the European Union prepare to divorce, many of their citizens contemplate tying the knot

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



DELPHINE was born in Jersey, a crown dependency of the United Kingdom, and holds a British passport. She and her Mexican boyfriend, José, intend to move to Paris from Mexico. When she heard that Britain had voted to leave the European Union, it threw those plans into doubt. Would she still be entitled to live in France? As she fretted, José sent her a message: “I guess you’ll have to marry me, then.” He has French citizenship, passed down from a French grandmother via his mother. After Brexit he will remain an EU citizen. Though he was joking, the pair are now seriously considering tying the knot.

Migrants between Britain and the 27 countries that will make up the post-Brexit EU fear losing not only the right to move freely, but to stay put. Theresa May, the front-runner to replace the prime minister, David Cameron, who is stepping down in the wake of the Leave vote, says the residency status of EU citizens in Britain may form part of the Brexit negotiations. For many, such comments have kicked off a search to guarantee they can stay where they are living. Neil White, a lawyer, says his firm, 1st4immigration, has been inundated with people requesting help.

The luckiest will be eligible for a useful second passport. About a tenth of Britons, for example, qualify for Irish citizenship through a parent or grandparent. Anyone already married to a native, and those who have had children in the country where they live, will presumably be able to get permanent residence relatively easily.

Waiting to see how Brexit pans out, by contrast, may mean jumping through hoops intended to deter visa fraud. All rich countries try to stop “marriages of convenience”—unions whose sole purpose is to get a visa. According to Richard Kurland, an immigration specialist in Vancouver, the going rate for a sham Canadian spouse is C$30,000-50,000 ($23,000-38,000). In America, visa overstayers are banned from applying for a green card for up to ten years—except for fiancés of American citizens. A 2008 report by the Centre for Immigration Studies suggested that Americans willing to pose as a bride or groom charged $5,000-20,000.

The past few years have seen a big increase in applications for British spousal visas by EU citizens, mostly from the continent’s poorer countries, married to non-EU nationals, says Farzana Robbani of Migrate Me, a firm in London. These are the types of marriages the Home Office thinks most likely to be fake. It has spotted a trend for young women from eastern or southern Europe being lured to Britain to marry men. Ireland is seeing an increase in overseas students whose visas have expired, or whose institution has lost accreditation, arriving from Britain to marry Latvian or Lithuanian women. The woman earns in the region of £8,000 ($10,400), but “the less you pay, the more flaky your fake spouse will be,” says Cathal Malone, an immigration lawyer in Dublin.

In 2014 police in the north of England discovered a pregnant Slovakian woman who had been tricked into coming to Britain and forced into a sham marriage by an organised-crime ring. Its basic price for a fake bride was £3,000, of which the women received little or nothing. If she had her husband’s baby, the fee could rise to as much as £15,000. In many countries, fathering a child greatly increases the likelihood of being granted leave to remain.

Officials are trained to look out for warning signs. These include a wide age gap, the lack of a shared language and ignorance of each other’s families. In most countries, only couples who arouse suspicion are interviewed. But deciding whether a marriage is genuine can be difficult: answers to questions such as “What colour is your wife’s toothbrush?” can be memorised. Post-Brexit, many more couples across Europe may face such hurdles.





Special report: Chinese society




Chinese society: The new class war

Chinese nationalism: East, west, home’s best

Family, identity and morality: A nation of individuals

Wealth: Keeping up with the Wangs

Public opinion: Crowd control

Civil society: Daring to think, daring to act

Emigration: The long march abroad

Looking ahead: The writing on the wall





Chinese society

The new class war

China’s middle class is larger, richer and more vocal than ever before. That threatens the Communist Party, says Rosie Blau

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN 13-YEAR-OLD Xiao Kang began to feel lethargic and his breathing grew wheezy last autumn, his parents assumed he was working too hard at school. Then his fellow classmates at Changzhou Foreign Languages Middle School started complaining too. The private school in a wealthy city on China’s eastern seaboard had moved to a smart new campus in September 2015, close to a site formerly occupied by three chemical factories. Tests showed the soil and water to have concentrations of pollutants tens of thousands of times the legal limits, and over 100 pupils have been diagnosed with growths on their thyroid and lymph glands. Yet the school denies responsibility, and the local authority has put pressure on parents to keep their children in attendance and stopped them from protesting. The toxic school remains open.

Xiao Kang and his family are beneficiaries of China’s rise. His forebears were farmers and more recently factory workers, but he attends the “best” school in the city (meaning it gets the highest university entrance scores). His father hopes he will become an architect or a designer and may go to study abroad one day. As with many of his generation, all the financial and emotional resources of the boy’s two parents and four grandparents are concentrated on this single child. The family is shocked that the government is so heedless of the youngster’s fate. If a school in any other country was found to be built on poisoned ground, it would immediately be shut, says the boy’s father. Why not in China?

For most of China’s modern history, its people have concentrated on building a materially comfortable existence. Since 1978 more than 700m people have been lifted out of poverty. For the past four decades almost everyone could be confident that their children’s lives would be better than their own. But the future looks less certain, particularly for the group that appears to be China’s greatest success: the middle class. Millions of middle-income Chinese families like Xiao Kang’s are well fed, well housed and well educated. They have good jobs and plenty of choices in life. But they are now confronting the dark side of China’s 35 years of dazzling growth.

This special report will lay out the desires and aspirations of this fast-expanding group. Many Chinese today are individualistic, empowered and keen to shape society around them. Through social media, they are changing China’s intellectual landscape. They are investing in new experiences of all kinds. But discontent over corruption, inequality, tainted food and a foul environment is sharp and deep; many worry that their hard-fought gains are ill-protected. For decades the Communist Party has kept control over a population that now numbers 1.4 billion by exceeding people’s expectations. Their lives have improved faster than most of them could have dreamt. Though the state has used coercion and repression, it has also relieved many pressure points. Now it is finding it increasingly hard to manage the complex and competing demands of the middle class; yet to suppress them risks holding back many of the most productive members of society.

When the Communist Party seized power in 1949, China’s bourgeoisie was tiny. In the Cultural Revolution two decades later, wealth, education and a taste for foreign culture were punished. But after housing was privatised in the 1990s, the government tied its fortunes to this rapidly expanding sector of society, encouraging it to strive for the material trappings of its rich-world peers.

For the first time in China’s history a huge middle class now sits between the ruling elite and the masses. McKinsey, a consultancy, estimates its size at around 225m households, compared with just 5m in 2000, using an annual income of 75,000-280,000 yuan ($11,500-43,000) as a yardstick. It predicts that between now and 2020 another 50m households will join its ranks. They are spread across the country, but are highly concentrated in urban areas (see map); around 80% of them own property; and they include many of the Communist Party’s 88m members.



Though China’s population as a whole is ageing, the middle class is getting younger. Nearly half of all people living in cities are under 35: they are eight times more likely than country-dwellers to be university graduates; and most are treasured and entitled only children, with no memory of a time when their country was poor. The internet has expanded their horizons, even if the government shuts out many foreign websites and quashes dissenting voices. Today’s young Chinese tend to do what they want, not what society expects—a profound and very recent shift. Most of these young people exercise their autonomy by choosing their own marriage partners or shelling out for a new car. But many have an appetite for civic engagement too: they are the foot-soldiers of China’s non-government organisations, a vast, though often politically sensitive, array of groups seeking to improve society in a variety of ways.

Pressures on the middle class are growing. Some feel that no matter how able they are, the only way they can succeed is by having the right connections. Housing has been a driver of economic growth, yet property rights are shaky, and the government encourages private investment without adequately regulating financial products. As more people go to university, returns to education are falling and graduate jobs are harder to come by. Many fret that their children may not see the progressive improvements in material well-being they themselves have enjoyed, and more youngsters are going abroad.

Political scientists have long argued that once individuals reach a certain level of affluence they become interested in non-material values, including political choice. Average income per person in China’s biggest cities is now at roughly the same level as in Taiwan and South Korea when those countries became democracies. When China opened up its markets in the 1980s, democratic demands were widely expected to follow. They did, but were savagely silenced in Tiananmen Square in 1989. Since then, a mixture of political repression, fear of chaos, pride in China’s advance and a huge rise in living standards has kept the country steady.

China’s middle classes increasingly look and behave like their rich-world peers, but they do not necessarily think like them. Intellectuals privately express a sense of despair that since becoming party chief in 2012, Xi Jinping has shuttered free expression and ramped up ideology. Yet most of the population at large seems unconcerned. If an election were held tomorrow, Mr Xi would very probably win by a large majority—and not just because there is no viable opposition.



However, although few people in China are demanding a vote, many are becoming more and more frustrated by the lack of political accountability and transparency, even if they rarely label them as such. The party is clearly worried. In an internal document in 2013 it listed “seven things that should not be discussed”: universal values, press freedom, civil society, economic liberalism, historical mistakes made by the party, Western constitutional democracy and questioning the nature of socialism with Chinese characteristics. Recently these have often become flashpoints between the middle class and the government.

No wonder that political trust in China is declining. A series of nationwide surveys from 2003 to the present, commissioned by Anthony Saich of Harvard University, show that the wealthy think less of the government than poorer folk do. Other polls show that richer and better-educated people are more likely to support the rule of law, market allocation of resources and greater individual autonomy; the less-well-off often favour traditional values and authoritarian rule.

Wang Zhengxu of the University of Nottingham in Britain and You Yu of Xiamen University in China go further. They observe a clear decline in trust in legal institutions, the police and local government between 2002 and 2011, despite a consistently good economic performance and rising social benefits, and reckon that “the era of critical citizens” has arrived in China.

Many wondered how the party could ever survive after it brutally crushed pro-democracy demonstrators in 1989. Its solution was to make people rich very quickly. Since 1990 the blistering pace of economic growth has been the party’s most important source of legitimacy, delivering its overriding priority: stability. For a while these goals meshed well with each other and with people’s personal aspirations: under an unspoken agreement, people could amass wealth so long as they did not try to amass political power too. The recent slowdown in growth puts a question mark over that compact.

Kingdom in the middle

Looking ahead, in a host of areas from taxation to industrial overcapacity to the environment, the party must make an invidious choice: introduce unpopular reforms now and risk short-term instability, or delay reform and jeopardise the country’s future. On present form, stability is likely to win: the mighty party is terrified of its own people.

The middle class is not the only source of potential instability. In the western province of Xinjiang, repression of ethnic minorities has aggravated an incipient insurgency. Tibet is simmering too. And across China millions of workers in declining industrial sectors risk losing their livelihoods. Many migrants from rural areas working in cities feel rootless and marginalised, denied access to facilities such as health care and education. Divisions within the party elite are also a potential problem. And although dissidents have been silenced for now, they could find their voice again.

China’s Communist Party has shown extraordinary resilience to destabilising forces and an impressive ability to recreate itself. It has ditched most of its founding principles and tied itself to the middle-class wealth-creators, expanding its membership to include the very group it once suppressed. Since the 1990s the Chinese model has proved so flexible that it appeared to break the democratic world’s monopoly on economic progress. To some it seemed to offer a credible alternative to democracy.

Now China is beginning to reach the limits of growth without reform. The complexity of middle-class demands, the rush of unintended consequences of economic growth and now a slowing economy are challenging the party’s hold. It has to find new ways to try to appease a population far more vocal and more individualistic than previous generations.





Chinese nationalism

East, west, home’s best

Do not expect China’s middle class to be liberal

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

ACROSS CHINA’S PARKS, elderly folk gather of a morning to sing, dance, play music and exercise. Much of the music is about their country: an anthem from the Cultural Revolution, Peking Opera numbers or songs from one of China’s many ethnic-minority groups. Most of the exercise is rooted in traditional Chinese medicine. China is a hugely patriotic country, but it is also increasingly nationalistic. Its people feel that it is superior to other nations, and that as China rises, others must cower.

Chinese society is far more connected to global culture than it was just a few decades ago, but exposure does not translate into tolerance. In April Global Times, a jingoistic state newspaper, published a poll showing that an astonishing 85% of respondents supported unifying China with Taiwan by force. In 2012 demonstrations erupted across China about Japan’s claim to sovereignty over disputed islands in the East China Sea; shops were looted, Japanese cars were destroyed and riot police had to be deployed to protect the Japanese embassy in Beijing.

Such belligerence has been fed by the Communist Party’s own narrative of history, which credits it as saving China from a “century of humiliation” at the hands of Japan and the West. Xi Jinping, China’s president, now claims to be leading the country’s “great rejuvenation”. China’s land reclamation around contested rocks in the South China Sea is controversial abroad, but the vast majority of Chinese people support its territorial claims there, according to a slew of polls. Nationalism has become a glue to hold people together, says Joshua Eisenman of the University of Texas: “The Communist Party of China is no longer communist so it had better be Chinese.”

At the same time sentiment has become more defensive. More than three-quarters of Chinese surveyed in the 2015 Pew Global Attitudes poll felt their way of life needed to be protected from foreign influence. Mr Xi has tapped this vein too. In 2015 his education minister called for a ban on “textbooks promoting Western values”. More puzzlingly, the Minister for Civil Affairs has proposed renaming “over-the-top, West-worshipping” place names like “Thames Town” near Shanghai, a cobbled recreation of an English market town.

International news coverage in China mostly makes other countries look stupid, dangerous or crime-ridden (particularly if they have recently overthrown an autocratic government), but that has not deterred the Chinese from wanting to go and see the world for themselves in droves. Last year they took 120m trips abroad, a fourfold increase in a decade.





Family, identity and morality

A nation of individuals

Chinese people increasingly do what they want, not what they are told

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

The apple of their eye

FOR A TASTE of the traditional Chinese approach to marriage, visit Lu Xun park in Shanghai. Advertisements with details of 20-somethings looking for a mate are plastered over upturned umbrellas. Those describing men often note their salary and where they hold residency rights. Women use more adjectives: beautiful, decent, quiet, “not fat”. What is curious about this marriage market is that almost everyone in the crowd of 300 or so is over 50. None of the youngsters said to be in search of a spouse is present; their parents even write the ads. The young today are picky, says Wang Xianghua, who is looking for a wife for her 30-year-old son, a software engineer at a state-owned enterprise. Women “marry houses”, not men, she says. In contemporary urban China a man is expected to bring a (mortgage-free) property to a union.

The scene sums up a fundamental change in Chinese society. The older generation sees marriage as essential; many young Chinese say their parents bug them almost daily about finding a spouse. Youngsters want partners too, but they do not define themselves by their marital status, and few wish to be matched. Chinese youths increasingly put their own emotions above social expectations. As they see it, their role in society is no longer about their responsibilities to the family and the wider community but about their own rights. Collective identities and group membership have become secondary to personal preferences. The ramifications reach far beyond private life.

For nearly 2,000 years the family has been the organising principle of Chinese society. “Confucian values” is shorthand for the idea that a peaceful society was built on the family as an extended, stable unit of several generations under one roof, each with a distinct social role and status. Ties were vertical and hierarchical, defined by respect and obligations flowing from the young to the old, from the kinship group to the emperor. Small wonder that Xi Jinping, China’s president, preaches family values as part of his own vision of a harmonious China.

He may be disappointed. Like every society that has shifted from agrarian to urban, China has seen a wrenching change in family ties, dispersing kinsfolk across vast distances. In addition, people’s values have been torn up twice in quick succession, first by communism, which during the Cultural Revolution often separated family members or set them against each other, and then by capitalism. Notions of family and identity have struggled to keep up with the country’s accelerated modernisation.

This raises practical problems. China will get old before it gets rich: one in six of its people is already over 60, and by 2025 nearly one in four will be. The one-child policy pursued over decades, together with delayed child-bearing, will bring a rapid decline in the ratio of working-age adults to the over-65s, from 12:1 now to 2.5:1 by 2050. China’s weak welfare system is still based on the assumption that kin will look after their own, placing the social and financial burden of caring for the elderly squarely on the shoulders of adult children. Yet people’s new mobility, combined with the vast size of the country, makes that particularly hard. A declining share of the population now lives in multi-generation households (see chart), though it is still bigger than in most rich countries.



Growing individualism is transforming every aspect of social behaviour. For hundreds of years marriage was essentially an economic contract between two families, designed to ensure heirs for the groom’s clan. But in the one-child society a child is regarded as the centre of the family, so weddings are focused on the couple, not, as formerly, on the groom’s parents. Even in the 1980s adulthood was still marked by getting married and having a child; putting self-interest above the collective was “basically illegitimate”, says William Jankowiak of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Now, he says, coming of age is about achieving autonomy. People are motivated by love, not responsibility.

That has helped bring about a sexual revolution. According to one study published in 2012, more than 70% of Chinese youngsters now have sex before marriage; ever more of them lose their virginity at a younger age, and lots have had several partners. More than 40% of couples live together before they wed, a dramatic change from the 1980s. They also get married later: in Shanghai and Guangzhou, men on average marry at 30 and women at 28, later than in America.

Young people used to move straight from living with their parents to their marital home; now 58m of them live alone, and the number is growing fast. “Our generation does not want to live with our parents,” says Zhou Haiming, a social worker in Guangzhou.

Divorce is getting much more common as education, migration and exposure to different ideas erode traditional norms. The national rate is well above that in Australia and most of Europe; in parts of China it already exceeds that in America.

Han solo

All these trends are part of a wider liberalisation. What most distresses the older generation—and the government—is the rise in the number of permanent singletons, a remarkable change from near-universal marriage in the very recent past. This group includes over 8m bachelors in rural areas, often among the poorest. Unable to find wives, they are unhappy victims of a preference for sons that meant many families aborted or abandoned baby girls. Around 2m women over 35 are single too, and the number is rising fast. For them this is more often a conscious choice, a sign of rising status, better job opportunities and a determination to find the right person. That upsets parents who want grandchildren. It also troubles the Communist Party, which sees the family as a path to stability, responsibility and acquiescence.

Every new generation believes their parents do not understand them, but in China this is often true. Most people in their 50s still have strong memories of being hungry; their children, by contrast, have known only a land of sizzling pork and high-speed trains. The world has radically changed within a single generation.

Take 34-year-old Zhang Diqi from Harbin in China’s frozen north. In 2013 he packed in his steady job in Beijing working for CCTV, the state broadcaster, to launch shijianpaimai.com, a website auctioning people’s time (“I believe that everyone has a price”). His initiative caused a clash with his father: his parents value quantifiable, visible skills, he says, and do not understand the value of ideas. His mother nags him about finding a wife, but he does not want one: “Marriage is the restructuring of capital,” he says. He last went home to see his parents—a two-hour flight away—two years ago.

The rise of individualism extends into working life, as Mr Zhang’s example suggests. Hundreds of millions of Chinese now work in small businesses rather than large institutions—the work equivalent of the socialising family. In recent years the party has established small cells within private firms and even foreign enterprises to monitor them. The government is now encouraging “entrepreneurship and innovation”, offering grants for startups, yet it is nervous about their rise.

The demise of traditional family values has strained conventional notions of trust. Until the 1970s, sometimes later, individuals knew most of the people they encountered in their life—those they bought food from, met through work, and even those they ended up marrying (because most were introduced by family networks). Strangers were treated with a degree of caution unless introduced by someone within the group. It is this relationship of trust that is behind China’s emphasis on guanxi, or personal relationships, often misunderstood by outsiders as fostering corruption.

Urbanisation, mass migration, the private company and the stretching of supply chains across thousands of miles have wrecked those personal networks. Most people live far from where they were born, work for independent firms and rely on services staffed by strangers. They must depend on institutions far more than on known individuals. But those institutions, or the laws that govern them, often turn out to be weak.

That has led to a rise in scandals that would have been impossible in former times: things like food contamination, internet scams, bogus ads for financial products, the recent illegal sale of improperly stored vaccines and the like. China Daily, a state mouthpiece, recently lamented that such events indicated a loss of “moral compass” in Chinese society, and that trust had become “a scarce commodity”.

The long search

This idea of decline seems to be supported by some shocking incidents. In 2011 a two-year-old girl was run over by a car and lay bleeding in the street for seven minutes before someone came to her aid. This year a video camera caught people walking by as a woman was attacked in a Beijing hotel. In another case a woman was found dead after being trapped in a lift for a month because nobody had checked it before cutting the power.

Many people look to religion for answers. In the 1990s the state first turned a blind eye to and then crushed Falun Gong, a Chinese discipline of self-improvement and meditation that had millions of followers. Its message was peaceful enough, but in 1999 more than 10,000 Falun Gong followers demonstrated in Beijing, demanding legal recognition and freedom from state interference. The government is still struggling with the tension between the stabilising moral message of most religions and their potentially destabilising capacity to mobilise people and preach some dogma other than its own.

A rise in the number of self-proclaimed Buddhists is tolerated because most of them enjoy the ritual aspects of the religion but do not get seriously engaged. The Christian church is more challenging. At an estimated 100m, it has more followers than the Communist Party has members. The party oscillates between wanting to embrace and to crush them.

Rather than fix or regulate the institutions people rely on, the party is instead trying to enforce its own version of morality. Mr Xi sums up his vision in “12 core socialist values” that stand in silent contrast to Western notions of “universal values”. In order to “engrave them on people’s minds”, folksy propaganda posters now preach these ideas from almost every bare patch of wall in China, on TV, at road junctions and in aeroplanes. Judging by the 13th five-year plan released this year, Mr Xi has high hopes for this campaign: “The core socialist values should become people’s firm inner belief, and people’s conscious behaviour, so as to strengthen the whole society.”

Just in case citizens do not willingly embrace its vision, the government is prepared to enforce it. In 2013 it introduced a law compelling people with elderly parents to visit frequently and ensure that their emotional and financial needs are met. Earlier this year the government of Shanghai, where 30% of the population is over 60, threatened to downgrade the credit rating of neglectful adult offspring, which could bar their access to jobs, loans or even welfare payments. The party claims to know what is best for its people, but a centrally imposed public morality is increasingly at odds with the private sort.





Wealth

Keeping up with the Wangs

China’s growing wealth is unevenly spread—and good investments are hard to find

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

High, and rising

“FOLDING BEIJING”, A short story by Hao Jingfang, a Chinese science-fiction writer, is set in a futuristic version of China’s capital where inequality is so stark that different social groups are not allowed to use the same ground simultaneously. They take turns occupying the area within Beijing’s sixth ring road, which flips over every 24 hours. One side has clear blue skies, tranquil leafy streets and supermarkets with imported food, where the 5m people of “First Space” people enjoy a whole 24 hours, whereas the 75m people of “Second Space” and “Third Space” get only 12 hours each. This last group is crowded together in a place where construction dust obscures the tops of neon-lit buildings and workers toil “for rewards as thin as the wings of cicadas”. People are beaten and imprisoned if they enter a zone above their station. “There are many things in life we can’t change,” says one character. “All we can do is to accept and endure.”

Present-day Beijing resembles Ms Hao’s fiction: you can buy handbags that sell for more than some workers make in a year. The People’s Republic has travelled a long way since it was founded on the dream of equality in 1949. Today it is one of the most unequal societies on Earth.

Until the late 1970s owning private property was almost entirely prohibited and very few people had substantial personal assets. The accumulation of wealth since then has been extraordinary. Between 1990 and 2014 income per person in China increased 13-fold in real terms, whereas globally it less than tripled. After Mao Zedong died, Chinese consumers dreamed of buying the “four rounds” (bicycle, sewing machine, washing machine and wrist watch) and “three electrics” (phone, refrigerator and television); these days they are more likely to yearn for sports-utility vehicles and trips to Thailand.

The greatest divide in both income and opportunity is between rural and urban areas. Less than 10% of rural youths go to senior high school, compared with 70% of their urban counterparts. Most rural youngsters leave school at 15, whereas a third of urban ones gain degrees. Within cities the main division is between migrant workers and local residents: most migrants lack the urban residence permit that would give them and their children access to public services such as schools and hospitals.

Most of China’s middle classes own property and have decent jobs, yet they, too, worry that they are being squeezed, both from the bottom and the top. In the 1980s China was among the most equal societies in the world, with a Gini coefficient of 0.3 (the Gini is a standard measure of income inequality in which 0 means total equality and 1 total inequality). By 2008 it had risen to a peak of 0.49. For the past seven years it has been declining slightly as pay for rural and blue-collar jobs has been rising faster than for white-collar ones, but at 0.46 the official figure is still higher than anywhere in the OECD, a club of mainly rich countries (see chart), and many unofficial estimates are higher.



Despite that narrowing of the income gap, in other respects people feel that inequality is getting worse. That is partly because of the way they think about success. Traditionally they compared their lives with those of their parents, which should leave almost everyone feeling better off. But today’s young tend to think horizontally, says Jean Wei-Jun Yeung of the National University of Singapore, and judge themselves against their peers. City folk are far more likely to run into the full spectrum of inequality in their own streets, and thanks to the internet and television they are also well aware of how their global counterparts are doing. That helps explain why a report on well-being in China by researchers from Oxford University in Britain and Monash University in Australia, published last year, found that a rise in rural incomes has a far more positive effect on happiness than in urban ones.

The middle class’s biggest grievance is that the super-rich have surged ahead and appear to have pulled up the ladder behind them. Beijing now has more billionaires than New York, according to Hurun, a Shanghai luxury publishing company. It calculates that the combined net worth of the country’s 568 billionaires is much the same as Australia’s total GDP. A study by Peking University earlier this year found that the top 1% of Chinese households controlled a third of the country’s assets, many of them in the form of “hidden income”, or undeclared earnings. Wang Xiaolu of the National Economic Research Institute in Beijing reckons that if hidden income is included, the top 10% earned 21 times as much as the bottom 10% in 2011, compared with official estimates of nine times. The distance between the upper and lower ends of the middle class is growing too, according to Boston Consulting Group, a consultancy.

Many middle-class folk feel that, having fought their way up, they are being rewarded ever less generously for their efforts. Returns to education are declining because universities have expanded rapidly. Last year more than 7m students completed university degrees, compared with fewer than 1m in 2000. That makes society more equal, but middle-class households fret that new graduates are finding it harder to get good jobs.

The squeezed middle

The party has helped hundreds of millions of people get richer, but has done little to ensure that their assets serve them well

Many think the gap between the super-wealthy and the rest is growing because the game is rigged. They see society as unfair, divided between those with connections and those without. A lot of Chinese believe, often correctly, that having personal networks which include powerful people trumps hard work. State-owned enterprises account for only one-third of GDP, but they control key sectors such as energy and finance that affect every company, big or small. Even if no graft is involved, people “who know people” find out about new policies and projects first, says Kong Miao, aged 25, who runs a startup in Beijing: “It’s not a problem of corruption, it’s a problem of information asymmetry.” As long as the government maintains a monopoly on the commanding heights of the economy, this will remain true.

The party is well aware that inequality is bad for social stability. From 1978 onwards it consistently said that its “chief task” was economic construction, but in 2006 it changed its goal to establishing a “harmonious society” by 2020. It seems reasonable to help the poorest in society move up, but that could make the middling sort feel even more unsettled.



Of all the social groups in China, the middle classes seem to have the most to lose from instability. Most are primarily interested in making money, but some now worry that their precious assets are in jeopardy. The party has helped hundreds of millions of people get richer, but has done little to ensure that their assets serve them well. Pension and insurance schemes are weak. The super-rich often park money abroad, but the merely well off find that harder to do. And the choices on offer at home look less than enticing. It may prove a fatal flaw—not only for the economy, but for confidence in the underlying political system—that the party failed to build a proper legal system at the same time as it launched a roaring economy.



Banks in China frequently offer interest rates below the level of inflation, so people look elsewhere to protect their savings. Around 15% of household financial assets are invested in the stockmarket, not enough to sink the economy when the market plunged last year but plenty to anger large numbers of stockholders. Around 3m people have also invested in peer-to-peer schemes, which have proliferated in recent years. That so many individuals and small businesses are prepared to put their money into products they know little about is a “manifestation of people’s deep desperation in a slowing economy”, says Edward Cunningham of Harvard University. And some of them have been badly burned.

In 2014 Ding Ning, an entrepreneur who had made a fortune manufacturing screws and tin-openers, started a company called Ezubao. It quickly became China’s largest peer-to-peer lender, attracting 50 billion yuan ($7.6 billion) from nearly 1m investors. It advertised returns of 9-15%, many times what traditional banks could offer. A government body even named it a “Model Enterprise” for e-commerce integrity. Unfortunately it turned out to be the wrong kind of model. Last year the government froze its assets; in February it pronounced the company a Ponzi scheme, the world’s largest by number of depositors. Almost all the money that flowed out to long-term investors came from deposits by new ones.

When Ezubao collapsed, protesters gathered in several cities, and hundreds of social-media groups formed online to discuss “rights protection”—just the kind of widely dispersed protest the state fears. Depositors were angry not only because they had lost money, but because they felt it had been “deliberate government policy” to encourage investment in such products, says Victor Shih of the University of California, San Diego. The case of Ezubao is unusual—and significant—because the protests were directed at the central government rather than the local authorities or institutions that typically attract such criticism. According to Harvard’s Mr Cunningham, amateur investors in Ezubao believed that the central government had endorsed the scheme, and were furious when they found their trust had been misplaced. “It’s like giving a car to someone who doesn’t have a driver’s licence and letting him rampage around recklessly,” says a 32-year-old investor from Ningbo, near Shanghai, who had put 150,000 yuan into Ezubao after seeing ads in state media and read endorsements from state-owned companies. “The government is irresponsible, I’m truly disappointed in this country.”

The party has no good explanation. Either it knew about the Ponzi scheme and did not warn investors, or it was oblivious to the scam when it should have known about it. At the very least, it failed to provide adequate regulation: more than a third of the 4,000 peer-to-peer platforms launched in recent years have failed. And since China has no independent judiciary, it lacks any system of trustworthy dispute resolution.

Things are getting worse. Between 2003 and 2013, courts across China ruled on 1,051 cases of financial fraud and “illegal poolings” of public savings, including Ponzi schemes. Last year there were nearly 4,000 cases, and in the first three months of 2016 alone a further 2,300 were uncovered. In the past year financial frauds have cost investors at least $20 billion. Although the government has belatedly woken up to the problem, so far its main response has been to ban the registration of new companies with the word “finance” in their title. Peer-to-peer schemes still account for only a tiny share of household savings, but their failure shows how hard it is to ensure that savings are safe.

From homes to castles

Since there are so few outlets in China for investing profitably and safely, putting savings into property is even more popular than elsewhere. Urban housing was privatised only in the 1990s, but already around 85% of city folk own their homes. Yet property rights are shaky. Time after time, apartment-owners have formed residents’ associations to fight plans to build additional towers close to theirs, usually in vain. In some cases buyers have shelled out for apartments before they were built, only for the developers to disappear with the funds.

A recent series of cases in Zhejiang province revealed the weakness of China’s legal framework for property rights. Since the party abolished land and property ownership after 1949 there have been no freeholds in China, and leases are typically 70 years for urban residential properties, but some are much shorter. Earlier this year hundreds of people who had signed 20-year leases on property in the wealthy city of Wenzhou in the 1990s were asked to pay a third of their homes’ market value to renew the leases. This provoked an outcry on social media, and Xinhua, the state news agency, warned that a blurry definition of home ownership could cause unrest. The 20-year leases on thousands of other apartments in Wenzhou and other coastal cities are due to expire in 2019.

Not in my courtyard

Property owners were dealt another blow in February with China-wide proposals to stop the building of new gated communities and gradually open up the many parts of Chinese cities that have been shut away behind fences and gates since the 1990s. The idea was to relieve pressure on the overcrowded road network and make better use of urban land, but it proved inflammatory. Within 12 hours the news had been forwarded tens of thousands of times on social media. Many complained that the proposal contravened a 2007 property law under which roads within such zones belong to the homeowners. The indignation was not just about money. Owning a residence in a gated community is seen as a sign of upward mobility, a domestic space removed from state control. It is the opposite to the Mao-era danwei or work unit, where the state told everyone where to live and neighbours all knew and monitored each other. Millions of people now question whether their assets are safe from some as yet unsuspected new plan. Even though the Chinese have little appetite for political change, they have a huge thirst for security, transparency and the rule of law.

The cost of housing is soaring in China’s biggest and most desirable cities. In Shanghai, for example, it rose by 20% over the past year. That is good for those who already own a property, but frustrating for young people hoping to buy in the next few years before getting married. It also raises fears that the next generation will fare less well than the current one, especially in view of slowing growth. And as middle-class certainties are being called into question, people are becoming more vocal.





Public opinion

Crowd control

The views of Chinese people matter—but only up toa point

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

The smell of success

IN 2011, FOLLOWING a string of serious incidents involving lead and cadmium poisonings in various parts of the country, the Chinese government named contamination by heavy metals as the country’s number one environmental health problem. China’s 12th five-year plan for 2011-15 included a requirement to tackle it. That same year a well-known Chinese property tycoon and blogger started translating hourly tweets with readings from an air-quality monitor on the roof of the American embassy in Beijing and posting them on a Chinese site. That drew attention to a different environmental health problem: the often extraordinarily high concentrations of PM2.5 particles, a category of very tiny pollutants particularly damaging to health. The readings contradicted the government’s persistent claim that the capital was simply “foggy”.

The turning-point came in January 2013 when a dark blanket of smog choked the capital for weeks on end and the tiny particles averaged over 600 parts per million for a full 24 hours, nearly 25 times the level the World Health Organisation deemed safe. The “airpocalypse” threatened stability as well as health, so the leadership took note. The following year Li Keqiang, the prime minister, declared a “war on pollution”, describing smog as nature’s “red light”. The party is now making a real effort to improve the country’s notoriously foul air.



Perhaps the biggest myth about China is that because its people do not have the vote, their opinions do not matter. For decades the Communist Party claimed to embody and express the will of the masses. Surprisingly, since 1980 it has often done that, for pragmatic reasons. It has remained in power largely by letting its citizens get richer and staying ahead of their expectations, occasionally even bending to some of their demands, as with air pollution, but retaining overall control.

People are angry about inequality, corruption and environmental degradation, and as the economy slows they are becoming harder to pacify

That deal is now fraying. The party is finding it harder to keep track of, or respond to, multiplying gripes. Many Chinese, despite being well fed, living in their own homes and now offered the chance of having two children, are looking for something beyond material comforts. Too often, China’s problems today are by-products of economic growth unfettered by regulation or rule of law. People are angry about inequality, corruption and environmental degradation, and as the economy slows and prices and taxes rise they are becoming harder to pacify. The system of making small tweaks to keep things going is reaching its limits; the party’s competing goals are becoming increasingly incompatible.

The environment is an obvious example. The about-face on air pollution showed that the government is particularly responsive to urban opinion. Repeated polls over the past decade show that concern about smog is far greater in urban than in rural areas, because belching factories usually cluster in cities. The government’s plan on pollution, such as it was, was to get rich first and clean up later if necessary. But the protests about Beijing’s smog demonstrated the limits of using economic growth as a proxy for legitimacy.

Technocracies are often said to be more efficient than democracies at getting things done because they can focus on things that really matter rather than waste time on such fripperies as elections. China shows this to be wide of the mark. The foul air is just one of a host of urgent environmental problems. The government responded to this one because the public grew restive, an indication that China’s environmental policy is aimed at stability, not sustainability.

Aside from water and soil contamination, which remain serious threats, another, longer-term environmental challenge poses a far higher risk of unrest: water shortages. The north of the country has two-thirds of the farmland but only a fifth of the available fresh water. Grain-growing areas around Beijing have about as much water per person as arid countries such as Niger and Eritrea. Rather than raise the price of water or import more food, the government has built two 1,200km-long canals to bring water from the (often drought-prone) south of the country. That pricey technical fix will not work for ever. Instead of curtailing demand, which would provoke short-term discontent, the party risks turning a difficult but not insoluble problem into a permanent environmental catastrophe.

In other arenas, too, the party shies from necessary but unpopular decisions. Yuan Yue, who runs Horizon, a polling company, tests policies for the party to see what the popular response might be. Raising the retirement age, currently 50 for most women and 55-60 for men, would help pay to look after China’s ageing population, but Mr Yuan’s poll found that 70% of those polled, both young and old, are against it. A rise in income tax faces similar resistance. In the same vein the government is reluctant to deal with industrial overcapacity because it fears the destabilising effect of mass lay-offs. For decades the economy has served the cause of stability, but now there is a trade-off between preserving order in the short term and keeping the engine of growth running to safeguard long-term stability.

After the violent crushing of pro-democracy protests in 1989, the party concentrated on shaping public opinion through the media. It is now trying the same again. President Xi Jinping courts popularity by kissing babies, cultivating a public persona more akin to that of a democratically elected politician. Animated videos about Mr Xi project an image of a hip yet humane party. The press, never free, is becoming more constrained. The president recently called on mainstream news organisations to redouble their efforts to “reflect the party’s will and views”.

Over the past two decades the party has largely withdrawn from people’s private lives, but its tentacles are spreading again. Liu Xianran, who runs a startup in Beijing, complains he can no longer watch the TV programmes or films he wants because the government has introduced quotas for foreign ones. Online video was freer, but now the party is trying to influence that too, by going for a stake and a board seat at Youku, China’s version of YouTube, and similar firms.

In May online videos of young female presenters eating bananas in a seductive manner were banned, and TV dramas are censored to edit out previously acceptable plunging necklines. A recent government-sponsored advertisement warned Chinese women against “dangerous love”—dating foreigners—because they might be spies. Mr Xi has spoken out against “weird” buildings and demands that art, architecture and all forms of culture serve the party.

Information control is now the party’s main battlefront in shaping and responding to public opinion, says Nicholas Bequelin, East Asia director of Amnesty International, a human-rights group, in what he calls “the grand bargain between state and society”. In 2009 the arrival of a Twitter-like microblogging site, Weibo, appeared to usher in a new age of free expression in China, but the authorities got spooked when users showed outrage after a deadly high-speed rail crash in 2011. Several prominent bloggers with a huge following, known as “Big Vs”, were soon silenced. Much traffic has migrated from the public Weibo to WeChat, where only invited members can join conversations (the party lurks as an uninvited guest), but it is so widely used that news of scandals spreads around China instantaneously.

Technology has created more space for people to express themselves, but also made it easier for the state to shutter discussion. Censorship is moving faster, says Zhou Runan of Sun Yat-sen University; many messages are now deleted in minutes, sometimes seconds. Criticism is often drowned out by pro-party views. A Harvard University team that analysed leaked e-mails from a district internet-propaganda office estimated that government staff post nearly 500m social-media comments a year within China. The country was named the world’s worst abuser of internet freedom in 2015 by Freedom House, an advocacy group in Washington, DC, measured by obstacles to access, limits on content and violation of user rights.

Great walls of ire

The space for disagreement, always narrow, has shrunk further under Mr Xi. A year ago about 120 civil-rights lawyers and 50 support staff who defend ordinary citizens against the state were rounded up. In March this year a party journal berated China’s entrepreneurs, long ago co-opted into the party, for “errors in their thinking”, and Mr Xi urged them to “love the Communist Party and actively practise socialist core values”. This was preceded by the disciplining of Ren Zhiqiang, one of China’s most prominent tycoons, for speaking out online against the party’s control of the media. Celebrities also face increasing scrutiny. Now the middle classes fear they may be turning into targets too.

The Chinese are accustomed to the often thuggish behaviour of their police, usually aimed at the poor and helpless. But in May such violence appeared to be being meted out to a different kind of victim when Lei Yang, a well-educated 29-year-old Beijinger who had been working as an environmentalist for a government-affiliated institute, died in custody in unexplained circumstances. His family spoke out, questioning the police’s account of events. For weeks afterwards social media rang with calls for justice. Former classmates from the prestigious Renmin University in Beijing led a petition: Mr Lei’s death, it said, “was a tragedy arising from the system…We want our most basic rights to personal safety, civil rights and urban order.”

Popular sentiment has often been an ally of the party, says Ma Tianjie, who blogs about public opinion. In recent decades the state has used it to help push through changes against vested interests. Now the party seems to be bent on criminalising or marginalising many previously acceptable means of expression. Given the choice between accountability and authoritarianism, the party is leaning ever more towards the latter.





Civil society

Daring to think, daring to act

Civic engagement of all sorts is becoming much more widespread

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Let’s have some colour in our lives

THE CONVERTED FLAT in a quiet residential neighbourhood in north-east Beijing does not look like a hotbed of revolution. A sticker on the door declares it to be a “safe space”; inside are some armchairs, a meeting table, a rainbow flag and a counselling room. Yet over the past two years this organisation in Beijing, which represents the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, has attracted increasing attention from the police. On one occasion the head of the centre was questioned for nine hours without a break. It is becoming harder to predict what forms of activism the Communist Party will tolerate, she says: “We often say our government is full of G-spots. You don’t know how and where you touch them.”

These days many Chinese want to get involved in non-profit organisations and civic groups, but the government does not always make it easy for them. After the party seized power in 1949 it stamped out anything that stood between it and the proletariat. Society was divided into work units, distinct walled communities that provided not just jobs but food, housing, schools, medical services and elder care for the toiling masses. The state claimed to meet every need from first to last gasp. What is now called civil society all but disappeared.

As the party has retreated from people’s daily lives since the 1990s, a host of civic organisations has sprung up to fill gaps in state coverage. The needs and demands of society have become far more complex, but state provision is surprisingly thin. Some civic outfits work with particular groups, such as the elderly or migrants; others are organised around issues such as the environment or labour. About 550,000 domestic non-government organisations (NGOs) are registered with the government, and a further 2m or so are either unregistered or registered as businesses, often to try to avoid scrutiny or harassment. On top of that, around 7,000 foreign NGOs are operating in China.

This looks like an outbreak of altruism in a country often charged with lacking a sense of morality. The rise in individualism that has caused some to pursue blind self-interest has had the opposite effect on others, instilling more of a social conscience and increasing civic engagement. Many Chinese are responding to the anomie and inequality caused by their country’s accelerated modernisation by trying to improve the lives of strangers. Such groups meet the demand for such services and provide an outlet for the mainly middle-class individuals who want to do their bit for society and have the capacity for it. Their efforts seem to enjoy widespread support: people’s trust in NGOs is increasing year by year, according to the annual “trust barometer” put together by Edelman, a public-relations firm.

This urge to engage has recently spread to charitable giving. Total donations have nearly quadrupled since 2007, to $16 billion, though ordinary folk tend to contribute ad hoc when prompted by some crisis or natural disaster, rather than systematically. Giving in China is still paltry compared with America, which collects 25 times the Chinese total from a population a quarter of the size, but it is rising fast. The richest individuals lead the way. According to researchers at Harvard’s Kennedy School, over a third of China’s biggest philanthropists made money in property; nearly 60% of their donations go to education, reflecting a wider Chinese concern; and most give to the province where they work, replicating and reinforcing China’s overall wealth gap.

A large and growing body of NGOs are essentially service providers for the state. The nine-storey building from which Datong, or “Great Harmony”, a government-sponsored NGO, operates in the southern city of Guangzhou is home to a bevy of similar organisations; their names form the leaves of a tree in the lobby, representing the Guangzhou government that nurtures them. The local government commissions Datong to provide social services for the elderly, children, migrant families and HIV sufferers. Its founder, Liu Jinglin, is a party member, as are some of her social workers.

Some hoped that by working with the government, NGOs like Datong might influence it from within, but most of them turn out to have little autonomy over their own services. Many are, in effect, arms of the state. “The party wants to take all the credit for sorting out society’s problems,” says Jing Jun of Tsinghua University in Beijing.

Any size as long as it’s small

Datong is precisely the kind of civic group that the government hopes will help it increase social stability by alleviating social ills. In March China’s first charity law was passed to allow registration with the government, legalise fundraising and protect donors. It sends a strong signal that the state encourages at least some kinds of civic groups. Despite reservations, most people in the sector see it as an important step forward.

But the new charity law also sets clear limits. In effect, it caps the size of such civic groups. Institutions have to be in business for two years before they can raise funds, which is longer than some will be able to wait. Charities’ operating costs must not exceed 10% of spending, which will make it hard to find and retain skilled staff. And most of the income must be distributed, so accumulating an endowment will be next to impossible.



The party is wary of civic groups because it views them as a training ground for political participation. It is well aware of the role that trade unions, churches and other civic groups played in bringing down the Soviet bloc. Mass participation is also an unwelcome reminder of China’s own Cultural Revolution. There is a reason why the party calls NGOs “social organisations”: it fears that “non-government” may be misread for “anti-government”.

The idea of like-minded souls bound by a common cause linking up around the country is anathema to the party

The party is particularly cautious about foreign NGOs and foreign-funded domestic ones, seeing them as potentially subversive “anti-China forces”. A new law requires international NGOs to register with the public-security bureau; they risk being shut down if they “endanger national security”, a vague term critics worry will be used to justify increased monitoring or harassment. “It’s unfortunate that they decided to see us as criminalised from the get-go,” says the head of one such foreign group.

The state’s fear that activism will turn into political action explains the ambiguous and at times antagonistic relationship between NGOs and the state. Yang Xiong of the Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences says social organisations are “friends of the government”, and only those working on “religion, politics or the military” are sensitive. In fact the distinction is not as clear-cut as that.

Since Xi Jinping took office in 2012, the crackdown on civil society has intensified. Tolerance of the more sensitive groups has declined and previously accepted groups have been subjected to greater scrutiny. Leaders of labour-rights groups have been arrested. Courses on civil society at some universities have been closed and professors told to behave. In March 2015 five feminists were imprisoned for over a month, purportedly for planning a campaign against sexual harassment. Their crime was not that they stood up for women’s rights, but that they wanted to stage simultaneous campaigns in several cities. The idea of like-minded souls bound by a common cause linking up around the country is anathema to the party. Most of its responses can be explained by this overriding concern.

Rather than bow to government repression, the feminists have changed their strategy, becoming active on social media and looking for crowdfunding to pay for ads against harassment. LGBT groups have changed tack too. Although Chinese society is becoming more tolerant of diversity, even at the top, the state worries that such groups are becoming increasingly well organised. In the past LGBT groups have helped stage “performance art” such as faux gay weddings in popular tourist spots to raise awareness. Now they have taken to helping people use the legal system to advance their cause. Individuals have brought cases fighting illegal “gay conversion” therapy, homophobic language in textbooks and pushing for the right to marry.

Bold star

Activism is not restricted to the non-profit sector. Luo Changping, a journalist, is known in China for his online exposure of the cheating and corruption of a top party official in 2013, which eventually got the cadre sacked. Mr Luo himself, although not exactly sacked, was moved from his reporting role at Caijing, one of China’s more outspoken magazines, for investigating secret offshore accounts, and transferred to an affiliated research institute. Now he works for Okoer.com, a Chinese-German joint venture that tests the quality of products made in China and other countries.

Mr Luo is a rare individual in China who is willing to speak truth to power, so inspecting sex toys, soy sauce and biscuits may seem like a comedown. But his work still involves exposing the effects of corruption, negligence and the weak legal system on the lives of ordinary Chinese people, he says. “What I do now is more effective than journalism. One test can affect millions of consumers, but a big media exposé would change nothing.”

That points to another reason why the party fears such engaged citizens: they lay bare the gross failings of the state, including its institutional inability to protect its citizens. Food safety is a particularly touchy subject in China. Most notoriously, in 2008 vast quantities of baby milk were found to be contaminated with melamine, killing four babies and sending 50,000 to hospital. Every month brings new such scandals. Though individuals sometimes go to jail for their part in them, the underlying failure of regulation and accountability is not dealt with. Since the subject is so controversial, Chinese labs often will not test food samples from private firms or individuals, so Okoer sends all its products to Germany to be analysed.

Ai Weiwei, a Chinese artist, once remarked that a distinctive feature of dictatorships is that they make individuals feel powerless to change anything in society. Yet although civic engagement is politically sensitive, China today has more and more engaged groups such as parents’ associations at schools and residents’ groups that represent apartment-block tenants. Few of them are interested in liberal causes; they may be NIMBYists, or objecting to migrant children in their middle-class schools. The vast majority are tiny and would never consider themselves part of a broader movement. Yet in pressing for action, they show that their voice matters, that the party cannot direct all social change from the top. Slowly they are shaping China, step by tiny step.





Emigration

The long march abroad

China’s brightest and wealthiest are leaving the country in droves

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Dreaming of America

IN FAR WESTERN China on the edge of the Gobi desert, 17-year-olds in a social-studies class are discussing revolution (the Russian one) and the use and abuse of nationalism (Germany, Italy). When the teacher asks what “totalitarianism” is, a girl immediately replies: “One leader, one ideology, no human rights.” These are Chinese pupils in a Chinese classroom studying the second world war, but by attending Lanzhou Oriental Canadian School they have already written themselves out of at least part of a Chinese future. They will all go to university abroad, many to Canada, others to the United States, Australia and Britain. So great is Chinese demand for foreign schooling that even here in Gansu, China’s second-poorest province, a new block is being built to house more students; the hoardings on the building site are plastered with posters about “The Chinese Dream”, a slogan Xi Jinping launched in 2012 to promote the country’s “great revival”. But like hundreds of thousands of people across China, these teenagers and their families harbour a different dream: escape.

Since the country started opening up in 1978, around 10m Chinese have moved abroad

The extraordinary outflow of people from China is one of the most striking trends of recent decades. Since the country started opening up in 1978, around 10m Chinese have moved abroad, according to Wang Huiyao of the Centre for China and Globalisation, a think-tank in Beijing. Only India and Russia have a larger diaspora, both built up over a much longer period. The mass exodus of students like those at Lanzhou Oriental is just one part of the story. Since 2001 well over 1m Chinese have become citizens of other countries, most often America; a far larger number have taken up permanent residence abroad, a status often tied to a specific job that may last for years and can turn into citizenship.

Chinese make up the bulk of individuals who are given investor visas, a fast-track immigration system offered by many countries to the super-wealthy. Others are just moving their money offshore, investing in foreign companies or buying property. Officially Chinese citizens are limited to moving $50,000 abroad a year, but many are finding inventive ways to get round that rule, including overpaying for imports, forging deals with foreign entities and even starting, then losing, fake lawsuits against foreign entities, triggering huge “damages”.

An export industry

Studying abroad has become an ambition for the masses: 57% of Chinese parents would send their child overseas to study if the family had the means, according to the Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences. Even Mr Xi sent his daughter to study at Harvard. Nor is this open only to the super-rich. Liang Yuqi from Zhangye, a city close to Lanzhou, is being quietly guided towards a relatively cheap Canadian state university to study psychology. Her parents are government officials who have never been abroad (cadres must hand in their passport) and will pool money from relatives to fund her foreign education. The sacrifice is worth it, says her mother: in middle school Yuqi was “fat” and “mediocre”, now she is confident and asks lots of questions. Many others are spending their all to make the break. More than half a million university students went overseas last year.

This aspirational market is served by hundreds of international schools in China. Some cater for non-Chinese citizens, often the foreign-born offspring of returning Chinese. Since 2003 a growing number of regular Chinese schools, such as Lanzhou Oriental Middle School, have launched lucrative international programmes for Chinese passport-holders (fees at Lanzhou Oriental’s international arm are 70,000 yuan ($11,000) a year, 11 times the price of a regular education there). Their popularity caused a backlash against the use of public facilities and funds to send kids to study abroad after they finished school. Beijing city government and a number of provincial authorities have stopped approving new international programmes, and the education ministry is pondering nationwide restrictions. But students are leaving younger and younger. Since 2005 the number of Chinese secondary-school pupils in America alone has increased almost 60-fold, to 35,000.

Of the 4m Chinese who have left to study abroad since 1978, half have not returned, according to the education ministry. By most unofficial counts the share is even larger. In some fields the brain drain is extreme: almost all of China’s best science students go abroad for their PhDs, and 85% of Chinese science and engineering graduates with American PhDs had not returned home five years after leaving, a study by the National Science Foundation found this year. Many of the teenagers at Lanzhou Oriental Canadian School know that they are responsible for their entire family’s future: 16-year-old Hai Yingqi says she has to get a good enough job upon graduation to allow her parents, young brother and all four grandparents to emigrate.

One, two, flee

China has long seen education as a passport to success, which helps explain why the middle class is now focusing on foreign schools and universities. One Beijing businesswoman preparing to give birth in America says she wants to avoid sending the child to a Chinese school because she would have to bribe her way into a good primary school, and then “make sure the teacher is happy”—more bribes: “It’s not the money I mind, but the trouble.” Another parent questions how a child can learn values in such a system, and cites the corrupting influence of “patriotic education”, the compulsory propaganda classes all pupils must attend, where there is only one right answer and nothing can be questioned.

Others find different exit strategies. The super-rich can, in essence, buy foreign residency. Chinese citizens who invest at least £2m ($3m) in Britain are promised permanent residency in five years; Australia offers a similar scheme for A$5m ($3.6m). Around 70,000 Chinese millionaires have emigrated to Canada since 2008 under an immigrant investor scheme. This is no longer in operation, but the country is now encouraging Chinese entrepreneurs and startups. Hong Kong has cracked down on mainland mothers giving birth there to gain Hong Kong passports (and citizenship has become less appealing than it used to be), but birth tourism to America and other countries is increasing. And many of those working for multinational companies eventually transfer elsewhere.

Businesspeople who have returned to the mainland now lead some of China’s most innovative companies. But most come back only once they have secured an escape route for themselves or their children. The government has sponsored some expensive schemes to lure academics back to China, and some have taken up the invitation, having first made sure that their children were born abroad so they would be able to choose where to live in future. Yao Ming, a famous 2.29-metre-tall basketball player, is one of China’s icons, a true product of the Communist Party (which encouraged his exceptionally tall parents to marry), but his daughter, now six, was born in America. Chen Kaige, one of China’s best-known film directors, has at least two American children; Gong Li, a film star, and Jet Li, a Chinese martial-arts actor, both have Singaporean passports.

Outflows of capital, even more than people, directly mirror political risk. The torrent of cash flowing out of China almost exactly matches fears about the strength of the economy and the government’s capacity to handle it (see chart). In the second half of 2015, for example, capital moved abroad at an annual rate of $1 trillion in response to a fragile economy, the government’s botched attempt to intervene in the falling stockmarket and a slight but unexpected drop in the yuan. The government temporarily slowed that outflow by stepping up capital controls earlier this year and taking some sensible decisions on the economy. Yet as with so many problems, the party dealt with the immediate crisis, not the underlying cause.



China has long been a land of emigration, establishing small outposts of its people in almost every country in the world. Their main motive was to escape poverty. But those now bowing out are among China’s richest and most skilled. It is a profound indictment of their country that being able to leave it is such a strong sign of success.





Looking ahead

The writing on the wall

The Communist Party’s policy of balancing freedom of expression with repression is not sustainable

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Walls still have ears

IN 1970 AN ECONOMIST called Albert Hirschman published a book called “Exit, Voice, and Loyalty” in which he set out two ways in which people can express disappointment in a company, institution or state: they can either vote with their feet (exit) or stay put and speak up (voice). The Chinese Communist Party owes its longevity to having kept the door ajar to both outlets for disillusionment.

After the Tiananmen Square pro-democracy demonstrations in 1989, it offered a quiet exit by allowing some of the regime’s bravest critics to leave the country. In recent years it has also turned a blind eye to capital outflows. China’s internet firewall is managed in similar fashion: millions of people in China are able to use virtual private networks (VPNs) and the like to leap over the fence and experience the world wide web rather than China’s filtered version. The authorities could crack down on such circumvention tools, and sometimes do so on politically sensitive occasions. But mostly they choose not to, partly for economic reasons (some businesses need VPNs to operate) and partly because they want to maintain stability (which might be upset by wholly effective filtering).

Exit is still possible: hundreds of thousands of people leave each year to study, work or join family. Many invest in foreign countries or send their money abroad. But the world does not have enough universities, houses or jobs to support 225m extra households; nor would everyone in China want to leave. So although this route is still open, the middle classes are expanding so fast that an ever smaller proportion of them can use it.

The government has employed the same tactic for voice, appearing both to allow and respond to criticism. Listening to the people on issues such as air pollution relieves tension and reduces pressure, as well as producing some good policies. On the internet low-level dissent is tolerated, but censored quickly once it starts to be widely shared. The government has become expert at dealing with crises—send in officials, launch an investigation, sack a few people—without tackling the underlying problems, which would usually show up far bigger cracks in the foundations. In April Mr Xi even claimed to welcome criticism online. The party is responsive but not accountable.

This artful balance will be hard to maintain. Disappointment among different groups is growing, in different ways. The middle classes want more autonomy over their personal lives; they want to comment online, even if they are censored or drowned out; many want to help remake their rapidly changing society rather than wait for the government to do so. They are anxious about protecting their property and assets in a country where regulation and the rule of law is weak. They want assurances that the government can safeguard their children’s future.

Mr Xi’s vision of the “Chinese Dream” has proved largely empty. Meant to echo the American dream, instead it highlights the difference between the two. The American idea that people can be whoever they want to be contrasts with the tightly scripted social and moral codes the Chinese government is vigorously trying to impose. Chinese people with American-style aspirations who hope to be rewarded for ability and hard work are frustrated by the continued monopoly of those with connections (though the journey from rags to riches has become harder in America too). And in China living a life free from interference is impossible because the state intrudes into people’s homes. Chinese nationalism is strong, but on its own it is not enough to nurture the dream.

The government’s answer has been to silence voices. Some by force, such as those of civil-rights lawyers, labour activists and brave feminists; others by telling them to put up and shut up. That is true of parents whose children have been poisoned by tainted food or toxic soil, investors who have lost money in Ponzi schemes or civil-society groups that are being prevented from trying to make society better. Their call for expression is being met with repression.

What is happening on the mainland now is reminiscent of what happened in Hong Kong more than a quarter of a century ago. In the 1990s, after the Tiananmen Square protests, many Hong Kongers were afraid of what rule from Beijing might bring. Those who could afford to obtained foreign passports before the territory was returned in 1997, but many lacked the means to leave. So although Hong Kong lost some of its most productive people, it ended up with an increasingly independent, individualist, confident yet potentially restive middle class.

Even with a far more relaxed government than on the mainland, since 1997 protesters in Hong Kong have repeatedly poured onto the streets, infuriated by mainland attempts to impose its laws and to introduce “patriotic education”, frustrated by not having any real say in who runs the territory and annoyed by the hordes of mainlanders crowding the streets. Many of the underlying causes of this discontent resonate with China’s middle classes: concerns about an ageing population, strained health-care resources, the quality and quantity of graduate jobs, high property prices, low pensions, jobs moving offshore and an inability to determine their own future.

A slow-burning fuse

The Chinese people are not likely to rise up and fight for democracy any time soon. But they are looking for change, and agitating (mostly in small ways) for some of the freedoms that go with democracy, though few would describe them that way. The regime has survived by staying ahead of people’s demands and offering some outlets for their dissatisfaction, but now those outlets are shrinking. Giving this group what it wants would destroy the monopoly on power that the party has sought so hard to build and maintain, and for now it shows no sign of doing so.

But in the longer term it will find it hard to contain these forces. The middle classes are increasingly dominated by those born after 1980, whose expectations are shaped by global travel and the internet. They are no longer so cowed by history or so grateful to the party for the improvements in living standards they have enjoyed. At some point the party’s institutional amnesia may come back to bite it. Those who do not remember the past may be in danger of repeating it.





Business




Consumer goods: Invasion of the bottle snatchers

Boardroom brawls, Chinese style: Vanke panky

Israel’s tech industry: Talent search

Kingfisher Airlines: Flying blind

After the Brexit vote (I): Rules and Britannia

After the Brexit vote (II): Picking losers

Schumpeter: The two faces of USA Inc





Consumer goods

Invasion of the bottle snatchers

Smaller rivals are assaulting the world’s biggest brands

Jul 9th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



THEY make some of the world’s best-loved products. Their logos are instantly recognisable, their advertising jingles seared in shoppers’ brains. For investors, they promise steady returns in turbulent times. They seem to be getting ever bigger: on June 30th Mondelez International made a $23 billion bid for Hershey to create the world’s biggest confectioner; and on July 7th Danone, the world’s largest yogurt maker, agreed to buy WhiteWave Foods, a natural-food group, for $12.5 billion. Yet trouble lurks for the giants in consumer packaged goods (CPG), which also include firms such as General Mills, Nestlé, Procter & Gamble and Unilever. As one executive admits in a moment of candour, “We’re kind of fucked.”

For a hint of the problem they face, take the example of Daniel Lubetzky, who began peddling his fruit-and-nut bars in health-food stores: his KIND bars are now ubiquitous, stacked in airports and Walmarts. Or that of Michael Dubin and Mark Levine, entrepreneurs irked by expensive razors, who began shipping cheaper ones directly to consumers five years ago. Their Dollar Shave Club now controls 5% of America’s razor market.

Such stories abound. From 2011 to 2015 large CPG companies lost nearly three percentage points of market share in America, according to a joint study by the Boston Consulting Group and IRI, a consultancy and data provider, respectively. In emerging markets local competitors are a growing headache for multinational giants. Nestlé, the world’s biggest food company, has missed its target of 5-6% sales growth for three years running.

For a time, size gave CPG companies a staggering advantage. Centralising decisions and consolidating manufacturing helped firms expand margins. Deep pockets meant companies could spend millions on a flashy television advertisement, then see sales rise. Firms distributed goods to a vast network of stores, paying for prominent placement on shelves.

Yet these advantages are not what they once were. Consolidating factories has made companies more vulnerable to the swing of a particular currency, points out Nik Modi of RBC Capital Markets, a bank. The impact of television adverts is fading, as consumers learn about products on social media and from online reviews. At the same time, barriers to entry are falling for small firms. They can outsource production and advertise online. Distribution is getting easier, too: a young brand may prove itself with online sales, then move into big stores. Financing mirrors the same trend: last year investors poured $3.3 billion into private CPG firms, according to CB Insights, a data firm—up by 58% from 2014 and a whopping 638% since 2011.

Most troublesome, the lumbering giants are finding it hard to keep up with fast-changing consumer markets. Ali Dibadj of Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, points out that some consumers in middle-income countries began by assuming Western products were superior. As their economies grew, local players often proved more attuned to shoppers’ needs. Since 2004 big emerging economies have seen a surge of local and regional companies, according to data compiled by RBC. In China, for example, Yunnan Baiyao Group accounts for 10% of the toothpaste market, with sales growing by 45% each year since 2004. In Brazil Botica Comercial Farmacêutica sells nearly 30% of perfume. And in India Ghari Industries now peddles more than 17% of detergent.

In America and Europe, the world’s biggest consumer markets, many firms have been similarly leaden-footed. If a shopper wants a basic product, he can choose from cheap, store-brand goods from the likes of Aldi and Walmart. But if a customer wants to pay more for a product, it may not be for a traditional big brand. This may be because shoppers trust little brands more than established ones. One-third of American consumers surveyed by Deloitte, a consultancy, said they would pay at least 10% more for the “craft” version of a good, a greater share than would pay extra for convenience or innovation. Interest in organic products has been a particular challenge for big manufacturers whose packages list such tasty-sounding ingredients as sodium benzoate and Yellow 6.

All this has provided a big opening for smaller firms. In recent years they contributed to a proliferation of new products (see chart). For instance, America now boasts more than 4,000 craft brewers, up by 200% in the past decade. For a sign of the times, look no further than Wilde, which sells snack bars made of baked meat. The bars, revolting to some, may appeal to the herd of weekend triathletes who want to eat like cave men.



Big companies have been trying to respond. One answer is to focus more. In 2014 Procter & Gamble said it would sell off or consolidate about 100 brands, to devote itself to top products such as Gillette razors and Tide detergent. Mondelez, the seller of Oreo biscuits and Cadbury’s chocolate, is spending more to understand who snacks on what, and why.

But the most notable strategy has been to buy other firms and cut costs. 3G, a Brazilian private-equity firm, looms over the industry. It has slashed budgets at Heinz, a 147-year-old company it bought in 2013; then Kraft, which it merged with Heinz in 2015; as well as Anheuser-Busch InBev, a beer behemoth poised to swallow SABMiller. Heinz’s profit margin widened from 18% to 28% in just two years, according to Sanford C. Bernstein.

Big firms are also acquiring or backing smaller rivals. In 2013 two American food companies and a French one—Campbell Soup, Hain Celestial and Danone—each snapped up a maker of organic baby food. Coca-Cola and Unilever, an Anglo-Dutch titan, have long bought companies outright or invested in them. Both General Mills and Campbell have launched their own venture-capital arms.

Such strategies may eventually make CPG firms even more like big pharmaceutical companies. They may invent few products themselves and instead either acquire small firms or join up with them, then handle marketing, distribution and regulation. That has worked decently well for drugmakers. Yet consumers are more fickle when buying skin cream than a patent-protected cancer drug. A CPG firm may pay a bundle to buy a startup, only to see its products prove a fad. And cutting costs expands margins, but may depress sales.

Despite such conundrums, executives remain bullish. Tim Cofer, Mondelez’s chief growth officer, maintains that wise cuts and reinvestment will position the firm well. “This is about the scale of a $30 billion global snacking powerhouse,” he declares, “and at the same time the speed, the agility, the dexterity” of a startup.

Others are gloomier. EY, a consultancy, recently surveyed CPG executives. Eight in ten doubted their company could adapt to customer demand. Kristina Rogers of EY posits that firms may need to rethink their business, not just trim costs and sign deals. “Is the billion-dollar brand,” she wonders, “still a robust model?”





Boardroom brawls, Chinese style

Vanke panky

Corporate governance in China leaves much to be desired

Jul 9th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition



WANG SHI (pictured) is not a man who gives up easily. The chairman of Vanke, one of China’s biggest property firms, cut his teeth in the People’s Liberation Army and climbed Everest at the age of 52. When bombers attacked the Boston marathon in 2013, Mr Wang stayed at the scene and posted dispatches on social media. CCTV, China’s official broadcaster, called him its “front-line correspondent”.

This steely temperament was again evident this week, as Mr Wang gained the upper hand in his battle against a corporate raider attempting to seize control of his listed company. Baoneng, a private Chinese conglomerate, fired the first salvo last year by raising its stake in Vanke to more than 24%. That made its holding bigger than the one held by China Resources, a state-owned enterprise which has long backed the firm’s leadership, and set the stage for a takeover bid.

Declaring Yao Zhenhua, Baoneng’s boss, an unwelcome barbarian, Mr Wang asked for trading in Vanke’s shares to be suspended on December 18th and tried to organise an alternative investor to outflank Baoneng. In March he unveiled a convoluted plan to acquire properties held by Shenzhen Metro, a government entity. In return, he planned to issue new shares and grant the state outfit a stake in his company that would be bigger than Baoneng’s. But China Resources, unhappy that its stake would also be diluted, opposed this plan.

Sensing weakness, Baoneng in late June demanded an extraordinary shareholder meeting to oust Mr Wang and his board. With China Resources no longer at his side, Mr Wang looked as if he might be toppled. But on July 3rd Vanke notified regulators that the firm’s board had officially rejected Baoneng’s demand. Baoneng responded on July 5th by purchasing more of Vanke’s shares, taking its holding to just below 25%.

Yan Yuejin of E-house, a property-research firm, warns that the public boardroom brawl was “such a joke” that it will prompt regulatory scrutiny. Whatever the outcome, the affair has revealed the sad state of corporate governance in China. Hostile takeovers are extremely rare on the mainland, especially of firms this large. (Vanke’s revenues last year were over $30 billion.) Most private-sector firms are controlled by a dominant shareholder or group, which makes it hard for raiders to seize control by purchasing shares openly.

But Vanke was unusually exposed to raiders. In 1988 Mr Wang took the decision not to keep a tight grip on Vanke, but rather to donate his shares to charity. In a speech in 2014 he professed his faith in good governance, arguing that he would rather win the trust of his board through his performance than control it through a dominant shareholding.

Alas, those sentiments were quickly forgotten when a hostile raider emerged. Chen Shimin of the China Europe International Business School in Shanghai sees “a lapse in corporate governance”. Instead of rejecting the bid from Baoneng out of hand and working stealthily to find a white knight, Vanke should have convened a board meeting immediately to discuss a potential takeover. Asked this week for comment, Vanke responded: “We are not in a position to comment on our own corporate governance.”

Vanke’s failings are more public than those of other Chinese companies, but they are not more egregious. Firms regularly flout rules about the independence of directors by, for example, packing boards with cronies of the chairman. Moreover, the rules and regulations about company behaviour are themselves often vague, and arbitrarily enforced. The Asian Corporate Governance Association, an independent body, rates China’s performance on such matters among the worst in Asia. If Mr Wang wants a task more challenging than climbing Everest, he should rally Chinese business leaders behind the cause of better corporate governance.





Israel’s tech industry

Talent search

The “startup nation” is running out of steam

Jul 9th 2016 | JERUSALEM | From the print edition



ISRAEL’S high-tech sector seems to be a land of milk and honey. Scarcely a month passes without another announcement of a foreign tech giant buying a local firm. In 2015 Israeli startups raised a record $4.4 billion in venture capital, up by 30% from the previous year. Yet the country once christened the “startup nation” is losing steam. Between 1998 and 2012 the tech industry grew on average by 9% annually, more than double the rate of Israel’s GDP. In all but one of the past six years, the tech sector has expanded at a slower rate than the overall economy.

The main cause for the slowdown is a growing shortage of trained workers, according to a recent report by the chief economist of the ministry of finance. This may come as a surprise, given the country’s reputation for having a deep pool of tech talent, mainly because of the Israel Defence Forces (IDF), which rely heavily on technology and churn out thousands of highly skilled workers. But a complex mix of social, educational and business factors is increasingly constraining the size of Israel’s tech workforce.

There is a limit to the size of any industry a small country of only 8m people can sustain. Until recently, the tech industry was helped by two trends: academics and employees of state-owned industries moving into the private sector and the arrival of tens of thousands of Jewish engineers emigrating from the former Soviet Union. Both these sources of fresh talent have now dried up, even as others remain obstructed. Two growing parts of the Israeli population are underrepresented in the job market: Israeli Arabs and the ultra-Orthodox, who together make up around 25% of the population. Israel’s universities are producing fewer engineers, too: the share of graduates with science degrees is down from 12% in 1998 to 9% in 2014.

At the same time, demand for skilled tech workers continues to grow, and not just in the private sector. The IDF need to keep their trained operatives longer, for instance to expand their cyber-warfare capabilities. Competition for such personnel is fierce: many are snapped up by firms offering twice the pay the army does.

Moreover, the Israeli tech industry doesn’t make the best use of the talent available. Many workers want to start their own firm, rather than toiling at a big one, meaning that most firms are tiny with only a handful of employees. Israeli entrepreneurs also tend to seek swift “exits” and quickly sell their startup to foreign companies. As a result, the country’s tech firms are not creating training schemes, points out Yigal Erlich of Yozma, the outfit that seeded many Israeli venture-capital funds.

The government has started to take action. Naftali Bennett, the education minister and a former high-tech entrepreneur himself, has launched an emergency plan to boost the number of students studying mathematics. For the first time in Israeli history, government economists are considering long-term work visas for foreign engineers. The IDF, for their part, have streamlined their training courses and now provide soldiers with the option of online distance-learning, so they can enhance their skills on the job. “But there is a limit to what we can do. Conscription is down due to demographic reasons and few of the new conscripts arrive with basic tech skills,” says Danny Bren, a former commander of the IDF’s Lotem Unit, the main provider of computer and networking services for the army.

Israel may have to take still more radical steps. One could be to provide more Israeli Arabs and ultra-Orthodox Jews with the skills necessary to work in the tech industry. Another potential source of talent are the more than 4m Palestinians living in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, over 50,000 of whom are already allowed to work in Israel, but mainly on building sites and other low-paid jobs. Before Israel imports engineers from Asia, it should consider its closest neighbours.





Kingfisher Airlines

Flying blind

The dog ate my accounts, honest

Jul 9th 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition

Have you seen my balance-sheet?

AN OWNER who is lying low in London, a slew of government agencies investigating fraud, a consortium of 17 banks facing hefty losses: winding up Kingfisher Airlines, an Indian carrier that stopped flying in 2012 under a pile of debts, always looked likely to make the fortunes of a few bankruptcy lawyers. It now seems that forensic accountants may get a fat payday as well, after the airline told a government agency its books had vanished. As with all important documents, it seems, a backup is nowhere to be found, if it ever existed.

The airline’s missing accounts—apparently stored on servers seized by a vendor who had gone unpaid—is an unwelcome complication for those who had hoped the Kingfisher saga might be inching towards some sort of resolution. To the dismay of Vijay Mallya, the booze scion who founded the airline in 2005 (pictured left, with Prince Charles), the case is now a tangle of bankers’ civil claims and criminal ones from authorities investigating allegations that some of the loan money went towards his foreign property purchases (accusations that Mr Mallya says he has disproved).

Every week brings fresh news of financial slapstick. Last month it emerged that one of the aggrieved banks froze the accounts of three customers it alleged had guaranteed loans to the carrier in their role as board directors of Kingfisher. In fact, it blocked a destitute farmer, a vegetable stallholder and a security guard with similar names. The actual targets deny being on the hook anyway.

Mr Mallya, who did in fact personally guarantee the loans, has claimed it was coincidence that he flew to Europe just as government agencies were closing in on him in March. He says proceedings designed formally to brand him an absconder make it harder for him to settle with the banks, many of which are state-owned. Having insisted he cough up the entire 90 billion rupees ($1.3 billion) he owes, including overdue interest, there are now reports that some banks may be happy if they get little more than their principal back.

That would still equate to a recovery rate of over 50 cents on the dollar, more than double the Indian average in such bankruptcy cases. But the banks’ fear of appearing soft on a hard-partying tycoon will make it difficult for them to settle. They must be seen to hold him to account—a task now made all the trickier by Kingfisher’s own missing accounts.





After the Brexit vote (I)

Rules and Britannia

Uncertainty, especially about regulation, spreads among industries most exposed to Britain

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



NO, GOOGLE is unlikely to move jobs to continental Europe, nor invest more there, said Eric Schmidt, the executive chairman of Alphabet (parent of the online giant) at a conference in Paris last week. Just because Britons voted to quit the European Union, businesses need not react hastily. But he added a warning that Britain and the EU must not let a digital gap open up; they need as “great a unification as possible” in technology regulation.

Tech bosses fret that Britain and the EU will end up with different policies towards their most important resource: data. On July 12th the EU is expected, at last, to approve “Privacy Shield”, an agreement to let companies transfer personal data across the Atlantic. (In October the European Court of Justice struck down an old deal as unsafe.) But if Britain leaves the union, nobody knows whether the new shield will cover it, too. So might the EU block data flows across the Channel, unless Britain negotiates a privacy agreement of its own? Since some in Brussels are suspicious of intrusive British surveillance, that could prove messy.

Uncertainty leaves not just big cloud-computing firms such as Google unsure where to put data centres. After the Brexit vote, the U-word is muttered everywhere in boardrooms—from carmaking to airlines, energy to telecoms. Shareholders are already feeling the pain, although not all recent losses on stockmarkets are due to Britain’s referendum (see chart).



Before the vote, European corporate leaders gave surprisingly little thought to what a split might mean for them. Matthias Wissmann, head of VDA, a German car lobby, says car firms made “no contingency plans” and the result caught them unaware despite Germany’s export of €89 billion ($99 billion) of goods, especially cars, to Britain each year. A survey, pre-referendum, by BDI, Germany’s industry federation, found that nearly 70% of firms had no clue how to respond to Brexit. The boss of a big French defence firm says nobody, banks aside, made serious plans for it, beyond currency hedging.

Regulatory uncertainty will dog firms for at least as long as Britain and the EU are negotiating a divorce agreement, which will determine whether British access to the single market will continue. Airlines are particularly exposed. Since the 1990s EU-based ones have been free to fly between any European airports without regulatory approval. Open-skies agreements with America and other third parties give EU airlines flexibility on long-haul routes, too. Outside the single market separate regulations kick in, for example on ownership and the need for official route approval. Firms with extensive continental operations, such as easyJet or IAG, will be sorely tempted to shift headquarters inside the EU. Dreams of a “European Single Sky”, to centralise air-traffic control and cut costs, are fading on the assumption that liberalising Brits will no longer push them.

Aircraft-makers, too, are facing a lack of regulatory clarity. Britain boasts the world’s second-largest aerospace industry, which, among other things, builds wings for Airbus aircraft. Before the vote, the firm already warned that Brexit could jeopardise future investment. Nobody knows whether the EU’s “launch aid” for aerospace, which helps with the setting up of big new plants, will still apply to Britain.

Energy is another big source of uncertainty. On July 4th Électricité de France, a French utility, reiterated its plan to build an £18 billion ($23 billion) nuclear-power station, Hinkley Point C, in Britain. The project is underpinned by British state aid, in the form of long-term electricity contracts and a debt guarantee. The European Commission agreed to these subsidies in 2014, but that could change if relations sour. Even before the vote, Austria’s anti-nuclear government had brought the matter to the European Court of Justice. Britain, at least, might be blocked from selling subsidised surplus electricity from Hinkley Point into the European grid, adding to doubts over Hinkley Point’s viability.

Pharmaceutical companies, for their part, were expecting a “unitary patent system” for Europe by 2018, with an intellectual-property court in Britain specialising in drugs and chemicals. This would have brought work resolving legal disputes into London, and boosted the pharma credentials of a country that is already home to the EU body that approves drugs for the entire European market. That now looks unlikely: Britain may not ratify the agreement, and will probably not get the court.

Similarly, in the chemicals industry, firms fret that British partners may no longer be covered by a EU framework, REACH, by which chemicals registered centrally can be sold in all member states. An industry insider in Germany says that without shared standards “customers may ask questions about the security of the supply chain”, and may be put off trading with British suppliers or investing in Britain.

The list goes on. In telecoms it is unclear whether British mobile carriers would be free to levy roaming costs on customers travelling inside the EU; such charges are to be scrapped in the union. For big food firms, such as Mars, worries about currency swings and tariffs are compounded by dismay that standards for factories, labels on packages, product recalls and employment conditions may soon differ in Britain. Matthias Berninger, the firm’s vice-president for public affairs, expects more complexity because British politicians will not “copy and paste European rules”.

All this uncertainty means that firms planning to invest in Britain are putting decisions on hold. A leading Swedish industrialist, Jacob Wallenberg, says he knows “companies that have withdrawn investment decisions from Britain since the referendum”. Given the British economy’s reliance on inflows from abroad, any slowdown is worrying: Britain holds roughly 7% of the world’s stock of foreign direct investment, some £1 trillion, and more than anywhere except America. Around half of Britain’s foreign direct investment comes from the EU.

Yet dramatic divestment may not loom. Instead the fear is of a “slow erosion”, says Juergen Maier, head of Siemens’s British operations. “Lots of little decisions” may be made away from Britain, to build plants or run research projects elsewhere. He points to researchers and firms that could be excluded from the EU’s €80 billion Horizon 2020 fund, which supports science and innovation.

Even if concerns over regulatory gaps prove overdone, there is a second worry: that future policy in the EU, drafted without direct British influence, will become more hostile to business. Mr Wallenberg calls Britain a free-market country and is concerned that new regulations will be dominated by a statist axis of Paris and Berlin. He is not alone. “Europe loses a sensible voice and a counterweight to the protectionists,” says an executive at a German chemicals firm. Surprisingly, perhaps, the chairman of a French industrial company volunteers: “A lot of us don’t like the idea of the Brits out. We like their business-friendly agenda.”





After the Brexit vote (II)

Picking losers

How different industries are exposed to the turmoil in Britain

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



SPARE a thought for Brammer, a British supplier of bearings and other industrial gear for factories in Europe. The exporter had boasted revenues of £717m last year (then $960m), but sales dipped before the referendum. Brammer now faces a rout, amid warnings of slumping demand and currency headaches (because the firm has lots of dollar- and euro- denominated debt). By July 5th its share price had tumbled by two-thirds since voting day—more than any firm listed in London.

If Brammer is a contender to be the company worst-affected by Brexit, it is not alone in the gloom. By one measure of global connectedness—combining indices of cross-border loans, legal relationships, data-storage hubs and so on—Britain’s economy is one of the most open in the world. The earnings generated by foreign firms from their investments in Britain amount to £70 billion, equivalent to about 10% of all of the profits made by the top 500 European listed firms, or roughly 1% of global business profits.

Plenty of these investors have placed bets on Britain’s domestic market, which had previously been buoyant but now faces the risk of recession. Li Ka-shing, a Hong Kong tycoon, owns utilities and a mobile network; Walmart, an American retailer, controls Asda, a chain of supermarkets; investors from Qatar have piled into commercial property; Ferrovial, a Spanish infrastructure firm, has interests in a string of British airports, including London Heathrow. The new economy is not immune from pessimism. Analysts see earning prospects for Netflix, an online video-service, dampened by slower GDP growth in Britain and the rest of Europe, for example.

Carmakers face a double whammy. First, the brakes are being slammed on in a market that had been one of the biggest and fastest-growing in Europe. Motorists in Britain bought 2.6m new cars in 2015, but Exane BNP Paribas now expects a 10% decline in demand in the second half of this year, plus a further 10% fall early in 2017. A Europe-wide downturn may follow. Morgan Stanley suggests car sales, once forecast to grow by 5% this year, will now only expand by 3.7%. In 2017 it suggests a 2.2% contraction is possible.

Second, Brexit threatens carmakers’ access to European export markets. Two-thirds of all vehicles produced in Britain are exported to the EU, and mass-market models, sold with slender margins—such as those made by Toyota, Nissan and Honda—are most vulnerable to currency swings or any future tariffs. Small wonder that Nissan’s boss, Carlos Ghosn, said this week that “we are a little worried”.



INTERACTIVE: Integration within the European Union

For other exporters, such as Nippon Sheet Glass, which bought Pilkington, a British glassmaker, in 2006, and BASF, a German chemicals giant that operates ten plants in Britain, any loss of access to the big EU market would be disastrous. About 80% of what BASF makes in Britain is exported, largely to continental Europe. Aerospace suppliers, such as GKN Aerospace, which sells 67% of its output to EU customers, are similarly exposed.

By contrast, firms that are headquartered in London for cultural, legal and tax reasons, but that have little exposure to the British economy and do not use Britain as an export hub—companies such as SABMiller, a brewer, or ArcelorMittal, a steelmaker—will not be fazed by recession and the falling pound. Promises, for instance, to bring corporate tax below 15% in Britain, will cheer them too—even as this annoys the country’s European partners.

And a select few professions might even prosper from the turmoil and its divorce from the EU: lawyers, headhunters, tax consultants, relocation firms, budding trade negotiators and soothsayers could all be in demand. This week, for example, KPMG, an accounting firm, announced a new “head of Brexit”. (It is not Boris Johnson.)





Schumpeter

The two faces of USA Inc

American bosses are divided when it comes to Donald Trump

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THE leaders of America’s multinational firms are usually a picture of self-control, with sincere handshakes, grown-up hair and scripted sound bites. But ask them about the election and emotion takes over. At a drinks party in Manhattan, a mega-bank’s boss froths that Donald Trump is a madman. Thumping an office table, the head of one of the country’s biggest technology firms, and a rare Republican in Silicon Valley, solemnly vows to vote for Hillary Clinton. The chief of a huge transport firm giggles uneasily that a Trump presidency will destroy free trade—and his firm’s booming business with Mexico.

The feeling of contempt is mutual. On June 29th Mr Trump laid into the Chamber of Commerce, big business’s favourite lobbying organisation. “It’s totally controlled by the special-interest groups,” he said, to wild cheers from a crowd in Maine.

Big international firms do not share Mr Trump’s diagnosis of America as a country that has stopped winning. For them, it has been a golden decade. Share prices are near an all-time high; the operating earnings of S&P 500 firms have risen by 137% since the crisis year of 2009. Many of the trends that have hurt Middle America have made USA Inc stronger. Big firms have cut jobs to increase productivity and now make 40% of their sales abroad. They are more dominant at home because of a wave of mergers and their mastery of lobbying. They grumble about tax, but have become superb at avoiding it. The top 50 firms paid a cash tax rate of 24% on their global profits in 2015, compared with an official rate of 39%. Even the big banks have learned to live with more regulation: they are thrashing their European rivals across the globe.

At the very point that swathes of the public say the economy isn’t working, USA Inc is on top of the world, occupying all of the ten top spots in the global corporate rankings, measured by market value. Bosses of multinational firms think their country has everything to play for. The worst of the job losses attributable to cheap Chinese labour have already happened; with luck, Chinese consumers will start buying more from the rest of the world. America’s lead in technology has never been bigger. New trade deals, such as the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership, are remarkably skewed towards American interests in areas such as intellectual-property rights. “The American model that got us through the last 30 to 40 years is stronger than ever,” declared Eric Schmidt, the executive chairman of Alphabet, the parent company of Google, to the Economic Club of New York last month.

The hostility of big firms towards Mr Trump goes beyond free trade. They know that America’s demographics are changing. The fastest-growing cohort of consumers are Hispanic, with their share of overall spending forecast to rise by about two percentage points by 2020, even as the share of white Americans drops by the same amount, according to Morgan Stanley, a bank. Bosses see a much more socially liberal America, too. None of this sits well with Mr Trump’s nativist agenda, which is perhaps why Wells Fargo, JPMorgan Chase, Ford, Coca-Cola and Apple have either cut their support for the Republican convention this month or will not support it at all.

Yet a thousand miles south of Manhattan, in suburban Florida, the mood is different. The boss of a construction firm says he is fed up. His firm does all its business within America’s borders and profits have not yet recovered to 2006 levels. The Obama administration, in his view, has crippled the economy. More generous welfare benefits means labourers have got lazy. Permits and local taxes have proliferated, raising costs. The crackdown on banks has hobbled lending. Vote for Hillary? Not a chance, he says. Trump it has to be—and if he is psychologically erratic and vulgar, better that than an endless stagnation.

The construction boss is not alone. Opinion polls suggest that Mr Trump is also popular with small-business owners. His campaign-finance disclosures show hundreds of contributions from the owners of small firms that no one on Wall Street or in Washington, DC, has ever heard of: Biagi Plumbing, James River Air Conditioning, Rosenberger Construction, Allen Unique Autos, Texan Drywall Inc and Podell Fuel Injection.

A demagogue and a hypocrite, with a point

The complacent response is that these entrepreneurs are fools who have been deceived. After all, Mr Trump’s business career has been built in the heart of the globalised part of the economy, not slogging it out in the trenches of Middle America. About 66% of the value of his business operations sits in New York, mainly in buildings in glittering Manhattan, according to Economist estimates. Global too-big-too-fail banks are tenants in two of Mr Trump’s most valuable properties. He has courted foreign investors, from Hong Kong to the Middle East, since the 1990s.

But Mr Trump speaks the language of business owners when he says he will abolish Obamacare, the health-care scheme that companies say has created piles of red tape. When he promises that no firm will pay a tax rate of more than 15%, small and domestically-focused business see not a fiscal absurdity, but a chance that they might enjoy the same treatment that multinationals already enjoy (Apple, America’s biggest firm, paid a cash tax rate of 18% in 2015). And when Mr Trump complains about special interests dominating the economy, and corrupting politics, he is right. Lobbying budgets have reached $3 billion a year. Two-thirds of industries have become more concentrated since the 1990s. With big companies ascendant, the number of new entrant firms being created is at its lowest level since the 1970s.

A sensible economic agenda for America would please—and annoy—both sides of the divide. It would pursue free trade but also attack oligopolies, lobbying and bureaucracy and reform the corporate tax system. In other words, it would listen to the polished sophisticates who run America’s biggest companies, but also to those business leaders who support Mr Trump.





Finance and economics




Italian banks: Crisis and opportunity

Buttonwood: Safe as office blocks

MiFID: Financial tonic

Banks in oil-exporting countries: Lending at $47 a barrel

China’s debt: Coming clean

Taxes in California: Stop dreamin’

Free exchange: X marks the knot





Italian banks

Crisis and opportunity

The Brexit vote has sideswiped Italy’s banks—and is testing Europe’s new rules on tackling troubled lenders

Jul 9th 2016 | MILAN | From the print edition



THE shockwaves from Brexit have been almost as severe on the Tiber as on the Thames. Markets fear that Britons’ vote to leave the European Union on June 23rd presages weaker growth in Europe and still-lower interest rates. That is not good for banks—and Italy’s, labouring under the EU’s heaviest bad-debt burden and tied to a frail economy, have been walloped (see chart). Shares in UniCredit, the biggest, have slid by one-third. Those of second-ranked Intesa Sanpaolo, though it is in far better shape, have shed 30%.



Most troubled is Italy’s third-biggest lender (and the world’s oldest): Monte dei Paschi di Siena, founded in 1472. Its shares tumbled on July 4th and 5th after the leak of a request from the European Central Bank for it to reduce its bad-loan pile from last year’s €46.9 billion ($52 billion), or 35% of all its lending, to €32.6 billion by 2018. (That was already the plan, said the bank, but the shares sank all the same.) It trades at around one-tenth of book value. Analysts at Morgan Stanley estimate it needs €2 billion-6 billion of extra capital.

Several European governments poured money into their banking systems in the wake of the financial crisis. Italy did not, partly in the misplaced hope that economic recovery would lighten its bad-debt load. The pile is now €360 billion, 18% of all banks’ loans, double what it was in 2011. After loss provisions (too low, say analysts) it is still €200 billion. The most “suffering” loans, or sofferenze, amount to €200 billion, or €83 billion after provisions. On July 29th EU supervisors are due to publish the results of their latest “stress tests” of 51 European lenders, which will not flatter Monte dei Paschi. It was one of nine Italian lenders to fail tests in 2014. Forced mergers, closures and capital raising ensued.

Matteo Renzi, Italy’s prime minister, wants to help banks shed their bad debts and recapitalise, with government money if need be. But European rules restricting “state aid” for companies have been tightened recently, making the task much harder. Since the start of this year, any bank receiving state aid is supposed to be put into “resolution”—in effect, bankruptcy. Shareholders and junior creditors must then be “bailed in” (ie, lose money) to the tune of at least 8% of the bank’s liabilities.

Mr Renzi wants to avoid that at all costs, because Italian banks’ creditors include millions of ordinary Italians. Households own around €200 billion of bank bonds eligible to be bailed in, which account for 5% of their financial assets. The stock is declining, because people are at last aware of the risks. A rescue of four tiny banks in November, in which bondholders were bailed in, caused widespread protests (one of which is pictured); one saver killed himself. A repeat may well seal Mr Renzi’s defeat in a referendum in October on constitutional reform, on which he has bet his premiership.

The stakes are high for the European Commission, too. It does not want its new rules to be bent the first time they are tested, nor does it relish a blazing row with a founding member of the EU so soon after the Brexit vote. So the search is on for a way to allow Italy to put public money into banks while sparing bondholders. There is wriggle-room: the rules allow a “precautionary” injection of state money to preserve financial stability without putting banks into resolution. A bad showing in a stress test is a possible justification.

That still counts as state aid, so should trigger a bail-in. One way around that, suggests Morgan Stanley, is to create a fund to compensate retail investors on the ground that the bonds were mis-sold in the first place. That may be not only expedient but also just: many investors were convinced that the bonds were as safe as legally guaranteed deposits.

Reports have suggested that Mr Renzi is contemplating a recapitalisation fund of €40 billion. But officials familiar with his plans say a far smaller sum is likely, probably less than €10 billion. That would be ample for recapitalising Monte dei Paschi and perhaps some smaller banks, and so could be a helpful step towards repairing the system. But it would still leave a lot of work to do.

Some banks will be able to raise capital on their own account if they need it. Analysts expect UniCredit, for example, to tap the markets and dispose of some businesses. The decision awaits Jean-Pierre Mustier, who becomes chief executive on July 12th.

But clearing up bad debts will take time. For lenders, sales and write-downs mean a painful blow: potential buyers rate the sofferenze at below 20% of face value on average, less than half of the written-down figure on banks’ books. Italian bankers complain that pressure from European regulators to act quickly will make a bad problem worse, by encouraging fire sales. Collateral consists largely of property: flats and commercial premises may be easy enough to sell in Milan or Rome, but much harder in less liquid markets in struggling areas. And repossession can take years—something a recent bankruptcy reform is intended to change.

One hope is that Atlante, a €4.25 billion fund set up in April with money from banks, insurers and other institutions to recapitalise small banks and securitise bad loans, can take more of the strain. But €2.5 billion has already been spent on shares in two ailing northern banks, leaving little in the kitty. Moves are afoot to boost Atlante, perhaps with a new bad-debt fund of €3 billion-5 billion.

The answer to Italy’s banking problems seems sure to involve more capital—from whatever source—more asset sales and more write-downs, as well as consolidation of smaller lenders, which the government is encouraging. But even that may not be enough. It is hard for banks to thrive if the economy around them does not.





Buttonwood

Safe as office blocks

British property funds suspend redemptions

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THE first concrete signs of post-Brexit financial stress in Britain emerged this week. The asset-management arm of Standard Life, an insurer, suspended redemptions from its £2.9 billion ($3.8 billion) British property fund. It was followed by a flurry of rivals: Aviva, Canada Life, Columbia Threadneedle, Henderson and M&G. Another fund, run by Aberdeen, said it would apply a 17% discount to redemptions.

The decisions highlighted the mismatch between the open-ended nature of such funds—allowing retail investors to buy and sell on a daily basis—and the illiquid assets they hold: office blocks and shopping centres. But the announcements also reflected the shock to the property market caused by the Brexit vote. London has attracted lots of businesses both because of its perceived openness and because it provides an English-speaking base for doing business in the EU; the vote has caused a reassessment of its attractiveness as a corporate home.

According to the Financial Times, German and Spanish buyers pulled out of £650m-worth of property deals in the week after the referendum. Russell Chaplin of Aberdeen says many deals had a “Brexit clause” allowing purchasers to walk away if Britain voted to leave. This has happened to Aberdeen’s property fund in two cases: one buyer abandoned a purchase altogether while another asked for a discount, which has not been accepted.

Mutual property funds tend to have monthly valuations (conducted by outsiders) to determine the “fair value” of their assets. Given the uncertainties after the referendum, valuers thought it prudent to apply a discount and fund-management groups took their advice. Henderson reduced its fair-value estimate by 4%, M&G by 4.5%, and Standard Life by 5%.

The funds keep some liquid assets on hand in order to meet the kind of redemptions they face in normal circumstances; as of May 31st, Standard Life had 13% of its assets in this form. Some of these liquid assets will be stakes in big property companies like British Land and Land Securities, so the big falls in their share prices (see chart) may in part be a contagion effect from funds meeting redemption requests.

There may be other knock-on effects. In a report on financial stability published on July 5th, the Bank of England worried that forced sales of assets by property funds may exacerbate the market’s weakness; it has eased capital requirements for banks to encourage lending.

Problems have been growing for a while. The central bank said that foreign capital inflows into British property fell by almost 50% in the first quarter, perhaps as investors waited for the Brexit vote to be resolved. The purchasing managers’ index for the construction industry fell in June to its lowest level since 2009.

Mike Prew of Jefferies, an investment bank, has been predicting a commercial-property downturn since last year. Two areas stand out. Central London has been on a building spree, with 26m square feet of offices currently being added (or refurbished) in a market with around 200m square feet of space. Mr Prew thinks 100,000 jobs in London are at risk of moving to the EU—enough to free up 10m square feet. Office rents could fall by as much as 18% in central London, he warns.

The second problem area is retail premises, to which the Standard Life fund was heavily exposed (its five biggest tenants were all retailers). High-street shops have been squeezed by the rise of the internet; BHS, a department-store chain, recently went under. If the economy does slow in the wake of the referendum, retailers’ troubles will intensify.

Comparisons with the financial crisis of 2007-08 are inevitable; that too saw property-fund suspensions in its early stages. But they should not be overdone. For a start, open-ended property funds do not borrow and own only around 5% of British commercial property. Few investors are likely to have devoted a large part of their savings to this asset; they will have known that they might lose money. The systemic risk is limited.

Furthermore, with interest rates near zero and ten-year bond yields below 1%, property funds still offer a decent income; even in London, prime rental yields are 4-4.5%. Vacancies are below the historical average, according to Jones Lang LaSalle, an estate agent. A big sell-off would surely attract some bargain-hunters.

Still, fund suspensions are not a good sign. At the very least, they should make regulators question whether open-ended funds are suitable for property investing. There is nothing liquid about bricks.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood





MiFID

Financial tonic

Bankers hope an obscure law will preserve the City’s access to the EU

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THERE was a time when a mention of MiFID 2, a complex European regulation, elicited groans from financial types in the City of London. Since Britain voted to leave the European Union, however, it has become a source of hope. That is because a clause in the second iteration of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive, to give it its full name, seems to provide financial firms outside the EU, as those in the City may soon be, with a means to provide services to customers inside it.

The provision in question allows financial firms from outside the EU to offer trading, brokerage and underwriting services to European institutional (but not retail) clients, as long as the regulatory regime where they are based is deemed “equivalent” to that of the EU. In theory, there should be no doubt about the equivalence of Britain’s laws, points out Jonathan Herbst of Norton Rose Fulbright, a law firm, as long as Britain continues to implement European rules until its exit. This suggests that for banks and brokerages based in London it should be business as usual.

Politics is likely to get in the way, however. The equivalence provision is as yet untested, since MiFID 2 does not come into force until early 2018. But the regulators’ interpretation of a similar clause in the European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR), which governs the trading and clearing of derivatives, is sobering.

The declaration of equivalence, both for EMIR and for MiFID 2, is at the discretion of the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), based in Paris. It has so far proved to be largely a “political process”, says Simon Gleeson of Clifford Chance, another law firm. Declaring American regulations on clearing-houses equivalent under EMIR, for example, took over three years and involved a long debate between America and the EU over the extent to which America should adapt its rules to mirror Europe’s (resolved only after ESMA eventually yielded).

As Mr Gleeson points out, the equivalence provisions of both EMIR and MiFID 2 were originally intended to encourage other countries to bring their rules more in line with European ones, in exchange for generous market access. A post-Brexit Britain would start with identical rules, but even a small divergence—a decision, say, to repeal Europe’s caps on bankers’ bonuses—could be construed as an unacceptable step in the wrong direction. In any case, argues Philippe Morel of Boston Consulting Group (BCG), a consultancy, it is unrealistic to expect that any decision on equivalence could be divorced from the wider, potentially acrimonious exit negotiations, in which it is bound to be used as a bargaining chip.

Indeed, the huge uncertainty about the length and outcome of the negotiations over Britain’s departure could be enough to render MiFID 2 useless to the City. If bankers cannot be sure about how soon a decision on equivalence will be made, or whether it might be revisited at any moment, they cannot rely on MiFID 2 to keep their operations running smoothly. According to Mr Morel, co-author of a recent joint report on MiFID 2 by BCG and Markit, a financial-information company, the implementation of the new law has already proved more costly and time-consuming than anticipated, requiring a big overhaul of market participants’ data systems. Banks would not want to risk wasting all the money spent complying with MiFID by maintaining European trading desks in London alone.

Instead, financial firms with big operations in London will probably begin setting up or scaling up European subsidiaries, to be able to continue trading with European clients no matter how the Brexit saga ends. Once trading has moved, it may not shift back. Some British bankers remain sanguine, arguing that retaining access to Britain’s deep capital markets is so important to European businesses that they would not allow it to fall victim to petty politics. Then again, some thought that the City was so important to the British economy that voters would not dare risk its future by plumping for Brexit.





Banks in oil-exporting countries

Lending at $47 a barrel

Cheaper oil means tighter credit

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Two is for joy

AT FIRST glance, Nigeria’s decision last month to float its currency and the announcement this week of a bank merger in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) have little in common. Nigeria is a country of almost 180m people with a GDP per person of less than $3,000 (at last year’s market exchange rates). The population of the UAE is 18 times smaller and 13 times better off. Both countries are, however, members of the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), a cartel, and both are learning to cope with cheaper crude.

The merger of National Bank of Abu Dhabi (NBAD) and First Gulf Bank (FGB), approved by their boards on July 3rd, will create a national champion with assets of over 640 billion dirhams ($175 billion). FGB’s strengths lie in consumer banking, credit cards and housing loans. NBAD describes itself as a “banker to the government”, with a strong investment-banking arm. The merged institution will help Abu Dhabi “project its financial power” beyond its borders, says Simon Kitchen of EFG-Hermes, an investment bank.

It is also, true, however, that the UAE itself has become less financially roomy. Since the oil price began sliding, in 2014, oil revenue has declined, stemming dollar inflows. Because the dirham is pegged to the greenback, lower inflows, all other things being equal, translate directly into slower growth in the money supply. In fact, it has plateaued over the past two years (see chart). A similar slowdown has prevailed across the Gulf. No fewer than 46 commercial banks (one for every 208,000 people) are competing over the UAE’s stagnant pool of deposits. Some of the smaller ones now trade at less than their book value. James Burdett, NBAD’s chief financial officer, has said that further consolidation “makes a lot of economic sense.”



Whatever the consequences of the peg, the UAE has the fiscal and currency reserves to defend it. It allowed its budget deficit to reach 3.7% of GDP in 2015, according to the Economist Intelligence Unit, our sister firm, but that red ink followed an even bigger surplus the year before. For less fortunate countries, cheaper oil poses tougher choices. One way to supply more money locally despite a dearth of dollars is to let the exchange rate drop. On June 20th Nigeria did just that, allowing the naira to depreciate by 30% in a single day. This float replaced an unworkable peg, imposed in March 2015, that had left the economy short of dollars and captive to an expensive black market for foreign exchange. In the week after the float was announced, bank shares rose by almost 10%.

Whereas the UAE is chock-full of banks, Nigeria has remarkably few. Only 21 (one for every 8.5m people) soldier on, down from 89 in 2004. For this score of survivors, the naira’s depreciation posed some difficulties. According to Fitch Ratings, 45% of Nigerian banks’ loans are denominated in dollars (or other foreign currencies), whereas their capital is in naira. When the currency fell, it dragged down the value of their capital relative to their loans, bringing them closer to regulatory minimums. If the naira weakens much further, it may harm their creditworthiness.

In other oil-exporting countries, a drop in the currency has caught banks in the opposite trap, raising the value of their liabilities relative to their assets. In both Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, for example, deposits are more dollarised than loans, exposing banks to a troublesome currency mismatch. Every oil exporter is unhappy, each in its own way.





China’s debt

Coming clean

Plans to rein in credit slowly take shape

Jul 9th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition



AS ANYONE who has conquered addiction knows, the first step is admitting that you have a problem. China, hooked on debt for much of the past decade, may be reaching that point. In recent weeks officials have talked at length about the country’s troubling reliance on credit to fuel growth. They have also sketched out a range of possible solutions. It is only a start—withdrawal symptoms in the form of defaults and slower growth are sure to hurt, and could yet prompt a relapse. But the new tone is encouraging nonetheless.

The frankest admission came in a front-page article in the People’s Daily, mouthpiece of the Communist Party, in early May. An anonymous “authoritative person”, widely believed to be Liu He, an economic adviser to President Xi Jinping, warned that high leverage could spark a systemic financial crisis. China’s total debt load jumped from less than 150% of GDP in 2008 to more than 250% at the end of last year. Increases of that size have presaged economic trouble in other countries.

Last month the government convened its first news conference on the topic, bringing together officials from the finance ministry, the central bank, the banking regulator and a top planning agency. The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a prominent official think-tank, has also opined on it. The research arm of the central bank has published a paper with a section on what can be done. And this week, a forum in Beijing gathered officials, bankers and academics to sift through the suggestions.

All of them have homed in on corporate debt as the main worry. That is obvious enough from a quick comparison with other big economies: China sits in the middle of the pack for total debt but is at the high end for corporate liabilities (see chart). Yet it marks a change of tone from recent years, when officials focused on cleaning up the debt of local government. This presented a more immediate but smaller problem, and also a more manageable one.

The most important outcome from all the discussions has been an outline, albeit rough, of how China hopes to tackle its burden. There will be no rush to deleverage. Sun Xuegong, a central planner, said China would start by slowing the rise in its debt-to-GDP ratio before guiding it lower, trying to avoid too much collateral damage to the economy in the process.

Officials think they can cushion the blow from eventual deleveraging in three ways. First, they want to get more bang from new debt. That, in theory, means choking off credit to underperforming state-owned firms or restructuring them in the image of their sleeker private-sector peers. Loans would flow to better firms generating higher returns.

Second, they want equity financing to help replace debt. That is tough, given the woeful state of the stockmarket after last year’s crash. But there are other ways. Regulators are working on a programme under which banks will swap some loans to indebted companies for equity stakes instead. Banks have pushed back, fearing that they will be saddled with bad investments. Officials insist that only viable companies will receive this treatment.

Finally, the government will use fiscal policy to prop up growth, in effect transferring debt from corporate balance-sheets to its own. That makes sense: official public debt is low, at less than 50% of GDP, while state-owned companies are the biggest debtors. However, direct bail-outs would give state firms little reason to improve their operations. So the central bank’s researchers suggest other measures, such as tax cuts, which would improve the business environment for all.

Scepticism about whether China will end its credit binge is warranted. Last December the government identified deleveraging as one of its main tasks for 2016. Yet credit issuance has outpaced economic growth by a wide margin, raising overall debt levels. And China’s approach to state firms is inconsistent. Officials recognise that getting them to operate more like private firms, constrained by budgets, is critical to controlling debt. But at the same time the Communist Party recently reiterated that they must obtain its approval before making any big decisions. China is sure to keep one promise, at least: there will be no speedy resolution to its debt problems.





Taxes in California

Stop dreamin’

California’s tax system needs reform. It is unlikely to get it

Jul 9th 2016 | SACRAMENTO | From the print edition



NOT long ago, California’s finances were a mess. The state’s tax revenues tanked during the recession of 2008-09. At one point in 2009 it ran out of money completely, prompting it start issuing IOUs and to force employees to take unpaid leave. Revenues have grown only slowly since. But in California, as in every state except Vermont, the law requires a balanced budget. As a result, from 2008 to 2012, politicians slashed spending. So it was testament to the state’s fiscal turnaround when on June 27th Jerry Brown, California’s fiscally hawkish governor, signed a budget without finding the need to veto any item of spending—the first time a governor has held fire on a budget since 1982.

The economic recovery has, for now, filled California’s coffers. Lawmakers are relaxing constraints on welfare spending and have even found some new money for infrastructure. But the Treasury’s long-term health remains uncertain. For that, thank the state’s oddball tax system.

Gag me with a boon

Two things stand out about taxes in California. The first is their progressivity. The top rate of state income tax, levied on incomes greater than $1m, has been 13.3% since 2012, when voters approved a ballot measure raising it from an already steep 10.3%. (These rates come on top of the highest federal levy of 39.6%, though taxpayers can usually knock state taxes off their federally taxable income.) Today the income-tax rate is the highest in the country. As inequality has increased over the past two decades, the state’s fondness for soaking the rich has proved lucrative. Since 1995, while incomes have grown by about 160%, the income-tax take is up 300%. But this has also made the budget reliant on a small number of high earners. In 2014 the top 1% of earners paid 48% of all income tax, up from 36% in 1995.



The second oddity is the set of strict constraints on local property taxes. Because these finance schools, and the state tops up local education budgets when necessary, property taxes affect the state’s bottom line. Proposition 13, a ballot measure passed in 1978, caps these levies at 1% of a property’s value. It also stops the tax bill on a given property from rising by more than inflation unless the property changes hands, no matter how much its value increases. This benefits homeowners but also firms who, on selling a property, can use shell companies to avoid a technical change of ownership. According to one estimate, in 2012-13 nearly 40% of commercial properties were assessed at less than 80% of market value.

Because incomes fluctuate more than property prices, these two features make the tax take highly volatile. Moreover, California taxes capital gains as income, so receipts rise and fall in line with the stockmarket. In 2014 the state set up a “rainy day fund” to guard against volatility. This year the amount stashed away will reach $6.7 billion, or 5.6% of annual revenues. The goal is 10%, but even that may not be enough. In April Moody’s, a rating agency, ranked the 20 most-populous states by the solidity of their buffers against another recession. California came 19th; only Illinois looked less prepared.

Betty Yee, the state’s wonkish financial controller, thinks the answer is comprehensive tax reform. On June 9th she released a report examining the options for change. One idea is to fix the state’s outdated sales tax. Currently, this applies only to goods, but Americans spend an ever-greater fraction of their income on services, in part because trade has kept goods cheap in recent decades. The fact that the federal government allows individuals to deduct either state income taxes or sales taxes from their taxable income, but not both, may have weakened the incentive for California to fix its sales tax. A high income tax and a low sales tax together result in a greater federal deduction than would middling rates for both.

Modernising the sales tax would be sensible, as would taking a second look at property levies. But both are close to impossible politically. “Prop 13 is sacred,” says Scott Drenkard of the Tax Foundation, a think-tank. Many firms would lobby against an expansion of the sales tax to cover services. Fans of high income taxes, meanwhile, think that the problem of volatility is used as cover by those who are mainly interested in cutting, rather than smoothing, the overall tax take. It is better to scale back investment in bad times than never have it in the first place, argues Chris Hoene of the California Budget and Policy Centre.

The immediate question likely to face voters this November is whether to extend the 2012 rise in income taxes on the rich, which expires in 2018, for another 12 years. With few other options, they should probably do so—and press politicians to save still more of the proceeds.





Free exchange

X marks the knot

It is surprisingly hard to draw clear conclusions about voters’ intentions from electoral results

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THE voters have spoken, runs an old gag, but what on earth did they mean? In the wake of Britain’s vote to leave the European Union, bereft Remain campaigners have sought to explain away the result. Some argue that Britons would never have voted for Brexit if they had known what it involves. Others claim voters were not really expressing an opinion about the EU, but simply protesting about the state of the country. The outcome, the revanchists insist, was not an accurate reflection of voters’ desires, but an electoral malfunction.

To most, that sounds like sour grapes. But there is a body of academic work that supports the idea that elections often misfire. For one thing, voters can be capricious. In a recent book, “Democracy for Realists”, Christopher Achen and Larry Bartels recount how people in New Jersey were significantly less likely to vote to re-elect President Woodrow Wilson in 1916 if they lived near the sites of recent shark attacks. By the same token, voters seem to punish politicians for floods and droughts, but instead of seeking candidates who plan to spend more time or money preparing for such calamities, they simply unseat the incumbent. They are also myopic, judging politicians’ economic management on the basis of only the very recent past. Their opinions can fluctuate wildly, depending on how questions are asked. Before the Gulf war of 1991, almost two-thirds of Americans said they were willing to “use military force”, but less than 30% wanted to “go to war”.

Messrs Achen and Bartels also show that many people neither follow politics closely nor scrutinise policy carefully. Voters do not always understand the politics of different parties: in Germany, only half of them can place “Die Linke” (“the Left”) on the left-right scale. Many do not even know who represents them: in 1985 only 59% of American voters could say whether the governor of their state was a Democrat or a Republican. The authors present compelling evidence that voters tend to pick a candidate first, then bring their policy views into line with their choice. That is true, they argue, of both educated and uneducated voters.

And then there is the question of how well voting systems distil voters’ intentions. There are mathematical difficulties in aggregating their desires. Most of the time, individuals’ preferences are at least vaguely consistent: if you prefer apples to oranges, say, and oranges to bananas, then you probably also prefer apples to bananas. But this is not true of groups. Even if each individual has consistent preferences, they can vary among voters in such a way that, in two-way races, candidate A would beat candidate B, candidate B would beat candidate C, and yet candidate C would beat candidate A. What, then, is the “will of the people”?

Another problem is that adding extra options may change a group’s choice. Al Gore might have won a straight vote against George W. Bush in America’s knife-edge presidential election in 2000. But the candidacy of Ralph Nader, a left-wing challenger, may have split the left-wing vote, allowing Mr Bush to win.

Devising electoral systems to get around such problems is far from straightforward. Take three fairly simple-seeming principles. First, if voters prefer A to B in a straight run-off, that preference should not change when you introduce C to the list. Second, if voters unanimously prefer pizza to pasta, then pizza must always outrank pasta. Finally, assume voters can at most rank the available options: they can say that they prefer lower taxes to higher taxes, but not how much they care. Yet in 1951 Kenneth Arrow, an economist, proved that it is impossible to devise a voting system that satisfies all these assumptions.

For example, French presidential elections aim to minimise vote-splitting by whittling the field down to two candidates, who then face each other in a run-off. Yet in the first round, vote-splitting remains a problem. This can lead to tactical voting. A communist, say, who supports a radical candidate might nonetheless vote for the mainstream Socialist Party to ensure that a left-winger of some description makes it into the run-off. Building on Arrow’s work, Allan Gibbard and Mark Satterthwaite proved in the 1970s that every common electoral system, even those in which voters can rank their preferences, is distorted by tactical voting.

In principle, referendums are simpler. British voters were given a straight choice between leaving the EU and remaining; there was no complicated menu of options. However, it was not clear what a vote to leave meant. One option is the “Norwegian model”, under which Britain retains access to the single market but must continue to allow unfettered immigration from the EU. Yet many Brits voted out because they wanted to reduce immigration. In effect, “half-in” and “out” votes were lumped together. The result may well have been different had they been separated.

Don’t ask, don’t tell

There is a long intellectual tradition which argues that voters should never be presented with such questions. Indeed, representative democracy is predicated on the idea that many have neither the time nor the inclination to wrestle with the details of policymaking. James Madison, one of America’s Founding Fathers, and Edmund Burke, his philosophising contemporary, argued for a “trustee” model, whereby voters elect politicians to make difficult decisions for them. In the 20th century Joseph Schumpeter argued, more bluntly, that policy should be left to those with the time and skill to get it right. The role of voters is to throw the rascals out if they sense things are going wrong.

What, then, would Schumpeter have said about the EU referendum? On the one hand, he would probably have argued that it should never have been held. On the other, he might well have interpreted the outcome as an angry public, sensing that something had gone wrong, giving the elites a good kicking—just what voting is for.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog





Science and technology




Self-driving cars: Motoring with the Sims

Mitochondrial donation: Three’s company

Biomimetic engineering: Flight of fancy





Self-driving cars

Motoring with the Sims

Testing autonomous vehicles virtually will make them safer on real roads

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



AMERICA’S National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) is investigating the fatal crash in May of a Tesla Model S electric car. Normally such an accident, tragic though it is for the friends and family of the victim, would not warrant a high-level inquiry of this sort. In the case in question, though, the car was operating on Autopilot. That is the name Tesla, an electric-vehicle-maker based in California, has chosen for its “autonomous-driving mode”, in which the vehicle itself, via sensors and computers, lifts from the person behind the wheel much of the burden of controlling the car. According to Tesla, neither the Model S’s driver nor the car’s own sensors noticed a large articulated lorry crossing the road ahead. The car therefore failed to brake, and it ended up careering under the lorry’s trailer. That ripped off its roof, killing the driver.

In the accident, which happened in Florida, the lorry, which was painted white, was set against a brightly lit sky, Tesla noted. One possibility is that the vehicle’s cameras, working in combination with its forward-facing radar, wrongly concluded that the lorry was an overhead sign with space beneath it. Some reports have suggested the driver might have been watching a video at the time. But whatever the NHTSA determines to be the cause, the accident makes plain that self-driving cars still have a long way to go before they are ready for routine use.

Tesla acknowledges this by describing Autopilot as an “assist” feature designed to relieve some of the workload of driving. When engaged, the system advises drivers: “Always keep your hands on the wheel. Be prepared to take over at any time.” Autopilot periodically checks pressure on the steering wheel to ensure that it is being held, and will slow the car if no pressure is detected. Yet plenty of videos have been posted on social media of drivers not touching the steering wheel and relying totally on their vehicle’s autonomous features. One of these was filmed by a driver from the back seat.

The virtues of driving virtually

For Tesla and other firms developing autonomous vehicles (from information-technology companies such as Google and Uber to established carmakers), the systems now available are more akin to intelligent cruise control than robot chauffeurs. But the features they provide, such as lane-keeping, automatic braking, maintaining a safe distance from the vehicle in front and overtaking, are necessary steps towards fully self-driving cars that, backers say, will operate more safely than those driven by people. Most accidents are, after all, caused by human error.

To get to that happy state of affairs, though, much practical development work must take place. Doing this on the open road provides the most realistic data, but as the accident in Florida shows, this can be a risky business. A new facility, at the University of Warwick, in Britain, offers an alternative approach. It is a driving simulator specifically designed to test “intelligent” vehicles. It can thus interact with the sensors of an autonomous car and put that car through its paces without its needing to go on the road.

The car to be tested sits in the middle of the simulator, which projects a 360° high-definition image of the vehicle’s virtual surroundings, constructed from digital maps of 48km (30 miles) of roads in and around the nearby city of Coventry, together with adjacent buildings and scenery. The simulator comes complete with virtual traffic, cyclists, pedestrians and even dogs scampering into the road—all of which its operators can control. It also features surround-sound and actuators that move the vehicle as it would when accelerating, braking or cornering. Even the thump of a virtual pothole can be created.

Some car sensors will interact directly with the projected image. Camera-based systems on many vehicles typically use a form of artificial intelligence, called machine vision, to analyse the shapes of objects. But this can go wrong, says Paul Jennings, head of experimental engineering at Warwick, such as when cameras succumb to a condition known as “washout” caused by the glare of bright sunrises and sunsets. Unlike the real world, hundreds of sunrises and sunsets can be created in the simulator every day. This will speed up the development of antiglare systems. Other visible hazards that might be hard for self-driving cars to manage—streets crowded with pedestrians, cars jumping red lights, joggers suddenly running into the road—can also be created endlessly in a simulator without endangering anyone.

Cameras are not, though, the only sensors fitted to autonomous vehicles. They also have devices that can detect how far away objects are. These may use ultrasound, radar or lidar (a system like radar but which substitutes laser light for radio waves). The researchers at Warwick can bypass these sensors and feed in simulated signals from the computer model. But they are also working on ways to test the sensors directly. One possibility is to generate radar or ultrasonic signals and send them to the test vehicle as if they had been reflected from cars and other objects in the projected scene.

Besides testing a car’s hardware and software, Dr Jennings’s simulator will also test its “wetware”—ie, the humans who are being transported—for he plans to invite members of the public to become drivers and passengers. His idea is to use gaze-monitoring and cameras inside the vehicles to find out how they respond to certain situations. In particular, he and his colleagues hope to see how quickly they realise that something might be going wrong and understand that they should therefore take back control of the car. This is important, for there is ample evidence that some people put too much trust in machines. For example, drivers have been known to follow instructions from satellite-navigation devices slavishly, even when the result is that they end up hundreds of kilometres from their intended destinations.

Hacked to death?

Autonomous vehicles also rely on navigation signals from satellites, though, and on other wireless transmissions as well. In the future, such connectivity will increase. Autonomous vehicles will probably communicate both with each other and with bits of transport infrastructure, such as traffic lights. The integrity of the signals involved will be paramount. So for safety’s sake, Dr Jennings’s machine can simulate what happens when contact is degraded or shut off—for example, when a vehicle enters a tunnel or a city canyon of tall buildings. A giant Faraday cage, formed from a mesh of materials that block electrical signals, surrounds the simulator. This both insulates it from outside interference and enables the signals that are required inside it to be created and controlled accurately, and terminated at will.

On top of this testing of accidental interference with a car’s wireless traffic, the team will also try to hack deliberately into vehicles—something that it would be illegal as well as irresponsible to attempt on public roads. Such tests, nevertheless, need to be done. Carsten Maple, a cyber-security expert at Warwick, reckons criminals are only about five years away from being able to disable a car’s ignition remotely, holding it to ransom until the owner has made a payment. Indeed, in 2015 Fiat Chrysler recalled 1.4m vehicles in America after security researchers showed it was possible to take control of a Jeep Cherokee via its internet-connected entertainment system.

Despite the potential problems, though, Dr Jennings and his team are convinced that genuinely driverless vehicles have a big future. At first this future could be in controlled and specially designated areas, such as city centres. One vehicle that will be tested in the simulator has been designed with just such a purpose in mind. It is an electrically powered passenger-carrying pod produced by RDM, a firm in Coventry. The pods are already being tested in pedestrianised areas of Milton Keynes, a modernist British city. RDM says they are also intended for use in places such as airports, shopping centres, university campuses and theme parks.

On the open road, however, it may take longer before steering wheels become obsolete. Even after extensive testing in simulators, the performance of autonomous systems will still need to be verified in the real world. And no self-driving system will ever be completely foolproof. As the Florida crash showed, accidents will still happen—although, mercifully, there may be fewer of them.





Mitochondrial donation

Three’s company

Mice with genes from three parents live longer

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Elixir of life

GENETICALLY speaking, everyone has two parents. But that could soon change. Several countries, led by Britain—whose legislators approved the idea last year—are working on a procedure called mitochondrial donation, which would result in a child with DNA from three people: its mother, its father and a female donor sometimes dubbed a mitomum.

The mitomum supplies the child’s mitochondria. These are tiny structures (one is pictured below), present in most cells, that liberate usable energy from food and oxygen. People with defective mitochondria suffer debilitating illness and often die young because the tissues of their bodies are starved of the energy they need to work. Mitochondrial diseases are hereditary, and at the moment incurable. Mitochondrial donation is designed to prevent them by replacing faulty mitochondria with healthy ones.

But mitochondria are, or used to be, creatures in their own right. They are the descendants of ancient bacteria that once lived free, but then entered into a symbiotic union with other cells. As such they have their own tiny genomes, separate from the main genome in the host cell’s nucleus. A baby born through mitochondrial donation would thus inherit maternal nuclear DNA, paternal nuclear DNA and a helping of mitochondrial DNA from the mitomum.

The effects of such mixing seem benign—and certainly better than inheriting misfiring mitochondria. But, to the surprise of almost everybody, a paper in Nature by José Antonio Enríquez of the Carlos III Centre for Cardiovascular Research, in Madrid, suggests they may be more than merely benign. The very act of transplanting mitochondria, regardless of any pre-existing disease, might bring benefits.

Dr Enríquez and his colleagues worked on that scientific stalwart, the mouse. Many genetic strains of lab mice are available, and the team started with two whose mitochondria had been shown by DNA analysis to have small but significant differences—about the same, Dr Enríquez reckons, as the ones between the mitochondria of modern Africans and those of Asians and Europeans, people whose ancestors left Africa about 60,000 years ago. They then copied the procedure for human mitochondrial transplants by removing fertilised nuclei from eggs of one strain, leaving behind that strain’s mitochondria, and transplanting them into enucleated eggs of the second strain, whose mitochondria remained in situ. A group of the first strain, left unmodified, was employed as a control. The researchers raised the mice and kept an eye on how they developed.

While the animals were young, few differences were apparent between modified and unmodified individuals. But as murine middle age approached, at around the animals’ first birthdays, differences began to manifest themselves. Modified mice gained less weight than controls, despite having the same diet. Their blood-insulin levels fluctuated less after fasting, suggesting they were more resistant to diabetes. Their muscles deteriorated less rapidly with age. And their telomeres—protective caps on the ends of their chromosomes whose shortening is implicated in ageing—stayed lengthier for longer.

Not all of the changes were beneficial. Young, unmodified mice had lower levels of free radicals—highly reactive (and therefore damaging) chemicals produced by mitochondria—than did their modified brethren, though even that difference reversed itself after the animals were 30 weeks old. But the combined result of the various changes was that the modified mice lived longer. Their median age at death was about a fifth higher than that of their unmodified cousins.

Given the fundamental metabolic role played by mitochondria, it makes sense that replacing one set with another, more distantly related set causes profound changes. The surprise is that those changes seem largely positive. Most biologists would have predicted the opposite, assuming that nuclear and mitochondrial DNA would co-evolve to interact optimally, so that mixing versions which have not co-evolved would be harmful.

Though unsure what to make of his discovery, Dr Enríquez suggests that a concept called hormesis might offer an explanation. This is the observation that a small amount of adversity can sometimes do an animal good, by activating cellular repair mechanisms that go on to clear up other damage which would otherwise have gone untreated. The biochemical cost of coping with mismatched mitochondria might, therefore, be tempering the animals’ metabolisms in ways that improve their overall health.

It is an intriguing idea. And regulators, in Britain and elsewhere, will examine Dr Enríquez’s results with interest. But it would be foolish to assume that something similar would happen in people. After all, human beings live much longer than mice do. And Doug Turnbull of the University of Newcastle, who is one of the pioneers of mitochondrial donation in Britain, points out that both strains of mice used in the study are highly inbred—much more so than humans. A better lesson to draw, until many more experiments have been done, is that a mismatch between parents and mitomum can indeed have profound physiological consequences. For the time being, Dr Turnbull thus argues, the safest approach to human mitochondrial donation is to make sure that the mitomum is as closely related to the biological parents as possible.





Biomimetic engineering

Flight of fancy

A robotic stingray, powered by real muscles and guided by light

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



LOOKING to the natural world for engineering inspiration is an idea at least as old as Leonardo da Vinci. Copying nature directly, though, has often proved hard. For example, birds flap their wings to achieve both lift and propulsion, but flying machines that imitate this action have tended not to do well. Human engineering has found it easier to create aircraft by giving them fixed, rigid wings and propelling them with motors.

Air is not the only medium through which animals move by flapping, however. Many creatures flap wings, or wing-like structures, to “fly” through water. That is something human engineers can aspire to imitate because the buoyancy of water provides free lift and its density makes propulsion easier. And, as they write in this week’s Science, a group led by Kit Parker of Harvard University have done just that. They have built a robotic stingray (pictured above) that imitates the motion of its biological counterpart. Moreover, it does so not with the electric circuits and servomotors of conventional robots, but with muscle cells engineered to mimic the elegant undulations of a living stingray.

The ray itself is a so-called soft robot, a type of ’bot that has gained prominence of late. Soft robots, which are made of materials such as latex and silicone, are able to squeeze through tight openings, handle fragile objects and interact with humans far more safely than can their rigid metal and plastic counterparts. Yet most soft robots are propelled by pneumatic pressure or cables that are, in turn, driven by bulky, rigid motors. Having real muscles instead of these ersatz ones would make much more sense for a soft robot, since muscles, too, are soft, and are powered by glucose, not motors.

Dr Parker and his team chose rat muscles for their rays. They grew rat-muscle cells in culture and then “printed” them onto sheets of elastomer that were to act as the surfaces of a robo-ray’s wings. Muscle cells work by contracting, which is why muscles often operate in pairs (like the biceps and triceps of the arm), the elements of which pull in opposite directions. To simplify things, though, the team used only one layer of muscle, to pull in one direction. The opposite pull was supplied by the relaxation of a skeleton of gold that had been put under tension by the muscle cells’ initial compression. The result, when cut into an appropriate shape, was a plausible facsimile of a ray.

To co-ordinate the muscle cells’ contraction in a way that would propel the ray forwards, Dr Parker printed them in serpentine patterns. When one cell was activated, it released calcium ions which acted (as happens in nature) as a signal to the next cell in the sequence to contract. Thus, like a cascade of dominoes, waves of muscular undulation passed from one end of the ray to the other.

Perhaps the cleverest component of the bionic ray, though, was its control mechanism. The muscle cells Dr Parker chose were genetically engineered so that light activated their contraction. Flashing a beam at the front of the ray’s fins caused an undulation to start propagating. Each new flash triggered a new undulation, so making the ray move forward in a straight line meant flashing at each fin simultaneously. Increasing the rate of flashing on one side of the robot but not the other caused that side to flap faster, turning the machine away from the hyperactive fin. This let the team steer the device. Thus controlled, the 16mm-long ray was able to travel at 90mm a minute, and to complete a 250mm slalom course at that speed without touching any of the obstacles. Moreover, it was able to do so on six consecutive days, retaining 80% of its original speed on the final day of the trial.

What use might be made of a more sophisticated version of such a robot remains to be seen. Dr Parker’s design requires the fluid the ’bot swims through to contain the glucose that power its muscles, reducing the ’bot’s deployability. But a future version might be fitted with a glucose reservoir and a cardiovascular system to circulate that glucose. This would let it go anywhere which had enough oxygen in the water for the muscle cells to respire—and would make it resemble a real animal even more closely than it does already.





Books and arts




Innovation in China: Out of the Master’s shadow

Political biography: A work in progress

Child development: The brain game

20th-century history: Vantage point

A.E. Housman: A Worcestershire lad

Painters’ paintings: Beyond influence





Innovation in China

Out of the Master’s shadow

China, long a land of copycats, is making gains as an innovator

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



Paper Tigers, Hidden Dragons: Firms and the Political Economy of China’s Technological Development. By Douglas Fuller. OUP; 304 pages; $95 and £55.

China’s Next Strategic Advantage: From Imitation to Innovation. By George Yip and Bruce McKern. MIT Press; 290 pages; $29.95 and £19.95.

“THE Master said, ‘I transmit rather than innovate. I trust in and love the ancient ways’.” Those words from Confucius seem to offer a cultural explanation for why China is an innovation laggard. Many Chinese companies seem to be copycats, unable or unwilling to come up with world-beating ideas, products and services of their own. The Chinese legal system also looks rigged against foreign inventors. A cultural deference to authority and an educational system that emphasises rote-learning complete the stereotype.

It is true that markets in Chinese cities offer knock-off Gucci handbags, Peppa Pig toys and Apple gizmos. Jack Ma, boss of Alibaba, an e-commerce giant accused of tolerating counterfeits on its websites, sparked an outcry in June by claiming: “Fake products today are of better quality and better price than the real names.” Beijing’s patent office recently ordered Apple to stop selling some versions of its iPhone in Beijing, which allegedly copy designs belonging to an obscure Chinese firm.

Yet there are also signs of an imaginative China emerging. In fields from gene editing to big-data analytics to 5G mobile telephony, Chinese experts are now among the world’s best. Sunway TaihuLight (pictured), a supercomputer made using only local computer chips, is five times as fast as the best American rival. Fleet-footed and frugal Chinese firms are coming up with business-model innovations too. WeChat, a social-media and payments platform with 700m monthly active users, is more useful and fun than Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp put together.

Most Chinese companies are still plodders, just as many firms in America’s rustbelt or deep South are hardly innovation icons. But it is increasingly clear that a vanguard of world-class firms is emerging in the Middle Kingdom, and two new books explain why and how the best of China Inc is learning to innovate.

Douglas Fuller is an academic at Zhejiang University, in a part of China’s eastern coast that has for centuries produced the country’s greatest entrepreneurs (including Mr Ma). In a new book, Mr Fuller is scathing in his indictment of state capitalism. By showering state-owned enterprises and “state-favoured” private firms with soft money and protecting them from market discipline and bankruptcy, the state removes any incentive for them to upgrade their technological capacity.

So how does he explain the rise of outstanding Chinese firms? Mr Fuller believes that “ethnic Chinese, foreign-invested firms…are the hidden dragons driving China’s technological development.” He argues that the best ones are only partly Chinese, with hybrid structures that allow access to capital and talent from outside the mainland. Local startups often lack the privileged access to financing enjoyed by established Chinese firms, and so are forced to raise money from foreign venture capitalists. Because international investors and regulators demand financial discipline and good governance, these firms have no choice but to compete at the level of top global companies. Such firms also boast talent from Hong Kong or Taiwan, who blend knowledge of Chinese culture with global sophistication.

Producing a handful of stars is one thing, but could the Chinese market really become the world’s innovation hotbed? That bold thesis is put forward by George Yip and Bruce McKern, academics affiliated with the China Europe International Business School in Shanghai, in their new book. They show how technological disruptions, business-model innovations and the world’s most eager customers are coming together in this market to produce agile and inventive firms.

Though their arguments are stretched thin at times, the authors are persuasive when arguing that the Chinese market accelerates innovation. Consumers are quick to adopt new trends and are digital sophisticates. Unlike those in established markets, they are quite forgiving of mistakes, which lets firms experiment, fail and learn quickly. The domestic market, with both a super-rich elite and a big bottom of the pyramid, is a useful bellwether of global trends. And the huge diversity of the continental-scale country forces firms to adapt nimbly. Messrs Yip and McKern call it “the world’s biggest Petri dish for breeding world-class competitors”.

Fine, but what about the thorny problem of intellectual property (IP)? The authors insist the government is getting serious about protecting it, pointing to special IP courts in big cities with technically trained judges and staff. Apple is appealing against the iPhone decision by Beijing’s patent office, and continues to sell its phones in China. Surprisingly, Shanghai’s government has just ordered Han City, a multi-storey mall overflowing with counterfeits on the city’s main shopping promenade, to be shut down. China’s leadership also vows to “strive to build an IP power, an innovative country, and a well-off society”. If it does so, surely even the Master would approve.





Political biography

A work in progress

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

The patrician turned tribune of the people

Bobby Kennedy: The Making of a Liberal Icon. By Larry Tye. Random House; 580 pages; $32.

ROBERT KENNEDY remains an enigma nearly 50 years after he was gunned down in a Los Angeles hotel, in the midst of a promising presidential campaign. He was fearsome yet gentle, an anti-communist stalwart who became the standard-bearer for American liberals, and a moralistic, devout Catholic who covered up his brother’s affairs (and, some suspect, his own) and embraced dirty political fights.

Larry Tye, a former Boston Globe journalist, is the latest to try to untangle these delicate threads. His thesis is that Bobby Kennedy learned as he went along, far more than most politicians. Driven by passion, Kennedy became a “pragmatic idealist” who, midway through his only term as senator from New York, had become “twice the senator and reformer” that his brother John had been.

Mr Tye opens with Robert’s most startling alliance—with Senator Joseph McCarthy, whose anti-communist witch-hunts rocked America during the 1950s. Joe Kennedy, the family patriarch, had befriended and given amply to McCarthy, clearing the way for Bobby to take a job that jump-started his career. An aide on McCarthy’s investigations subcommittee, Kennedy focused on American allies shipping goods to communist China during the Korean war. He left after seven months but remained fond of McCarthy, even showing up secretly at his memorial service.

The experience was, Mr Tye writes, a “baseline”, highlighting how much Kennedy would change over his short life. His cold-warrior posturing, in support of a man who routinely violated civil liberties, would soften as he saw more of the world and its hardships. Gradually, this privileged son who lived in an enormous mansion learned to empathise with those on the fringes of society.

Indeed, it is Kennedy’s work on civil rights and poverty that reverberates most powerfully through history. As attorney-general during his brother’s presidency, he ordered troops to prepare for a stand-off in Alabama with the arch-segregationist governor over admitting African-Americans to the state university. As a senator, he travelled to Mississippi to search out the poverty that the state’s leaders ignored. He also became an early ally to Cesar Chavez and the farmworkers Chavez fought for. “All [Kennedy] said was, ‘What do you want? And how can I help?’ That’s why we loved him,” a Chavez deputy recalled.

Mr Tye’s account is nuanced and thorough, and he manages the rare feat of interviewing Kennedy’s widow Ethel, now 88. Yet it is still hard for the reader to get truly inside the mind of this complex Kennedy, somehow both a “Machiavellian contriver and man of conscience”.

A few stylistic quirks also distract. Mr Tye repeats that Bobby was “growing up fast”—a tired way to describe a grown man. He has an odd habit of relegating key points to footnotes. These include the Kennedy brothers’ likely plans to get rid of J. Edgar Hoover as director of the FBI had John been re-elected in 1964, and the “antipathy” between Ethel and Jackie Kennedy, whom Bobby grew close to after John’s death. (Mr Tye poses the question of how close, but does not answer it.)

And so Robert Kennedy remains a mystery, cut down at 42, shortly after he won the California presidential primary. Yet his vision echoes through the decades. “Only those who dare to fail greatly can ever achieve greatly,” he said in 1966. If only modern-day leaders were so bold.





Child development

The brain game

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



Helping Children Succeed: What Works and Why. By Paul Tough. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt; 144 pages; $18.99. Random House; £8.99.

AFTER the collapse of the Soviet Union, the number of infants in Russian orphanages swelled. They had food, and they were clean and safe. But the staff were impersonal and cold, until researchers coached them in new ways: smiling at the babies, cooing, talking and other behaviours natural to parents. The results were striking. Infants did better on developmental tests and grew physically stronger, too.

For Paul Tough, a journalist, this offers two lessons about why some children thrive and others struggle. The first is that the emotional contexts in which children grow up are crucial, especially in their early years—“a remarkable time of both opportunity and potential peril”. Infants who are neglected or under-stimulated develop in different ways from those reared in loving homes. Hormones triggered by stress stunt brain development, making it hard to control behaviour and concentrate. The effects last: such children do worse in exams and earn less at work.

The second lesson, though, is that it is possible to mitigate the effects of adversity. In “Helping Children Succeed”, Mr Tough describes Attachment and Biobehavioural Catch-up (ABC), a programme in which coaches visit foster homes in poor parts of New York City. By helping foster parents become more attentive, ABC has helped children in care to reduce stress levels and improve their behaviour.

It is most cost-effective to act early to prevent infants turning into troublesome teenagers, but Mr Tough shows that policy can also help later on in childhood. He cites Turnaround for Children, a programme run in schools in New York, New Jersey and Washington, DC, by Pamela Cantor, a child psychiatrist. Turnaround trains teachers to make their classrooms more supportive and their classwork more engaging. Teachers are told how to defuse aggressive pupils, and are encouraged to set tricky team projects rather than drone on at the whiteboard.

Mr Tough’s book is one of many in recent years to argue that education policy in rich countries has emphasised academic skills while neglecting emotional and psychological development. His previous books, “Whatever It Takes”, about the Harlem Children’s Zone (a pioneering educational charity in New York), and “How Children Succeed”, pursue similar themes. Those books are better. “Helping Children Succeed” reads more like a succession of entries in a notebook than a new story worthy of a whole book.

Nevertheless, his message bears repeating. Too often, education policy zips from one fad to another, neglecting the deeper reasons why adversity leads to poor outcomes. Evidence-based early childhood projects are among the smartest ways to avert enduring poverty. Spending public money on infants can save taxpayers a lot of money later (on, say, job training and prison places). But such programmes must be rooted in scientific evidence and led by empathetic professionals who know what they are doing.

Too often they do not. Around the world, countries are embracing early-childhood projects, opening snazzy centres and dispatching home visitors. But too many projects are of poor quality. Mr Tough shows that it need not be this way. In doing so he points towards an entirely new meaning for the nanny state.





20th-century history

Vantage point

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



The House by the Lake: One House, Five Families, and a Hundred Years of German History. By Thomas Harding. Picador; 410 pages; $28. William Heinemann; £20.

IN 2007 Thomas Harding, an English journalist, began probing his German-Jewish roots after hearing an amazing story at a family funeral. The result was “Hanns and Rudolf”, a bestselling account of how his great-uncle, Hanns Alexander, tracked down and eventually captured the kommandant of Auschwitz, Rudolf Höss.

Mr Harding was only beginning to mine his family’s history, it transpired. In “The House by the Lake”, a book acclaimed in Britain last year and now available in America, his gaze broadens to the century-long saga of five families’ fortunes and misfortunes. If “Hanns & Rudolf” was a sonata, “The House by the Lake” is a symphony, telling the story of modern Germany with one recurring theme: history as seen from the Alexander family’s lake house outside Berlin.

Alfred Alexander, Mr Harding’s great-grandfather, built the house at Gross Glienicke, 15km (nine miles) west of Berlin, in 1927. A prominent doctor who counted Einstein among his patients, Dr Alexander sought a calm refuge for himself, his wife Henny and their four children. That idyll came to an abrupt end in 1936, when the Alexanders fled Nazi Germany to England.

Thus “Aryanised”, their cottage would, by an extraordinary twist of fate, offer a ringside seat to the many convulsions of German history. This house not only endured seizure by the Gestapo and had the Berlin Wall built at the bottom of its garden, but was on the front-line of every other major event of Germany’s 20th century: the 1936 Olympics, Soviet conquest and mass rape, the Berlin airlift, the socialist republic, spies, sports doping, and finally, the Wall’s fall in 1989.

“The House by the Lake” skips between its varied occupants and these events to present an admirably clear and concise history of modern Germany. It’s an impressive feat of archival and investigative research. Fascinating revelations abound, such as the fact that the anthem of the Berlin airlift, “Berlin bleibt doch Berlin” (“Berlin is still Berlin”), was written in 1948 by Will Meisel, the composer who took over the Alexanders’ house in 1937 and vainly tried to reclaim it after the second world war.

Yet for all its detailed digging, the emotional side of the family’s loss remains submerged. Mr Harding is more comfortable with facts; with classic English reticence, he buries his family’s responses in footnotes and summaries. A greater willingness to explore the pain of this historic theft would have made this powerful book even more so.





A.E. Housman

A Worcestershire lad

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



Housman Country: Into the Heart of England. By Peter Parker. Little, Brown. 446 pages; £25.

IN FEBRUARY 1896, a slim volume of 63 poems was published: 500 copies at half a crown each. Their author, A.E. Housman, had had to pay £30 towards publication. (“Vanity,” he confessed, “not avarice, is my ruling passion.”) Sales were sluggish despite a handful of favourable reviews, and the first printing didn’t sell out until two years later. The volume remained in print, however, and slowly but steadily sales picked up. The poems, set in an idealised English countryside and imbued with a yearning melancholy, struck a chord not just in England but in America. By 1918 “A Shropshire Lad” was selling 16,000 copies a year.

Alfred Edward Housman was not a Shropshire lad but a Worcestershire one. His mother died as he turned 12, an event which left the seven Housman children in the care of their genial but madcap father, and which would gradually lead Housman to reject Christianity. He left the local grammar school garlanded with prizes, and went to Oxford with an open scholarship to study classics. He is perhaps the only person ever to have got a first in his second-year exams, and then entirely failed his finals.

“So Alfred has a heart after all,” a member of his family remarked after reading “A Shropshire Lad”. He certainly had, and it had been broken by a fellow undergraduate, Moses Jackson. As Jackson was heterosexual, the love was unrequited—possibly never even expressed—but it was the great passion of Housman’s life, and it left him almost incapable of intimacy. He could, said his Times obituary, be “so unapproachable as to diffuse a frost”. E.M. Forster was not the only person to find his attempts at friendship brutally rebuffed, and when Housman died in 1936 he wore an expression of “proud challenge”.

So much for the man. But Peter Parker’s new book is much more than a biography, and having lured us into Housman’s life with a magpie’s eye for detail, he then sets out on a tour of Housman Country—not a geographical area but a landscape of the mind in which “literature, landscape, music and emotion” all contribute. He casts his net wide to encompass, among much else, the feelings of an increasingly urbanised population about the English countryside; the development of the Youth Hostels Association and the Ramblers’ Association; the publication of the Shell County Guides; the attitudes of other writers, including George Orwell, Rupert Brooke, T.S. Eliot, W.H. Auden and Ted Hughes towards Housman; and the part Housman played in the English musical renaissance.

But it was ordinary people (chiefly men) that Housman longed to reach through his poetry, and thousands of soldiers in both world wars left home with copies of “A Shropshire Lad” in their breast pockets, where Housman hoped they might stop bullets. The poems remained precious to some for years after the war was over.

Today, Housman’s influence continues to be felt, not simply among contemporary writers—Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, Alice Munro and Tom Stoppard among them—but in popular culture, from “Inspector Morse” to “The Simpsons” and “The Archers”. Among rock singers, Mr Parker considers Morrissey the musician “who most embodies” Housman’s spirit.

After 120 years, “A Shropshire Lad” has never been out of print. “Some men are better than their books,” Housman believed, “but my books are better than their man.” What this wry, shy genius created in one slim volume was not simply a collection of moving poetry but a “gazetteer of the English heart”.





Painters’ paintings

Beyond influence

A new show examines the myriad reasons artists collect each other’s work

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition

It made an impression on Matisse

THE young Henri Matisse fell hard for Paul Cézanne’s “Three Bathers” (pictured) when he saw it in 1899 at the gallery of Ambroise Vollard in Paris. He couldn’t get the painting out of his mind; several agonising weeks later, he and his wife agreed to pawn her emerald ring and buy it. Matisse would not part with the painting for another 37 years; from it he drew, he said, “my faith and my perseverance”.

It is easy to see why. The three fleshy nudes are at once solid and kinetic. Streaks of sunlight bathe the awkward yet magnetic little group. This small and potent canvas, now owned by the city of Paris, is at the centre of an unusual summer show at London’s National Gallery called “Painters’ Paintings”.

Artists have always closely observed the work of fellow artists. Still, it is rare for museums to consider the “extra level of identity” a painting owned by another artist acquires, says Anne Robbins, the show’s curator. Prompted by a gift from the late Lucien Freud of a portrait he loved by Corot, visitors are invited to go beyond the usual single-artist show to a richer, more historical approach.

The show flows backwards over 500 years, from Freud to Matisse to Edgar Degas, then to the Victorians such as Lord Leighton, and English court and portrait painters, notably Joshua Reynolds and Anthony Van Dyck. It is immediately apparent that some painters acquired paintings out of an intimate urge, while others were more interested in assembling great collections. Degas did both. Of the eight painters considered, the moderns stand out: the passion of Degas and Matisse for the works they acquired is especially palpable.

Degas, like nearly every painter in Paris, started out by copying paintings in the royal collection. “The Louvre is the book where we learn to read,” Cézanne once said. But unlike his fellows, Degas was born to wealth. He supported his Impressionist friends by buying their paintings; later he was able to acquire favoured old masters such as Ingres and Delacroix. The happy result is a gathering of masterpieces that reveals the private personality of the man: generous, reverential, obsessive. The world owes a great deal, for example, to his dogged search for the pieces of Manet’s “The Execution of Maximilian”, dismembered after Manet’s death, which Degas hunted down and reassembled.

In Van Dyck’s reverence for Titian, or Reynolds’s appreciation for the Renaissance masters, one begins to grasp that an artist’s collection is “the most secret kind of self-portrait”, in Ms Robbins’s words. Tracing the influence of these painter’s paintings on their own style, however, is more difficult; the show makes the case better for some than for others. Lord Leighton’s vast collection in Holland Park included a magnificent set of Corot landscapes entitled “The Four Times of Day”, which the painter so admired that he adopted Corot’s injunction to use a certain pigment to achieve his luminous skies.

The gallery devoted to Matisse makes the connection best. The intense red of Degas’s “La Coiffure” finds echoes in Matisse’s expanses of rich colour; the thick limbs of Cézanne’s bathers find their counterpart in his monumental sculpture “Back III”. In other galleries, the influence of one painter on another is less obvious, the comparisons made between the works less rich.

Yet tracing influence is only one way of regarding these works. “Painters’ Paintings” also reveals an equally fascinating habit common to many artists: keeping special artworks close to hand. Treasured pieces function as prompts or inspirations; as models for composition and technique; they contribute to the development of an aesthetic theory and serve as yardsticks against which to measure oneself. An entire floor of Degas’s Paris house was stuffed with easels displaying old masters, which favoured visitors were allowed to view. Matisse and Freud, especially, regarded the pieces they amassed around them as possessed of a talismanic power. “Lucien always thought that art came out of art, so it was necessary that he had these paintings in his life,” says David Dawson, his former studio assistant, in an accompanying film.

Freud’s favourite, “The Italian Woman” by Corot, hung in his drawing room and was visible through a double-door from his bed. It may be that he saw in it a physical approach to paint, a kind of “abrupt, rough-hewn brushwork” similar to his own, Ms Robbins suggests. To Freud’s assistant, the connection went far deeper still. “Everything he wanted in painting was in that work—everything that it meant to be human.” By studying it, and the many exhilarating works in this intimate show, we too may glimpse a little of what a great painter sees.





Obituary




Obituary: Elie Wiesel: Unanswerable questions





Obituary: Elie Wiesel

Unanswerable questions

Elie Wiesel, preserver of the memory of the Holocaust, died on July 2nd, aged 87

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition



ON REFLECTION, the habit had begun with Moishe the Beadle. It was Moishe who led Elie Wiesel, much too young, to study Kabbalah. Most people in the little shtetl of Sighet, in Transylvania, knew it was dangerous even to go near those mysteries. But Moishe insisted on probing, seeking, enquiring for deeper and deeper truths. Questions, he said, possessed power. The more a man asked, the closer he got to God.

And why indeed had the townsfolk not asked more questions when, in 1942, Moishe was suddenly deported? Why had they not listened to his agonised cries of warning when he returned, weeping, knocking on doors? Why had they insisted, even when the town was divided into two ghettos by the Nazis, that they could live in this new world and treat it like a temporary vacation? Why, in 1944, had they never heard the word “Auschwitz”?

As he was deported too, questions poured into Elie’s 15-year-old head. Why were his friends and neighbours put into sealed cattle cars, to travel for two days with almost no air or water? Why were they delivered to a place fogged with the stench of human flesh, where pits of fire devoured the bodies of babies and children? Why were they stripped of everything, shaved, tattooed with numbers and made to run everywhere? Why, within a day, was he torn from his mother and youngest sister, never to see them again? How, in the 20th century, could such things happen, and the world stay silent?

The questions accumulated and became more disturbing. Why did fellow-inmates, as well as Germans, beat new arrivals and call them sons of bitches? Why did the prisoners watch the routine hangings for minor thefts without emotion, staring indifferently at the swaying, swollen faces? Why did he find himself thinking of nothing but his ration of soup and bread? What led him to claw his way through a pile of dying men to save just himself? Most dreadful of all, what led him to ignore his dying father’s request for water, when his father was the only and dearest thing he had left in the world?

When, after a year, he was freed from the camps, he knew he had survived to tell the tale. He must sear the memory of the Holocaust on human minds for ever. In a world that preferred to blot it out, his motto had become Zachor! Remember! But for a full decade he asked: How? Even as a student of literature at the Sorbonne, even as a working journalist, how could he find the words? What phrases could do justice to inexpressible evil? What language could he write in, when language itself had been profaned by obscene meanings for “selection”, “concentration”, “transport”, “chimney” and “fire”?

Perhaps silence was a better response. Several famous rabbis had excelled at it. After all, what authority did he have to speak for the dead, to recount their mutilated dreams? None. But how else to remember them? For 800 pages in Yiddish, itself a relic that had to be treasured and preserved, he poured out his memories. Much shortened, they became “Night”, published in Engish in 1960 and overlooked at first. He persevered. What other reason had he to live, when six million had died? What else could be done to honour those ghosts? In 1964 he returned to Sighet to find the town prospering but the Jews forgotten, the closed synagogues filled with dust. He revisited the labour camp at Buna to find it had vanished, reclaimed by trees and birds. Who could prevent the disappearance of these things?

With a book every year—57 in all, each permeated by “Night”—with lectures, articles, even cantatas, he rammed the subject of the Holocaust home. His sad lined face, the shaggy hair, the brooding eyes, became ubiquitous where Jewish leaders or luminaries gathered. By his 80th birthday the Holocaust was established on modern-history curriculums, his books were on reading lists, he had won the Nobel peace prize, and millions of visitors every year streamed to the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC, which he had helped to found. Widening his scope beyond his beloved Israel, he set up his own foundation to pursue human rights wherever they were threatened, in Cambodia, Bosnia, South Africa, Chile, Rwanda. For just as he still had nightmares of his parents and the dark, just as he still feared random attackers and journeys by train, who was to say that the Holocaust might not happen again?

Nor did the questions ever stop. His Talmud-studying childhood had been devoted to God, but where had God been in the camps? Why had He allowed Tzipora, the little golden-haired sister, to die for nothing? Why had He caused old men to fall down from dysentery on forced marches, when they might have died peacefully in their beds? Why had God created man, if only to abandon him? What exactly did God need man for?

Against the melancholy that never really lifted—for how could it ever do so?—he clung to the words “and yet”. The sun set, and yet it rose again. Delirium struck, and yet it passed. He railed at God, and yet still strapped on his tefillin and recited his prayers as fervently as he had done on the day of his bar mitzvah. For ritual, too, was part of memory. And besides, how could he ever get closer to the mystery of God, unless he battered Him with his doubts?





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

The Economist poll of forecasters, July averages

Markets





Interactive indicators

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition





Output, prices and jobs

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition





The Economist commodity-price index

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition





The Economist poll of forecasters, July averages

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition





Markets

Jul 9th 2016 | From the print edition





Table of Contents

The Economist

The world this week

Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders

Italian banks: The Italian job





China’s middle class: 225m reasons for China’s leaders to worry





Hillary Clinton’s e-mails: Notes on a scandal





Immigration and politics: Aussie rules





War in Iraq: The dangerous chill of Chilcot





Letters

On female genital mutilation, law, Brexit: Letters to the editor





Briefing

America’s forests: Ravaged woodlands





United States

Warfare: The queen and her drones





Stem-cell clinics: A dish called hope





Competitive eating: Glorious gluttony





Education: O-levels





Religious-liberty laws: Left, right





Lexington: Ride ’em, cowboy!





The Americas

Violence in Rio: A sporting chance of safety





Education protest in Mexico: A battle to feed young minds





Argentina’s economy: The cost of truth





Bello: No Brussels here





Asia

Mainstream politics breaks down: The churn down under





Change of command in the Philippines: Talk Duterte to me





Cambodian politics: Sex, power and audiotape





Indian politics: Modi-fication





Hindi movies: Yes, he Khan





Terrorism in Asia: Jihad’s new frontier





China

Pollution: Beijing v belching chimneys





Bad planning: A bigwig purged





Anti-smoking legislation: Butts resist kicks





Middle East and Africa

Kurdistan: Dream on hold





Iraq and Syria: Islamic stateless?





Zimbabwe’s begging bowl: Bailing out bandits





Divorce in Nigeria: Rings fall apart





Europe

France on edge: Hot time, summer in the cité





German inheritance law: Free will





Scandinavia and Russia: Just visiting





The Balkans and the EU: Balking at enlargement





Labour law: Going posted





Charlemagne: Looking to Mutti





Britain

The Conservative leadership: The battle for Downing Street





Sterling: How low can it go?





The Brexit procedure: Article of destiny





The Chilcot report: Iraq’s grim lessons





Bagehot: ¡Hasta siempre, comandante!





International

Immigration systems: What’s the point?





Marriage and citizenship: Get hitched or hike





Special report: Chinese society

Chinese society: The new class war





Chinese nationalism: East, west, home’s best





Family, identity and morality: A nation of individuals





Wealth: Keeping up with the Wangs





Public opinion: Crowd control





Civil society: Daring to think, daring to act





Emigration: The long march abroad





Looking ahead: The writing on the wall





Business

Consumer goods: Invasion of the bottle snatchers





Boardroom brawls, Chinese style: Vanke panky





Israel’s tech industry: Talent search





Kingfisher Airlines: Flying blind





After the Brexit vote (I): Rules and Britannia





After the Brexit vote (II): Picking losers





Schumpeter: The two faces of USA Inc





Finance and economics

Italian banks: Crisis and opportunity





Buttonwood: Safe as office blocks





MiFID: Financial tonic





Banks in oil-exporting countries: Lending at $47 a barrel





China’s debt: Coming clean





Taxes in California: Stop dreamin’





Free exchange: X marks the knot





Science and technology

Self-driving cars: Motoring with the Sims





Mitochondrial donation: Three’s company





Biomimetic engineering: Flight of fancy





Books and arts

Innovation in China: Out of the Master’s shadow





Political biography: A work in progress





Child development: The brain game





20th-century history: Vantage point





A.E. Housman: A Worcestershire lad





Painters’ paintings: Beyond influence





Obituary

Obituary: Elie Wiesel: Unanswerable questions





Economic and financial indicators

Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





The Economist poll of forecasters, July averages





Markets





