The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Essay

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



North Korea declared that it had launched a satellite into space, violating UN sanctions. The launch is likely to have been a cover for testing a long-range ballistic missile. Days later reports surfaced that the army chief of staff, Ri Yong Gil, had been executed. He was one of several bigwigs to have been purged recently by the dictator, Kim Jong Un. Meanwhile, South Korea, displeased at the launch and at an earlier underground nuclear test, shut the industrial park at Kaesong that it operates with North Korea. See article.

A “fishball riot” broke out in Hong Kong following reports that officials were trying to clear unlicensed food-hawkers from a working-class neighbourhood. More than 120 people were injured, including 90 police. Members of a political group called Hong Kong Indigenous, which wants the territory to be more separate from China, played a prominent role. See article.

Celebrations in Beijing of the lunar new year were somewhat quieter than usual. At the start of the holiday, workers swept away 400 tonnes of firework debris from the streets, down by more than a third compared with last year. Worries about pollution, as well as a slowing economy, may have dampened sales.

The prime minister of Australia, Malcolm Turnbull, admitted that attempts to improve the lives of Aborigines were falling short. Infant mortality has fallen and the proportion of Aboriginal students who finish high school has nearly doubled. But Aborigines die younger and are more likely to be unemployed than non-indigenous Australians.

Show of force

Ahead of a two-day meeting of NATO defence ministers in Brussels, Germany and Turkey proposed that the alliance set up patrols in the Aegean Sea to police refugee flows. Meanwhile the European Commission drew up a list of steps it expects Greece to take to improve the situation of asylum-seekers.

The lower chamber of the French parliament voted on a proposal to write into the constitution the power to strip French nationality from dual citizens who are convicted of terrorism. The amendment was adopted but divided both the majority and the opposition. This was not the final vote, but it was a test for François Hollande, the French president, who needs three-fifths of the votes in both chambers.

Two trains crashed in Germany leaving ten people dead and more than 80 injured.

Five years on…



Fears grew of a new humanitarian catastrophe in Syria, as forces loyal to Bashar al-Assad, backed by heavy Russian bombing, came close to encircling Aleppo, where 300,000 people are in danger of being cut off and starved. UN investigators accused the Syrian government of a crime against humanity, after a report found that detainees are being killed on a massive scale, amounting to a state policy of civilian “extermination”. See article.

A grandson of Ayatollah Khomeini, who led Iran’s Islamic revolution, will not be allowed to stand in this month’s election in Iran, the body charged with vetting candidates reaffirmed. Hassan Khomeini is seen as a reformist.

A plane leaving Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, survived what appears to have been a blast that killed only the suspected suicide-bomber. The bomb exploded after take-off, blowing a hole above the wing of the plane out of which the bomber was sucked. No one else died.

Encouraging peace

Barack Obama said he would ask Congress for $450m to help Colombia implement a peace agreement with the FARC, a guerrilla group with which Colombia’s government has been at war for more than 50 years. Among other things, the “Peace Colombia” aid package will help pay for clearing mines. Colombia’s government and the FARC have set March 23rd as a deadline to sign a peace deal.

Haiti’s president, Michel Martelly, left office as scheduled, but without handing power to a successor. A run-off vote in the presidential election was postponed until April after several candidates complained of irregularities in October’s first round. Parliament is to select an interim president.

Anabel Flores Salazar, a crime reporter for a newspaper in the Mexican state of Veracruz, was kidnapped from her home by at least eight uniformed men and murdered. Her body was found on a road in the neighbouring state of Puebla. Six journalists who lived or worked in Veracruz have been killed since 2011.

The government of Argentina offered a partial repayment to bondholders whose refusal to accept a debt restructuring prompted the country to default in 2014. It is offering $6.5 billion to bondholders, who are claiming $9 billion.

Fulfilling an election promise, Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said that the country will stop bombing Islamic State in Iraq and Syria by February 22nd. It is to withdraw six jets but will continue to refuel aircraft flown by its allies, keep two surveillance planes in the region and triple its number of troops training Kurdish fighters.

Bern, baby, Bern



In the New Hampshire primary Bernie Sanders won on the Democratic side, beating Hillary Clinton by a stonking 60% to 38%. Donald Trump came first in the Republican contest with 35%. The winning margins for both men were bigger than had been forecast. John Kasich came second in the Republican primary on 16%, followed by Ted Cruz, Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio. Support for the party’s mainstream challengers to Mr Trump was split. See article.

After their poor placing in the primary Chris Christie and Carly Fiorina pulled out of the Republican race.

America’s Supreme Court temporarily halted the implementation of the Clean Power Plan, the backbone of Barack Obama’s policy to cut emissions from power plants. The plan gives states leeway over achieving this, but some contend it is too burdensome.

The White House sent its budget to Congress. The document was deemed dead on arrival, as Republican leaders are this year forgoing the traditional charade of even pretending to listen to the administration’s budget director at public hearings. See article.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21692943-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

It was another jittery week for stockmarkets. As well as general worries about the state of the world economy, investors fretted about the health of European banks, causing wild swings in their share prices. Some of the concerns were over Deutsche Bank’s restructuring programme and its capacity to make payments on a specific type of debt. The bank’s chief executive, John Cryan, gave assurances that its position was “absolutely rock solid”. Its share price rebounded on reports that it would buy back several billion euros worth of its debt. See here and here.



Tech stocks also fared badly, none more so than those of LinkedIn, a social network for businesspeople, and Tableau, which produces cloud-based software for data visualisation. Both companies released sales forecasts for the year that came in well below analysts’ expectations; LinkedIn’s share price plummeted by 43% in a day and Tableau’s by 49%.

Going cheap

Twitter’s share price dropped to a new low after it released its fourth-quarter earnings, which showed no growth for the first time in its user base (compared with the previous quarter). It posted another net loss, of $90m. The results were the first since Jack Dorsey returned on a permanent basis as chief executive. See article.

Japanese ten-year bonds joined a lengthening list of government securities with a negative yield, offering -0.04% a year. Nearly 30% of the global government bond market now trades on a negative yield. Sweden, meanwhile, pushed its main interest rate further into negative territory, to -0.5%, Janet Yellen, who chairs the Federal Reserve, hinted that the central bank was less inclined to raise interest rates again at its meeting in March.

China’s foreign-exchange reserves fell again last month, as the central bank tapped its pile of dollars to prop up the yuan. The reserves dropped by $100 billion to $3.2 trillion, the lowest in nearly four years.

Believe it or not

The release of GDP figures in India for the last three months of 2015 raised more questions than it answered. The economy officially grew by 7.3% compared with the same quarter a year earlier, making it the world’s fastest-growing large economy. But since last year’s rejig of GDP statistics, doubts have been raised about the accuracy of the data. Economists point to other numbers, such as weak exports and a lack of investment, which suggest a less rosy outlook.

India’s telecoms regulator introduced a ban on differential pricing for access to internet content, in effect blocking Facebook’s Free Basics service in the country. Free Basics is a collection of apps and resources made for people in developing countries and distributed without charge, which Facebook says offers the poor a portal to the internet through their phones. But critics of the scheme contend that it ties people to Facebook’s network, giving it an unfair market advantage.

Asahi, a Japanese brewer, presented a €2.6 billion ($2.9 billion) offer to Anheuser-Busch InBev to buy the Peroni and Grolsch beer brands that are currently owned by SABMiller. AB InBev is in the process of taking over SABMiller and has to offload some assets to satisfy antitrust regulators in Europe. It would be Asahi’s biggest acquisition to date.

Weaker demand for transporting goods on Asia-Europe sea routes was a factor behind A.P. Moller-Maersk reporting a fall in underlying profit for last year, to $3.1 billion. The Danish shipping company also took a big write-down on its oil-exploration business because of “low oil-price expectations”.

Volkswagen delayed the publication of its annual report. It is struggling to determine the full cost of last year’s emissions scandal, when it admitted to cheating in tests of nitrogen-oxide levels emitted by its diesel cars. The German carmaker has yet to satisfy regulators in America that it has a viable plan for fixing the 600,000 diesel vehicles that have been recalled.

The squabble raged on between London’s black-taxi drivers and app upstart Uber. This week Uber offered free access to its taxi-hailing app to the cabbies, but this was rejected as a publicity stunt. Rival apps, such as Hailo and Gett, count two-thirds of the capital’s black-cab drivers among their ranks.

Boys and girls

Merchandise tied to “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” helped boost profits at Hasbro. The American toymaker said that sales in the last quarter of 2015 were 13% higher than in the same three months of 2014. Revenue in its “boys” division, where it parks its Star Wars-related business, was up by 35%. Hasbro, like other toymakers, faced a storm of criticism when it initially omitted products that feature Rey, the film’s female lead character, from its range.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21692940-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21692941-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




Regulating cannabis: The right way to do drugs

Hong Kong: Wounded society

European banks: Borrowed time

Travel in Africa: Let Africans fly

The Mekong river: Damned if you do





Articles Sections Next

Regulating cannabis

The right way to do drugs

The argument for the legalisation of cannabis has been won. Now for the difficult bit

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS like a hash-induced hallucination: row upon row of lush, budding plants, tended by white-coated technicians who are bothered by the authorities only when it is time to pay their taxes. Cannabis once grew in secret, traded by murderous cartels and smoked by consumers who risked jail. Now, countries all over the world have licensed the drug for medical purposes, and a few are going still further (see article). Four American states have so far legalised its recreational use; little Uruguay will soon be joined by big, G7-member Canada in the legal-weed club. Parliaments from Mexico to South Africa are debating reforms of their own.

Those (including this newspaper) who have argued that legalisation is better than prohibition will welcome the beginning of the end of the futile war on weed. Cannabis accounts for nearly half the $300 billion illegal narcotics market, and is the drug of choice for most of the world’s 250m illicit-drug users. Legalising it deprives organised crime of its single biggest source of income, while protecting and making honest citizens of consumers.

Yet the repeal of prohibition marks the start of complex arguments about how to regulate cannabis. What sound like details for bureaucrats—how to tax it, which varieties to allow, who should sell it and to whom—are questions that force policymakers to decide which of legalisation’s competing aims they value most. Trailblazers like Canada are writing rules that the rest of the world will copy; once laid down, they will be hard to uproot. Getting these decisions right will ultimately determine whether legalisation succeeds or fails.

Have your hash cake and eat it

Legalisation’s proponents are an odd mix of libertarians, who want to maximise personal and commercial freedom, and conservatives, who grasp that prohibition is less effective than pragmatic legalisation and regulation. The hippies and hardliners created a powerful alliance for legalisation. But when asked to say exactly how the cannabis trade should work—at what rate to set taxes or whether to place limits on consumption, for instance—they can find themselves at odds.

Libertarians may ask why cannabis, which has no known lethal dose, should be regulated at all for adults who can make free, informed decisions. There are two reasons for care. First, cannabis appears to induce dependency in a minority of users, meaning the decision whether to light up is not a free one. Second, cannabis’s illegality means that the research on its long-term effects is hazy, so even the most informed decision is based on incomplete information. When decisions are neither always free nor fully informed, the state is justified in steering consumers away, as it does from alcohol and tobacco.

Hence the libertarians must cede ground. States can tax users to deter consumption—though not so much as to make consumers turn first to the untaxed black market. The “right” level of tax will depend on a country’s circumstances. In Latin America, where abuse is rare and the black market is bloody and powerful, governments should keep prices low. In the rich world, where problem use is more common and drug-dealers are a nuisance rather than a threat to national security, prices could be higher. One model is the United States after Prohibition: alcohol taxes were set low at first, to drive out the bootleggers; later, with the Mafia gone, they were ramped up.

A similar trade-off applies when determining what products to allow. Cannabis no longer means just joints. Legal entrepreneurs have cooked up pot-laced food and drink, reaching customers who might have avoided smoking the stuff. Ultra-strong “concentrates” are on offer to be inhaled or swallowed. Edibles and stronger strains help put the illegal dealers out of business, but they also risk encouraging more people to take the drug, and in stronger forms. The starting-point should be to legalise only what is already available on the black market. That would mean capping or taxing potency, much as spirits are taxed more steeply and are less available than beer. Again, the mix will vary. Europe may be able to ban concentrates. America already has a taste for them. If the product were outlawed there the mob would gladly step in.

In one respect, governments should be decidedly illiberal. Advertising is largely absent in the underworld, but in the legal world it could stimulate vast new demand. It should be banned. Likewise, alluring packaging and products, such as cannabis sweets that would appeal to children, should be outlawed, just as many countries outlaw flavoured cigarettes and alcohol-spiked sweets. The state should use the tax system and public education to promote the least harmful ways of getting high. The legal market has already created pot’s answer to the e-cigarette, which reduces the damage done by smoke to lungs.

In America the federal ban on cannabis means the task of writing its first regulations has fallen to overstretched civil servants in a few small states. Testing potency, setting safe-driving limits and solving a hundred other puzzles is no easier when the federal agencies that would normally advise them (such as the Food and Drug Administration, the world’s most advanced pharmaceutical regulator) are sitting on their hands. And the absence of federal curbs on pot advertising means that the drug is more widely promoted than tobacco, by companies pleading the First Amendment. The federal government’s wait-and-see policy sounds prudent; in fact it is irresponsible.

Be cautious, but be bold

Campaigners for and against legalisation need to adjust to the new reality, too. Those who would rather ban the drug should stop flogging the dead horse of prohibition and start campaigning for versions of legalisation that do the least harm (just as the temperance movement these days lobbies for higher taxes on booze, rather than a ban). Legalisers, meanwhile, should open their eyes to the fact that the legal marijuana industry, which until now has only had to prove itself more worthy than organised criminals, now needs as much scrutiny as the other “sin” industries that defend their turf jealously. Rather than one day having to take on Big Cannabis, it would be better to get policy on pot right from the start.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21692881-argument-legalisation-cannabis-has-been-won-now-difficult-bit-right/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Hong Kong

Wounded society

Violent unrest in Hong Kong suggests a need for political cures

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



ON SOCIAL media the rioting that erupted in Hong Kong on February 8th has been dressed up as a righteous political protest: “#FishballRevolution” is the hashtag used to discuss the violence that racked a working-class district of the city for ten hours, resulting in injuries to 124 people, including 90 police officers (see article). The mayhem was triggered by reports that officials were trying to clear away illegal food stalls selling fishballs, a local delicacy.

In no sense was the violence righteous. Most Hong Kong residents were appalled. Their city is renowned for the peacefulness of its many protests. In an unusually prolonged outbreak of unrest late in 2014, known as the Umbrella Movement, pro-democracy protesters mostly remained on good terms with police. Not since the 1960s, during the madness of Mao’s Cultural Revolution in mainland China, have the territory’s streets seen such bloodshed.

Nonetheless, #FishballRevolution was undeniably political. Activists from a group called Hong Kong Indigenous, which stresses Hong Kong’s separateness from mainland China, were involved in the mêlée. Their pretext was the protection of a cherished tradition—eating from food stalls during the Chinese new-year holiday—from zealous officialdom.

Hong Kong Indigenous is a fringe group. Officials will be tempted to dismiss its resort to violence as an aberration over a triviality. In fact the central government in Beijing, and that of Hong Kong, should see what happened as evidence of social and political discontent. They have a role in putting it right.

When the Umbrella Movement eventually sputtered to an end in December 2014, both governments hoped that the public’s misgivings would abate. China had refrained from leaning on Hong Kong’s government to follow up its tear-gas assaults on the Umbrella protesters with even tougher measures and the tactic was quickly abandoned. But China also turned a deaf ear to the demonstrators’ demands for fully democratic elections for the territory’s leadership. Leung Chun-ying, the unpopular chief executive, showed no willingness to explain the protesters’ anxieties to his overlords in Beijing.

As a result, resentment towards officials has grown. The emergence of radical groups such as Hong Kong Indigenous is an extreme manifestation of the simmering discontent. Fears of China’s influence are evident even in debates about building transport links with the mainland (see article). Anxieties have been fuelled by the apparent abduction in recent months of five Hong Kong booksellers by Chinese agents—three while visiting mainland China, one from a resort in Thailand and another from Hong Kong itself. Many suspect that the men were “disappeared” because of plans to publish a tell-tale book about China’s president, Xi Jinping.

A fine kettle of fishballs

The months ahead in Hong Kong will not be calm. Elections will be held this year for the Legislative Council; and there will be a (rigged) election in 2017 for the chief executive. Mr Leung could help reduce tensions by launching a thorough investigation of the recent violence, including its social causes. Young people are concerned not just about high politics, but also about everyday issues such as unemployment and house prices. But it is China’s government that most urgently needs to act: by releasing the booksellers, apologising for their treatment and heeding calls for political reform. Above all, it needs to recognise that its “one country, two systems” formula depends on preserving Hong Kong’s freewheeling way of life. It should seek to persuade the people of Hong Kong to see themselves as Chinese through attraction, not intimidation.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21692880-violent-unrest-hong-kong-suggests-need-political-cures-wounded-society/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

European banks

Borrowed time

It has been a traumatic week for European banks. Their problems run deepest in Italy

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR those who worry that a repeat of the crisis of 2007-08 is imminent, this week brought fresh omens. Shares of big banks tumbled; despite a mid-week rally, American lenders are down by 19% this year, European ones by 24% (see article). The cost of insuring banks’ debts against default rose sharply, especially in Europe. The boss of Deutsche Bank felt obliged to declare that the institution he runs is “absolutely rock solid”; Germany’s finance minister professed to have no concerns (thereby adding to the concerns). This is not 2008: big banks are not about to topple. But there are reasons to worry, and many of them converge on one country.

Start with the better news. Banks are more strongly capitalised than they were. Even in Europe, where lenders have been slower than their American counterparts to raise capital, banks have plumped up their core equity cushions from an average of 9% in 2009 to 12.5% in 2015. Managers at European banks are making a renewed effort to adjust to the post-crisis landscape. New rules on everything from capital to liquidity are forcing them to change. John Cryan, Deutsche’s newish co-chief executive, was brought in to trim its investment bank. He is jettisoning whole divisions, and suspended the dividend this year and last. Credit Suisse is undergoing similar surgery. Just now, this is weighing on the banks’ share prices. Yet, however painful for investors, the sensible goal is ultimately to create slimmer, safer, more profitable outfits.

Also salutary, if painful, is how investors in bank debt are coming to understand that they bear greater risk than they did. New European rules that came fully into force at the start of this year stipulate that troubled banks must deal with capital shortfalls by “bailing in” holders of bank bonds before any call is made on the taxpayer. The chance that bondholders might lose money suddenly seems more real. The turmoil at Deutsche this week stemmed partly from fear that the bank might struggle to pay interest next year on a type of bond that is designed to act as a buffer in a crisis (see article). There are some design flaws in the bail-in regime, but the possibility that European banks are at last repairing themselves at a cost to their investors is the silver lining to this week’s spasms.

The clouds, alas, still loom. One source of anxiety is the health of the world economy. The factors that spook markets more broadly—the slowdown in China, plunging commodity prices and indebted energy firms, political upheaval from Greece to New Hampshire—all weigh heavily on banks in particular. Banks do well when the economies they serve are growing, and miserably when they are not.

The receding prospect of higher interest rates leaves American banks with less hope of widening the margin between the rates they pay depositors and what they charge for loans. In Japan, where bank shares have fallen by 24% this month, and Europe central banks have imposed negative rates, in effect levying a fee on some reserves—one that banks have not yet been able to pass on to depositors. With the economic outlook growing gloomier, margins being squeezed and restructuring costs still hitting profits, investors have good reason to fret.

Worse, some countries appear to have taken so long to deal with their banks that they will now struggle to clean them up at all. The IMF reckons that the total amount of non-performing debt in Europe was around €1 trillion ($1.13 trillion) at the end of 2014. Bail-in is an especially ugly prospect in countries where bank debt is owned not only by diversified financial institutions but also by local retail investors. Under such conditions, politicians may find that they cannot force the cost of cleaning up balance-sheets on voters without causing uproar.

Rome is where the hurt is

No country is more impaled on this dilemma than Italy. The gross value of non-performing loans makes up a whopping 18% of their total lending; retail investors own some €200 billion of bank bonds, equivalent to 12% of GDP. A government plan to buy bad debts from the banks at close to face value would fall foul of European rules against “state aid”. But selling the loans at a significant discount would force Italian banks to recognise losses, some of which could be borne by retail investors. The prime minister, Matteo Renzi, headed down this road late last year, when the efforts to save four small banks clobbered the savings of individual Italians and seemingly resulted in a high-profile suicide. He will not want to do so again.

The European Union and the Italian government recently agreed on a half-baked alternative to bail-in, though few think it will cleanse banks’ balance-sheets. Instead Italy seems trapped between the rock of hurting small savers and the hard place of a banking system strangled by bad debts. If Mr Renzi cannot negotiate his way round the new rules on bail-in, Italy’s banks and economy risk years of more stagnation, poisoning relations with the EU. Behind this week’s banking headlines is the threat of something very bad coming out of Italy.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21692879-it-has-been-traumatic-week-european-banks-their-problems-run-deepest-italy-borrowed/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Travel in Africa

Let Africans fly

Air travel in Africa is needlessly hard and costly. Open skies would make it cheaper

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



FEW places still capture the romance (and frustration) of the early days of flight quite as Africa does. Although air travel in the continent is safer and more common than ever before (see page 53), it still has some charming anachronisms. In Nigeria everyone applauds when the plane touches down. On tiny propeller-driven planes in Botswana the cabin attendants hand you a little bag of biltong, the dried meat that once fed people on long overland treks. In Tanzania, where on some flights almost half the passengers are taking to the skies for the first time, many of the faces in the cabin betray a sense of wonder tinged with fear.

Yet African airlines feel like a prop-blast from the past in regrettable ways, too. In most places, schedules are about as reliable as they were when planes could take off or land only in clear weather. Tickets are costly. Routes are convoluted: a passenger wanting to fly from Algiers to Lagos may have to go via Europe, turning a four-and-a-half-hour journey into one that takes at least nine hours. Most airlines are state-owned and protected from competition. Like a lot of national carriers elsewhere, they tend to be chronically unprofitable and to need frequent bail-outs from taxpayers.

Across Africa, airlines wanting to fly new routes from one country to another need the agreement of both governments first. Getting this can take years of lobbying and, in some cases, bribes. If the airline is not owned by one of the two states, its chances of winning permission nosedive. Fastjet, a London-listed low-cost carrier with operations across Africa, had to wait three years for a green light to fly between Tanzania and neighbouring Kenya. Zimbabwe recently announced that it would not let any airline besides its national carrier fly from Harare to London—although Air Zimbabwe does not currently service this route, for fear that as soon as its planes land they will be impounded by creditors.

Closed markets carry jumbo-sized costs. It is not just that badly run African state airlines lose money ($300m last year, or $3.84 for every airline ticket sold on the continent). Far bigger are the opportunity costs. Lousy air links inhibit trade, exports and investment. In many parts of the world air travel grows about twice as fast as GDP. In Africa it has been expanding by about 5% a year, which is slower than the 6% or so that economic growth has averaged over the past decade.

The lesson from other parts of the world is that when markets are freed, fares fall. This stimulates a huge increase in air travel and gives a boost to all the businesses that depend on mobility. In African countries that have liberalised a bit, this has indeed happened: after a bilateral open-skies deal, fares between South Africa and Zambia fell by almost 40% and passenger numbers rose nearly as much. After Morocco opened its market to European airlines in 2005, the number of passengers jumped by 160% and the number of routes more than tripled, from 83 to 309 in eight years.

A study commissioned by the International Air Transport Association (IATA), a club of big airlines, estimates that if just 12 of Africa’s bigger economies opened their skies to one another, fares would fall by more than a third and traffic between them would soar by 81%, to roughly 11m passengers. More than 155,000 new jobs would be created, and $1.3 billion would be added to GDP. This may well be an underestimate, given Africa’s vast size and sparse, shoddy road network, which is about a fifth as dense as the world average and mostly unpaved. Where air travel expands, so do unexpected new industries, such as growing roses in Kenya for export to Europe.

Fly freedom

In 1988 most African governments signed up to the Yamoussoukro Declaration, pledging to open their skies. To date not one has done so fully (although some, such as South Africa, have opened up a lot). Rather than encouraging competition, most African leaders seem more concerned with mollycoddling their bust national carriers. This provides jobs for pals and jets that can be commandeered for presidential shopping trips to Paris. But it is terrible for Africa. The continent will struggle to take off economically while its people are stuck on the runway. Time to let Africans fly.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21692882-air-travel-africa-needlessly-hard-and-costly-open-skies-would-make-it-cheaper-let-africans/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Mekong river

Damned if you do

Governments should stop building dams on the mother of rivers

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



THE greatest of all South-East Asia’s waterways and the world’s 12th-longest river, the Mekong, is a natural wonder that ties together the destinies of half a dozen countries. Born from snowmelt at over 17,000 feet (5,200 metres), it bolts off the Tibetan plateau like a runaway horse; by the time it leaves China it is starting to slow and spread. When it reaches Cambodia, via Laos, it is tropical and ample and, with the monsoon rains, parts of it curiously change the direction of their flow. Farther down, it reaches the South China Sea through a filigree delta. The Mekong watershed nurtures extraordinary biodiversity, with new species of plants and animals discovered every year. It has also nurtured humans. Tens of millions of people—much of the population of Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam—depend on the Mekong. Its fish are their protein and its delta is the world’s rice basket. No wonder its name, in Thai or Lao, means “mother of rivers”.

Planners think the mother has one more gift to give: hydropower. China has 14 dams planned or under construction on its stretch of the Mekong in Yunnan province, joining six already built. Today the river is undammed below China, but that will soon change. Laos has nine dams planned or under way; Cambodia has two. Dozens more dams for tributaries are on the drawing board.

To the planners, the case for building dams is obvious: they generate electricity and much-needed cash. Poor, landlocked Laos wants to become the dynamo of South-East Asia, selling its energy to Thailand and others; it dreams of hydropower becoming its biggest earner in just a decade. Long wretchedly poor, the Mekong region is now booming. Hydropower will help meet its energy demands, which are expected to double over the next ten years.

Yet there are flaws in the planners’ case. For one, they overestimate the river’s potential. At most, says the Mekong River Commission (MRC), the intergovernmental body charged with co-ordinating the river’s management, dams will meet just 8% of the lower Mekong basin’s projected power needs.

Worse, the planners underestimate the harm that dams will do to ecosystems as well as to food security. As our essay on the Mekong points out (see article), dams threaten the stocks of migratory fish on which many South-East Asians depend. Farmland will either become less productive because less sediment reaches it from upstream, or disappear under rising river levels or, in the delta, suffer incursions of salt water. The dams, in other words, come at a high environmental cost, imperil food security and, far from increasing overall prosperity, promise to aggravate the poverty of millions of people. They may also increase regional tensions. China and Laos will reap most of the hydropower benefits, while downstream Cambodia and Vietnam pay most of the price.

The biggest problem with the dam-building schemes is their lack of co-ordination. An individual dam, high up the river system, would not be a big worry, especially if it was fitted with ladders for migrating fish and the like. But the question is not what one dam will do. It is what 25 of them will do, and how each will affect the next. The dams’ sponsors are not thinking about that.

Just keep it rollin’ along

Isn’t this the MRC’s task? Well, yes, and it tries to do its job. But it has no enforcement power, struggles to promote good river management and is woefully short of cash. Besides, China, the Mekong’s biggest threat, refuses to be a member. The MRC proposes a ten-year moratorium on dam-building, and has urged studies of hydropower projects, such as run-of-the-river schemes, that would not block the Mekong’s flow. That is prudent advice; but few governments are listening. The scale of the harm that damming the Mekong might cause is huge, and would be irreversible. Without giving enough thought to what they are about to undertake, governments are messing dangerously with the mother of all rivers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21692885-governments-should-stop-building-dams-mother-rivers-damned-if-you-do/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




Arab investment, electricity, restrooms, batteries, citizenship, gas, dedicated subscriber, punk, collaboration: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

Arab investment, electricity, restrooms, batteries, citizenship, gas, dedicated subscriber, punk, collaboration

Letters to the editor

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



Property deals in Bosnia

I’d like to add some points to your article on Arab investment in Bosnia (“Ottoman comfort”, January 23rd). Land-development deals are being made in a completely non-transparent manner. Officials with the necessary party and foreign ties are making favourable deals with Arab investors without input from the broader community. Some of the land being sold is public, and municipal officials are playing fast and loose with zoning regulations to clinch deals. There are reports that private landowners (often non-Muslims who remained after the war in what are now majority-Muslim areas) are being pressured to sell as foreign buyers seek large land holdings.

Beyond the value of developments catering to other Arab buyers, the aim of these investments is seemingly less about profit and more about longer-term presence and influence. The only Bosnians “delighted” about these deals are the elites who directly profit from them. The residents in this still-divided society are troubled by opaque terms that will result in gated communities, catering to thousands of foreign nationals. There is a marked difference between favourable globalisation and open markets, and the narrow economic fruits of poor governance, weak rule of law and corruption.

VALERY PERRY

Democratisation Policy Council

Sarajevo





African energy

Regarding your article on stalled electrification plans in Africa (“Power hungry”, January 9th), electricity-distribution companies across the continent are generally state-owned and governments are usually the largest electricity consumers. They are the main culprits for either late or non-payment. What does a state-owned electricity company do when its owner and biggest customer doesn’t pay? The generators of that energy are then not paid or paid in arrears. The shortfall in generation is plugged using emergency diesel generators at four times the cost of grid power.

This is symptomatic of a greater failure in sub-Saharan energy markets. Schemes such as Barack Obama’s Power Africa plan are welcome, but the focus should be on reforming markets and recapitalising and privatising distribution companies under qualified, accountable management. A functioning power market will attract foreign capital for expansion, which is vital for broader economic growth and poverty alleviation in Africa.

DIARMUID TWOMEY

Chief executive

EMPower

Dublin





The battle of backwater loos

The debate over making restrooms inclusive to transgender people is too narrow (“Restroom rumpus”, January 30th). Rethinking restrooms for all genders would better serve families by, for example, letting a father with a daughter or a caregiver looking after someone from the opposite sex take them to the toilet. Public restrooms don’t meet modern society’s needs in many ways.

JENNIFER GEREND

Wiltingen, Germany





Batteries not included

* I was surprised that you cited lithium-ion batteries as the “technology of our time” (“A plug for the battery”, January 16th). A consensus is emerging within the industry that electricity storage will require a number of complementary technologies. Where there is no one dominant technology, the suitability of a storage system depends on how and where it is going to be used. You highlighted the limitations of lithium in storing grid-scale power which alternatives can address. Flow batteries, for example, store energy in tanks of liquid electrolyte and so neatly sidestep this problem, since more energy can be stored through a simple increase in tank size. Vanadium, the most commonly used metal in flow battery technology, is a significantly more plentiful element, and therefore does not suffer from the supply restrictions which you rightly noted are driving up prices. Based upon US Geological Survey resource data and current usage, we have 1000 years supply of vanadium. Whilst lithium has enjoyed success in short duration applications, it is longer duration services that will drive the de-carbonisation agenda and smooth imbalances between generation and consumption. I would suggest that the flow battery is the real “technology of our time” and that it should not be eclipsed by its younger, and often noisier, cousin.



SCOTT McGREGOR

CEO, redT Energy

London



Natural-born thriller

Although Ted Cruz is an American citizen by virtue of his mother, it is simply not the case that “his eligibility to be president is beyond serious doubt” (“Outsiders’ chance”, January 30th). Mr Cruz was born in Canada. The phrasing in Article II of the constitution requires that “No person except a natural-born citizen… shall be eligible for the office of president.” Neither the constitution nor statutory law defines “natural born”.

As a former foreign-service officer, I point you to volume seven of the “Foreign Affairs Manual”, section 1131.6-2: “It has never been determined definitively by a court whether a person who acquired US citizenship by birth abroad to US citizens is a natural-born citizen within the meaning of Article II of the constitution and, therefore, eligible for the presidency.” Thus, “the fact that someone is a natural-born citizen pursuant to a statute does not necessarily imply that he or she is such a citizen for constitutional purposes.”

HOWIE MUIR

Nevada City, California





In the pipeline

* Regarding the global market for natural gas (“Step on it”, January 30th) one area to watch is the development of a liquid wholesale natural gas in China. Domestic consumption is growing and there is diversity and competition of supply sources. Important policy changes are forthcoming from the National Development and Reform Commission, including third-party access to gas pipelines and potential pipeline sales. The infrastructure is being restructured. China could finally be the answer to the “Asian Gas Index”, providing a long awaited reference for LNG contracts in the region, and playing the role of the Henry Hub index in the West.



CHUNG YEN WONG

Strategy manager

Accenture Trading

Singapore





An Economist reader passes

I am writing to tell you of the death of Martin Bud, possibly The Economist’s longest-ever subscriber. He received his subscription on his 18th birthday in January 1938, and his last copy was delivered after more than 78 years of uninterrupted readership. His life was in many ways a mirror of the 20th century.

Born Jewish in Weimar Berlin to the family of a self-made economist and banker, his mother died of appendicitis when he was four, in the age before antibiotics. Returning from school one day he found himself between a great crowd and a motorcade, face to face with Hitler. His family escaped as refugees to England in 1935, where he qualified as an accountant with PriceWaterhouse. His father stopped him from joining the Republicans in the Spanish civil war and later the British army.

At the family firm, ENM, he developed sophisticated research tools for sales forecasting, which would later form the basis for some celebrated work by the music industry on modelling the long tail of digital consumption. In the 1960s he pioneered the use of microelectronics by British industry.

The years after ENM’s purchase were difficult, as this heir to the German industrial tradition chafed at what he felt was the plutocratic, lax and irrational management of the new owners. He later supplied equipment to many of the world’s state lotteries, and enjoyed working in an industry which thrived by applying rational reasoning to the irrational. His wife of 58 years, Hanna, was a research chemist with Margaret Thatcher at J. Lyons Research. In 2009 the producers of Harry Potter wanted to use his house as a location. He conducted negotiations for the complex contract entirely in verse.

ANDREW BUD

London





Pioneers of punk

More than a few elderly New Yorkers would dispute whether the “place of punk rock’s birth in 1976” was the King’s Road in London (“Punk reaches middle age”, January 30th). The Ramones, were playing punk rock in New York in 1974. When I lived in London in 1978 my landlady complained that punk was an evil American influence.

PETER WEVERKA

San Francisco





Death to the collaborators!

Schumpeter is one smart dude for capturing the destructive underbelly of technology’s tidal wave of collaboration and consequent disruption (January 23rd). He would do well to read “The Circle” by Dave Eggers, a chilling story that would leave him even more despondent.

RICHARD HETKE

Hinsdale, Illinois





Collaboration also allows ineffective employees to skirt responsibility. As the saying goes, meetings are the practical alternative to work.

TIMOTHY KLAAS

Winnipeg, Canada

* Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21692846-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Legalising cannabis: Reeferegulatory challenge





Articles Sections Next

Legalising cannabis

Reeferegulatory challenge

A growing number of countries are deciding to ditch prohibition. What comes next?

Feb 13th 2016 | DENVER | From the print edition



IN AN anonymous-looking building a few minutes’ drive from Denver International Airport, a bald chemotherapy patient and a pair of giggling tourists eye the stock on display. Reeking packets of mossy green buds—Girl Scout Cookies, KoolAid Kush, Power Cheese—sit alongside cabinets of chocolates and chilled drinks. In a warehouse behind the shop pointy-leaved plants bask in the artificial light of two-storey growing rooms. Sally Vander Veer, the president of Medicine Man, which runs this dispensary, reckons the inventory is worth about $4m.

America, and the world, are going to see a lot more such establishments. Since California’s voters legalised the sale of marijuana for medical use in 1996, 22 more states, plus the District of Columbia, have followed suit; in a year’s time the number is likely to be nearer 30. Sales to cannabis “patients” whose conditions range from the serious to the notional are also legal elsewhere in the Americas (Colombia is among the latest to license the drug) and in much of Europe. On February 10th Australia announced similar plans.



Now a growing number of jurisdictions are legalising the sale of cannabis for pure pleasure—or impure, if you prefer. In 2014 the American states of Colorado and Washington began sales of recreational weed; Oregon followed suit last October and Alaska will soon join them. They are all places where the drug is already popular (see chart 1). Jamaica has legalised ganja for broadly defined religious purposes. Spain allows users to grow and buy weed through small collectives. Uruguay expects to begin non-medicinal sales through pharmacies by August.



Canada’s government plans to legalise cannabis next year, making it the first G7 country to do so. But it may not be the largest pot economy for long; California is one of several states where ballot initiatives to legalise cannabis could well pass in America’s November elections. A majority of Americans are in favour of such changes (see chart 2).

Legalisers argue that regulated markets protect consumers, save the police money, raise revenues and put criminals out of business as well as extending freedom. Though it will be years before some of these claims can be tested, the initial results are encouraging: a big bite has been taken out of the mafia’s market, thousands of young people have been spared criminal records and hundreds of millions of dollars have been legitimately earned and taxed. There has so far been no explosion in consumption, nor of drug-related crime.

To get the most of these benefits, though, requires more than just legalisation. To live outside the law, Bob Dylan memorably if unconvincingly claimed, you must be honest; to live inside it you must be regulated. Ms Vander Veer points to a “two-inch thick” book of rules applicable to Medicine Man’s business.

Such rules should depend on which of legalisation’s benefits a jurisdiction wants to prioritise and what harms it wants to minimise. The first consideration is how much protection users need. As far as anyone has been able to establish (and some have tried very hard indeed) it is as good as impossible to die of a marijuana overdose. But the drug has downsides. Being stoned can lead to other calamities: in the past two years Colorado has seen three deaths associated with cannabis use (one fall, one suicide and one alleged murder, in which the defendant claims the pot made him do it). There may have been more. Colorado has seen an increase in the proportion of drivers involved in accidents who test positive for the drug, though there has been no corresponding rise in traffic fatalities.

The chronic harm done by the drug is still a matter for debate. Heavy cannabis use is associated with mental illness, but researchers struggle to establish the direction of causality; a tendency to mental illness may lead to drug use. It may also be the case that some are more susceptible to harm than others.

Jonathan Caulkins of Carnegie Mellon University has found that cannabis users are more likely than alcohol drinkers to say the drug has caused them problems at work or at home. It is an imperfect comparison because most cannabis users are, by definition, lawbreakers, and therefore perhaps more prone to such problems. Nonetheless it is clear that pot is, in Mr Caulkins’ words, a “performance-degrading drug”.

What’s more, some struggle to give it up: in America 14% of people who used pot in the past month meet the criteria by which doctors define dependence. As in the alcohol and tobacco markets, about 80% of consumption is accounted for by the heaviest-using 20% of users. Startlingly, Mr Caulkins calculates that in America more than half of all cannabis is consumed by people who are high for more than half their waking hours.

To complicate matters, the public-health effects of cannabis should not be looked at in isolation. If taking up weed made people less likely to consume cigarettes or alcohol it might offer net benefits. But if people treat cannabis and other drugs as complements—that is, if doing more pot makes them smoke more tobacco or guzzle more alcohol—an increase in use could be a big public-health problem.

No one yet knows which is more likely. A review of mostly American studies by the RAND Corporation, a think-tank, found mixed evidence on the relationship between cannabis and alcohol. Demand for tobacco seems to go up along with demand for cannabis, though the two are hard to separate because, in Europe at least, they are often smoked together. The data regarding other drugs are more limited. Proponents of the Dutch “coffee shop” system, which allows purchase and consumption in specific places, argue that legalisation keeps users away from dealers who may push them on to harder substances. And there is some evidence that cannabis functions as a substitute for prescription opioids, such as OxyContin, which kill 15,000 Americans each year. People used to worry that cigarettes were a “gateway” to cannabis, and that cannabis was in turn a gateway to hard drugs. It may be the reverse: cannabis could be a useful restraint on the abuse of opioids, but a dangerous pathway to tobacco.

More bong for your buck

Danger and harm are not in themselves a reason to make or keep things illegal. But the available evidence persuades many supporters of legalisation that cannabis consumption should still be discouraged. The simplest way to do so is to keep the drug expensive; children and heavy users, both good candidates for deterrence, are particularly likely to be cost sensitive. And keeping prices up through taxes has political appeal that goes beyond public health. Backers of California’s main legalisation measure make much of the annual $1 billion that could flow to state coffers.

Setting the right level for the tax, though, is challenging. Go too low and you encourage use. Aim too high and you lose one of the other benefits of legalisation: closing down a criminal black market.

Comparing Colorado and Washington illustrates the trade-off. Colorado has set its pot taxes fairly low, at 28% (including an existing sales tax). It has also taken a relaxed approach to licensing sellers; marijuana dispensaries outnumber Starbucks. Washington initially set its taxes higher, at an effective rate of 44%, and was much more conservative with licences for growers and vendors. That meant that when its legalisation effort got under way in 2014, the average retail price was about $25 per gram, compared with Colorado’s $15. The price of black-market weed (mostly an inferior product) in both states was around $10.

The effect on crime seems to have been as one would predict. Colorado’s authorities reckon licensed sales—about 90 tonnes a year—now meet 70% of total estimated demand, with much of the rest covered by a “grey” market of legally home-grown pot illegally sold. In Washington licensed sales accounted for only about 30% of the market in 2014, according to Roger Roffman of the University of Washington. Washington’s large, untaxed and rather wild-west “medical” marijuana market accounts for a lot of the rest. Still, most agree that Colorado’s lower prices have done more to make life hard for organised crime.

Uruguay also plans to set prices comparable to those that illegal dealers offer. “We intend to compete with the illicit market in price, quality and safety,” says Milton Romani, secretary-general of the National Drug Board. To avoid this competitively priced supply encouraging more use, the country will limit the amount that can be sold to any particular person over a month. In America, where such restrictions (along with the register of consumers needed to police them) would probably be rejected, it will be harder to stop prices for legal grass low enough to shut down the black market from also encouraging greater use. Indeed, since legalisation consumption in Colorado appears to have edged up a few percentage points among both adults and under-21s, who in theory shouldn’t be able to get hold of it at all; that said, a similar trend was apparent before legalisation, and the data are sparse.

If, starved of sales, the black market shrinks beyond a point of no return, taxes could later go up, restoring the deterrent. There is precedent for this. When the prohibition of alcohol ended in 1933, Joseph Choate of America’s Federal Alcohol Control Administration recommended “keeping the tax burden on legal alcoholic beverages comparatively low in the earlier post-prohibition period in order to permit the legal industry to offer more severe competition to its illegal competitor.” After three years, he estimated, with the mob “driven from business, the tax burden could be gradually increased.” And so it was (see chart 3).



Those taxes reflected the strength of what was for sale; taxing whiskey more than beer made sense as a deterrent to drunkenness. Here, so far, the regulation of cannabis lags behind. The levies on price or weight used by America’s legalising states are easy to administer, but could push consumers towards stronger strains. In the various lines sold by Medicine Man, for example, the concentration of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the chemical compound that gets you high, varies from 7% to over 20%. The prices, though, are mostly the same, and there is no difference in tax. Some like it weak, but on the whole, Ms Vander Veer says, the stronger varieties are what people ask for. If they cost no more, why not? The average potency on sale in Denver is now about 18%, roughly three times the strength of the smuggled Mexican weed that once dominated the market.

Barbara Brohl, the head of Colorado’s Department of Revenue, says THC-based taxation is something the state may try in the future. But the speed with which the regulatory apparatus was set up—sales began just over a year after the ballot initiative passed in November 2012—meant that they had to move fast. “We’re building the airplane while we’re in the air,” she says. Uruguay, clear that it wants to be “a regulated market, not a free market”, as Mr Romani puts it, plans a more direct way of discouraging the stronger stuff. Dispensaries will sell just three government-approved strains of cannabis, their potencies ranging from 5% to 14%.

Another issue for regulators is the increasing number of ways in which cannabis is consumed. The star performer of the legalised pot market is the “edibles” sector, which includes THC-laced chocolates, drinks, lollipops and gummy bears. There are also concentrated “tinctures” to be dropped onto the tongue and vaping products to be consumed through e-cigarettes. Foria, a California company, sells a THC-based personal lubricant (“For all my vagina knew, I was laying on one of San Diego’s fabulous beaches!” reads one testimonial).

The popularity of these products looks set to grow; users appreciate the discretion with which they can be consumed, producers like the ease with which their production can be automated (no hand-picking of buds required). But edibles, in particular, make it easy to take more than intended. A hit on a joint kicks in quickly; cakes or drinks can take an hour or two. Inexperienced users sometimes have a square of chocolate, feel nothing and wolf down the rest of the bar—only to spend the next 12 hours believing they are under attack by spiders from Mars.



The three cannabis-related deaths in Colorado all followed the consumption of edibles. Hospitals in the state also report seeing an increasing number of children who have eaten their parents’ grown-up gummy bears. In response the authorities have tightened their rules on packaging, demanding clearer labelling, childproof containers, and more obvious demarcation of portions.

A second concern about new ways of taking the drug is that they could attract new customers. Ms Vander Veer says that edibles offer a “good way to get comfortable with how THC makes you feel”; women, older people and first-timers are particularly keen on them. If you see cannabis as a harmless high, this is not a problem. If you want to keep usage low, it is.

The innovation seen to date is just a taste of what entrepreneurs might eventually dream up. On landing in Denver—which, uncoincidentally, is now the most popular spring-break destination for American students—you can call a limo from 420AirportPickup which will drive you to a dispensary and then let you smoke in the back while you cruise on to a cannabis-friendly hotel (some style themselves “bud ‘n’ breakfast”). You can take a marijuana cookery course, or sign up for joint-rolling lessons. Dispensaries offer coupons, loyalty points, happy hours and all the other tricks in the marketing book.

Legalisation has also paved the way for better branding. Snoop Dogg, a rap artist, has launched a range of smartly packaged products called “Leafs by Snoop”. The estate of Bob Marley has lent its name to a range of “heirloom marijuana strains” supposedly smoked by the man himself.

Roll up for the mystery tour

Branding means advertising, which may itself promote use. Many in America would like to follow Uruguay’s example and ban all cannabis advertising, but the constitution stands in their way. When Colorado banned advertising in places where more than 30% of the audience is likely to be under-age cannabis companies objected on the grounds of their right to free speech, though the suit was later dropped.

As well as moving into advertising, the industry is growing more professional in its lobbying. In legalisation initiatives the “Yes” side increasingly outspends the “No” side: in Alaska by four to one, in Oregon by more than 50 to one. Rich backers help—in California Sean Parker, an internet billionaire, has donated $1m to the cause. In some states, ballot initiatives have been heavily influenced by the very people who are hoping to sell the drugs once they are legalised. In November 2015 voters in Ohio soundly rejected a measure that would have granted a cannabis-cultivation oligopoly to the handful of firms that had backed it.

Worries about regulatory capture will increase along with the size of the businesses standing to gain. Big alcohol and tobacco firms currently deny any interest in the industry. But they said the same in the 1960s and 1970s, a time when Philip Morris and British American Tobacco, it has since been revealed, were indeed looking at the market. Brendan Kennedy, the chief executive of Privateer Holdings, a private-equity firm focused on the marijuana industry, says that several alcohol distributors have invested in American cannabis firms.

Even without such intervention big companies are likely to emerge. Sam Kamin, a law professor at Denver University who helped draft Colorado’s regulations, suspects that eventual federal legalisation, which would make interstate trade legal, could well see cannabis cultivation become something like the business of growing hops, virtually all of which come from Washington, Oregon and Idaho. Big farms supplying a national market would be much cheaper than the current local-warehouse model, driving local suppliers out of the market, or at least into a niche.

The industry has so far been helped by the fact that many on the left who might normally campaign against selling harmful substances to young people are vocal supporters of legalisation. That could change with the growth of a business lobby that, although understanding that an explosion in demand would trigger a backlash, may have little long-term interest in restraint. The prospect of such a lobby could also serve as an incentive for states to take the initiative on legalisation, rather than waiting for their citizens to demand it. Fine-tuning Colorado’s regime, Mr Kamin says, has been made harder by the fact that the ballot of 2012 enshrined legalisation in the state constitution. Other states “might want [their rules] to be defined instead by legislation, not citizens’ initiative,” suggests Ms Brohl, the Colorado tax chief.



Different places will legalise in different ways; some may never legalise at all; some will make mistakes they later think better of. But those that legalise early may prove to have a lasting influence well beyond their borders, establishing norms that last for a long while. It behoves them to think through what needs regulating, and what does not, with care. Over-regulation risks losing some of the main benefits of liberalisation. But as alcohol and tobacco show, tightening regimes at a later date can be very difficult indeed.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21692873-growing-number-countries-are-deciding-ditch-prohibition-what-comes/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




New Hampshire and beyond: Trumped and Berned

Bernie Sanders’ economic policy: A vote for what?

Trump’s German roots: Kallstadt’s king

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

Libertarians: Live free, or try

Climate change: Supreme emissions

The defence budget: Mr Carter places his bets

Lobsters: Shell shock

Lexington: Rush-ing around





Articles Sections Next

New Hampshire and beyond

Trumped and Berned

A tycoon selling snake-oil and an aged leftie won the first primary. Oh dear

Feb 13th 2016 | NASHUA, NEW HAMPSHIRE | From the print edition



THE nativist rage Donald Trump is whooping up across America translates into actual votes—lots of them. So does the left-wing populism with which Bernie Sanders is thrilling an expanding chunk of the Democratic Party. These were the messages of the New Hampshire primary held on February 9th; and their repercussions, blown from the icy New England state down south and out west, where America’s quarrelsome primary contest moves to next, could be tremendous.

Mr Trump hoovered up 35% of the vote in New Hampshire. John Kasich, the governor of Ohio, came second with 16%. That means the Republican establishment still has no answer to Mr Trump’s assault on conservative ideology and their party’s good name; or to Ted Cruz, an ultra-conservative troublemaker who won in Iowa and came third in New Hampshire. Mr Kasich is too pragmatic and, in a fraught time, too genial for most Republican primary voters. Marco Rubio, a likelier establishment champion who was widely expected to surge from the mainstream pack, did abysmally. He won less than 11%, which put him fifth behind Jeb Bush, the ridiculed scion of a divisive dynasty.

Democratic Party bosses were similarly confounded. They think Mr Sanders could not win a general election; they are probably right. The veteran senator vows to break up banks, make college education free, squeeze the pips out of rich people, then squeeze them again. He calls himself a democratic socialist; most Americans hear only the second word, and shudder. Yet he won 60% of the vote in New Hampshire, which represented one of the biggest victories in a contested Democratic primary—and trouble for Hillary Clinton.

Mr Sanders trounced the Democratic front-runner in almost every voter group. Exit polls suggested he won over 80% of younger voters, which was startling, if predicted, given how college crowds love to “feel the Bern”. He also beat Mrs Clinton among men and women, college graduates and non-graduates, those with guns and those without. The only voters who mainly stayed loyal to Mrs Clinton were high-earners and those aged 65 and over.

At an almost-hysterically upbeat defeat rally, Mrs Clinton acknowledged that she needed to do more to win the love of youngsters. But it is the votes of Hispanics and, especially, blacks that will now concern her most. African-Americans, who have hitherto favoured Mrs Clinton over Mr Sanders by 3:1, represent half of all Democrats in South Carolina, which will hold its primary on February 27th. So long as Mrs Clinton can keep them onside, she will probably win the nomination. Yet, given the immensity of Mr Sanders’s victory, that seems a bit less certain than it did.

He had a couple of big advantages in New Hampshire. It is crammed with white lefties, his main target audience, and next-door to Vermont, which he has represented in Washington for a quarter of a century. Yet the result also showed how fundamental Mrs Clinton’s weaknesses are. She represents continuity, and voters want change; exit polls in New Hampshire suggest that 42% of Democrats want a more left-wing president than Barack Obama. They, naturally, are another group Mr Sanders swept. He promises a “political revolution”; Mrs Clinton pledges to secure Mr Obama’s legacy. With a little tinkering, that should not be a losing promise; the president is extremely popular among Democrats. The trouble for Mrs Clinton is that, despite her cool head, tough streak and ironclad grip on policy, she lacks the subtlety and easy charisma that lesser politicians would deploy to change gears.

She has charm, but of a programmatic sort. Having failed, so far, to fire up many women with the promise of America’s first woman president, she is struggling even to get them to like her. A persistent controversy over her use of a private e-mail account as secretary of state has made that harder, by playing to her reputation for being rather shifty. Her supporters decry both, reputation and scandal, as malicious Republican slander, of which there has been plenty aimed at Mrs Clinton. But the impression endures, and there is little reason to think black and Hispanic voters, whom Mr Sanders is about to lovebomb with revolutionary promises, will be immune to it. “I worry that Hillary is dishonest,” said Reina Rodriguez, a retired teacher emerging from a polling station in the New Hampshire town of Nashua, after casting her vote for Mr Sanders. She thought the senator “a beautiful politician, a true democrat”. Ominously for Mrs Clinton, she was speaking in Spanish.

If Mrs Clinton must rethink, her old New York buddy, Mr Trump, can rejoice. In Iowa, the property tycoon performed less well than opinion polls suggested he should. That implied his support was flaky, because the working-class whites who flock to his rallies, to hear him crack jokes, insult people and promise border walls, do not flock to vote. Mr Trump did little to salve that concern. He campaigned less in New Hampshire than almost any of his rivals, spending only 30 days in the state and little money. Much of what he spent went on aviation fuel and red baseball caps emblazoned with his Reaganite slogan, “Make America Great Again”. His campaign had the look of a Potemkin effort, cobbled together in a half-hearted bid to show journalists he was serious. Mr Bush, by comparison, spent 57 days in the state; he and the super-PAC supporting him, Right to Rise, spent $30m on television advertising there, chiefly to attack his mainstream rivals, Mr Rubio, Mr Kasich and Chris Christie, the governor of New Jersey.



America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

For Republican patricians and moneymen, Mr Rubio’s failure was an even bigger shock than Mr Trump’s win. Had the senator from Florida merely repeated his performance in Iowa, by beating his mainstream rivals convincingly, he would have been saluted as the man to foil Messrs Trump and Cruz—and his campaign deluged with money. That could still happen. Mr Rubio is suffering from a perception that he is too green to be president. An ill-timed gaffe in a televised debate on February 6th, in which Mr Rubio responded to Mr Christie’s accusation that he was rote-learned and untested by robotically repeating a rehearsed attack on Mr Obama, appears to have reinforced that. Yet he remains clever and attractive—and if he is not to be the mainstream Republican champion, it is not at all clear who is.

Mr Bush has money, but seems as alien to the Republican mood as Mr Kasich. Mr Christie, who won a pathetic 7% of the New Hampshire vote, has dropped out. Worse for the patricians, the identity of the putative anti-Trump, anti-Cruz candidate, for whom about 40% of the primary vote is available, now cannot be settled until after the party’s South Carolina primary on February 20th. That is excellent for Mr Trump and Mr Cruz, who spent similar time and less money in New Hampshire than the Donald. They can concentrate on building their campaigns and racking up delegates. Mr Rubio and the rest are meanwhile locked in a mutually enfeebling brawl.

Not that any of them is likely to do particularly well in South Carolina. Opinion polls put Mr Trump just as far ahead there as he was in New Hampshire, with 36% of the vote. They put Mr Cruz, with 20%, securely in second place. All the mainstreamers are lagging far behind.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21692893-tycoon-selling-snake-oil-and-aged-leftie-won-first-primary-oh-dear-trumped-and/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bernie Sanders’ economic policy

A vote for what?

Health-care costs and high taxes would sink the Sanders economic plan

Feb 13th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition

Power to the tax planners

HOW radical is Bernie Sanders? The self-declared socialist likes to remind voters that many of his policies—say, on health care, or on paid family leave—simply copy most of the rest of the rich world. Compared with left-wingers there—Jeremy Corbyn in Britain, for instance—Mr Sanders is no socialist. It is freewheeling America which puts Mr Sanders on the far-left. The truly socialist thing about Mr Sanders’s admirably detailed economic plan is not its goals. It is that it is completely unworkable.

Under President Sanders taxes, particularly on high earners, would soar. Mr Sanders wants to make public universities free, increase infrastructure spending and expand Social Security (pensions). His most ambitious policy calls for the government, rather than private insurers, to pay health-care bills. That would cost $14 trillion over a decade, requiring new taxes on most workers worth 8.4% of their income.

Expanding Social Security means a further big tax rise for those making more than $250,000. Income-tax rates would become more steeply progressive, too. Totting up all the levies, the top marginal rate of federal tax—which would be levied on households earning more than $10m—would rise to about 67%. (Adding in state taxes would take it higher still.)

That is not without precedent: in the 1970s, the top rate was around 70%. This would probably dent growth, and it is at the high end of estimates of the rate which maximises revenue. Taxes might have to go higher still. Mr Sanders plans to tax capital gains as ordinary income. High earners can decide whether or not to sell assets, making this tax easy to dodge. Partly because of this, the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, an advocacy group, reckons Mr Sanders has highballed his revenue estimates by $3 trillion over a decade.

Mr Sanders knows that soaking the rich can get him only so far. He is also banking on health-care costs tumbling. Health spending per person is two-and-a-half times the average for the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries. The immense bargaining power of a government buyer could help to control waste. Medicare, government-funded health insurance for the over-65s, already provides care at a lower cost than private insurers. Mr Sanders predicts $6.3 trillion of savings over a decade.

That looks like wishful thinking. A costing of Mr Sanders’s plans by Kenneth Thorpe of Emory University, using more conservative assumptions, found that the plan was underfunded by nearly $1.1 trillion (or 6% of GDP) per year. If Mr Thorpe is right, higher taxes will be required to make the sums add up. In 2014 Mr Sanders’ own state, Vermont, abandoned a plan for a single-payer system on the basis that the required tax rises would be too great.

Getting health-care costs down is easier than it sounds. Mr Sanders hopes to save a bucketload on administration. But 20% of health spending flows to doctors, nurses and the like. A study published in Health Affairs, a journal, in June 2015 found that the average nurse earns about 40% more, and the average doctor about 50% more, than comparably educated and experienced people in other fields. To bring costs down to British or Canadian levels, these salaries would have to fall. Half a million Americans work in the private health-insurance industry, which would shrink or disappear if Mr Sanders had his way. His plan is “radical in a way that no legislation has ever been”, argues Henry Aaron of Brookings, a think-tank.

Mr Sanders has bold plans for monetary policy and banking, too. He supports a movement headed by Rand Paul, an erstwhile Republican runner, to get politicians more involved in decisions on interest rates, because he thinks Fed policy is too tight. To loosen it, he would bar the Fed from raising rates when unemployment is above 4%.

Mr Sanders’ plans tend to suffer from a fallacy of composition. Although the average American might not mind paying higher taxes instead of a health-insurance premium, some—such as firms that do not provide health insurance—would face big losses. With such concentrated costs, Mr Sanders’s plans would have no chance of making it past Congress, even an improbably friendly one.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21692895-health-care-costs-and-high-taxes-would-sink-sanders-economic-plan-vote-what/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trump’s German roots

Kallstadt’s king

How the German heritage he has hidden shaped Donald Trump

Feb 13th 2016 | CHICAGO | From the print edition



MANY ingredients went into making Donald Trump. An under-appreciated one is the distinctively German, or rather Kallstadtian, tinge to his family history. Mr Trump is descended from German immigrants who arrived in America penniless and succeeded quickly through hard work, a free relationship with the truth, opportunism, shrewd business tactics and a great sense of family loyalty. Fred Trump, Donald’s father, who was a strict taskmaster with all his five children, told his three sons to be “killers”.

Fred Trump’s father, Friedrich Trump, came to America in 1885 as a 16-year-old from Kallstadt, a village in Rhineland-Palatinate, a region known for wine and stuffed pig’s stomach. After working for a few years as a barber in New York, he headed west and opened a restaurant in a mining town in Washington state where workmen were treated to hearty food, liquor and assignations with women in the back rooms of the establishment. Having amassed a nest-egg, Friedrich returned to Kallstadt to marry Elisabeth Christ, the girl next door, whom he took with him to America. Elisabeth was homesick, so they soon went back to Germany. Yet the authorities refused to let them repatriate because they said Friedrich, who was an American citizen by then, had dodged his military service. The young Trumps were thus forced to emigrate to America. In 1905 their first son, Fred, was born in New York.

When Fred Trump was 11 America entered the first world war and a period of intense anti-German sentiment followed, abating in the interwar years and then flaring up again during the second world war. German books were burnt, sauerkraut was renamed “liberty cabbage” and frankfurters became “hot dogs”. Friedrich died of Spanish flu in 1918 at the age of only 49 and left Fred and his mother a tidy sum of money, which they used to set up a company, E. Trump & Son, and invested in property. After graduation from high school in 1923, Fred started to work full-time in construction. He realised quickly that his German origins could be a hindrance, so he pretended that his parents were Swedish, though his mother spoke English with a thick German accent and baked Apfeltorte for family reunions.

Donald was Fred Trump’s favourite child, and followed him into the building business. “Fred taught Donald a lot and he was a very good student,” says Gwenda Blair, the author of a book on three generations of Trumps. Part of Donald Trump’s success in the casino and property business was down to his early understanding of the power of branding. “Trump” lends itself to big lettering on buildings because it suggests luck and success. Like his father, though, he thought his German origins might not endear him to possible backers. He stuck to Fred’s tale and wrote in his autobiography, “Trump: The Art of the Deal”, that his father was of Swedish descent. Challenged on this point in an interview with Vanity Fair in 1990, he replied: “My father was not German; my father’s parents were German…Swedish, and really sort of all over Europe.”

The Trumps were typical of German-Americans, the country’s biggest single ethnic group, in trying so hard to assimilate and obscuring their origins. Yet Donald Trump has occasionally changed his story. Simone Wendel, a filmmaker from Kallstadt, visited him at Trump Tower a few years ago for her documentary “Kings of Kallstadt”, a portrait of this village of 1,200 inhabitants, which also produced the Heinz family, founders of the Ketchup empire. He was rather reserved at first during the meeting, says Ms Wedel, but he warmed to the topic when she showed him photographs of his grandparents and of his grandfather’s modest house. “I love Kallstadt,” says Mr Trump in her documentary. “Ich bin ein Kallstädter.”

The braggadocious Mr Trump has probably more Kallstadt in him than he knows. The people of Kallstadt are affectionately known as Brulljesmacher, meaning braggart in the regional dialect. Were he to become president, Mr Trump would not be the first occupant of the White House of German descent. Dwight Eisenhower’s family was originally called Eisenhauer and hailed from Karlsbrunn, close to the German-French border. Herbert Hoover’s ancestors were called Huber and came from Baden in southern Germany. They both made little of their origins—but they did not go so far as to invent new ones.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21692909-how-german-heritage-he-has-hidden-shaped-donald-trump-kallstadts-king/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The campaigns

Heard on the trail

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



Valentine’s day

“I still love New Hampshire.”

Hillary Clinton after her loss.

Girls just wanna have fun

“When you’re young, you’re thinking, ‘Where are the boys?’ The boys are with Bernie.”

Feminist icon Gloria Steinem dismisses millennial women who support Bernie. HBO, “Real Time with Bill Maher”

Fourth is the new first

“This campaign is not dead.”

Jeb Bush hits 11% in New Hampshire.

Déjà vu all over again

“There it is. There it is. The memorised 25-second speech. There it is, everybody.”

Chris Christie points out that Marco Rubio has used the same line four times during the debate.

50 Shades of Christie

“I’ll beat her rear end on that stage.”

Mr Christie wanted to debate Mrs Clinton too, before he dropped out.

The Invisible Man

“I could drop my pants. Moon the whole crowd. Everybody would be aghast, except the press…would never notice.”

Mr Bush would like some more coverage, please. Boston Globe

Cicero it ain’t

“She said a terrible thing. You know what she said? Shout it out, because I don’t want to say…OK, you’re not allowed to say and I never expect to hear that from you again…She said: ‘He’s a pussy.’ That’s terrible.”

Donald Trump exploits to the full a shouted comment from a female supporter that Ted Cruz is soft on torture.

Go ahead, make my day

“Please run.”Rick Tyler, Ted Cruz’s spokesman, reckons Michael Bloomberg’s still-being-mulled-over candidacy would help his man. The Financial Times

Animal House

“And then somebody complains when, you know, a terrorist gets waterboarded, which quite frankly is no different than what happens on college campuses and frat houses every day.”

Eric Trump, a Georgetown alumnus, defends his father’s enthusiasm for waterboarding. Fox News

A blessing

“Sometimes when I am on a stage like this, I wish that we weren’t married, then I could say what I really think...I don’t mean that in a negative way. I’m happy.”

Bill Clinton.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21692896-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Libertarians

Live free, or try

New Hampshire’s Free State Project reaches critical mass

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

Porcupining for freedom

AFTER successful careers in engineering, Dan and Carol McGuire could have pursued retirements of highbrow ease—the couple’s interests range from American history to collecting modern art. Instead they moved across the country from Washington state in response to an essay by a young libertarian, Jason Sorens, arguing that if enough believers in limited government moved to a single state (ideally one with a small population and a “live and let live” ethos), they could exert real influence.

That essay spawned the “Free State Project” (FSP), whose early members voted to make New Hampshire their testbed. This was a nod to the state’s modest scale, its culture of Yankee self-reliance and low taxes, and its unusually accessible political system, starting with the state’s House of Representatives, whose 400 members answer to a few thousand constituents each, and are paid $100 a year. The FSP devised a pledge for activists to sign, by which they agreed to move to New Hampshire if 19,999 other libertarians made the same commitment. Once that critical mass was reached, FSP members pledged to make their own trek within five years. The FSP announced on February 3rd that the 20,000 target has been reached.

In the past decade 2,000 pioneers could not wait and moved anyway. A total of about 40 Free Staters have been elected to New Hampshire’s statehouse at various points, among them the McGuires, husband-and-wife Republican legislators who represent overlapping districts. Free Staters have helped to legalise gay marriage and ease rules on everything from home schooling to selling unpasteurised milk.

Some wins were easy. A repeal of all state knife laws passed in 2010: Mr McGuire shows off a now-legal switch-blade that can be opened with one hand, noting that such knives are handy tools for paramedics. Mrs McGuire is proud of a law making it simpler for farmers to slaughter their own chickens and rabbits. The couple credit Free Staters with making New Hampshire juries more aware of their right to throw out cases that seem to offend natural justice, under the centuries-old principle of nullification. Future battles loom over school choice and over using public money to send children to private schools.

Free Staters are yet to overcome national partisan divisions. In 2015 New Hampshire’s Democratic governor vetoed a law making it legal to carry a gun without a licence, backed by conservatives of all stripes, some of them libertarians. Interviewed at her suggestion in a smoke-filled Manchester cigar bar, the FSP’s president, Carla Gericke, stresses that some Free Staters have run for office as Democrats (though they are a small minority). One Democratic Free Stater is currently trying to legalise prostitution. Others are moved by internet privacy and alternative currencies such as bitcoin.

Ms Gericke would like to see New Hampshire become a “mix between Alaska and Amsterdam on personal freedoms, and Hong Kong on economic freedoms”. That is a stretch. As a fine place to live New Hampshire attracts lots of newcomers, many of them more conventional than the FSP’s shock-troops. Still, Ms Gericke hopes that are allies on the way. Pledge-signers have e-mailed to say that their homes are on the market, she says. New Hampshire boasts a property firm founded by a Free Stater (and former member of the state House) to help project members move. It is called Porcupine Real Estate, after a favourite libertarian animal, honoured as a beast which is dangerous only when attacked.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21692908-new-hampshires-free-state-project-reaches-critical-mass-live-free-or-try/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Climate change

Supreme emissions

The nine justices press pause on one of the president’s proudest achievements

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



AMERICA’S bold effort to cut carbon-dioxide emissions from power plants is on hold. On February 9th the Supreme Court, divided five to four along partisan lines, putting the brakes on Barack Obama’s flagship environmental policy, pending a possible ruling this summer. The plan forms the core of America’s recent commitments to cut emissions, made at the UN climate talks in Paris.

Power plants are America’s largest source of greenhouse gases, accounting for just under a third of all emissions. The Clean Power Plan, under the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), gives orders to each state which, considered together, should amount to removing 870m tonnes of carbon dioxide from power-station emissions by 2030 (as measured against 2005 levels). The regulations give states some flexibility over how and when to cut emissions. But each one is required to submit plans by 2018 and to show some progress on them by 2022. If the goals are met, the reduction by 2030 will be equivalent to taking 80m cars off the road.

The legal basis for the regulation was thought to lie in a ruling by the Supreme Court in 2007, which declared CO2 a pollutant, thereby placing it under the EPA’s remit. The court upheld most of an agency rule requiring new or rebuilt factories and power plants to use the “best available technology” to limit their emissions of greenhouse gases in 2014. That year the justices also supported the EPA’s regulation of pollution that drifts over state lines. But the agency was rebuked for its overreach in 2015: the Supreme Court reprimanded it for regulating mercury, arsenic and other substances emitted by power plants without taking proper account of the costs. The Court’s new order suggests it may eventually conclude that the president has again exceeded his authority.

States, utilities and mining companies have declared the plan to be too much, too soon. The attorney-general of West Virginia, one of the states opposing it, said he was “thrilled” after the court issued its stay. Richard Lazarus, from Harvard Law School, calls the intervention “extraordinary”. Although compliance with the regulation is not required until 2022, the deadline for submitting first plans to cut back on emissions was supposed to be September. (States also had the option then to ask for more time.) That date will now almost certainly need to be pushed back.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21692907-nine-justices-press-pause-one-presidents-proudest-achievements-supreme/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The defence budget

Mr Carter places his bets

New technology, deterring Russia and fighting Islamic State go hand in hand

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



ASH Carter may be one of the most formidably qualified defence secretaries to preside over the Pentagon, but the $582.7 billion 2017 budget request sent to Congress on February 9th is likely to be his only shot at creating a lasting legacy. After December’s two-year budget deal there will be less squabbling over funding levels than in recent years. But because this defence budget will not become law until after the election of a new president, it will need bipartisan support for Mr Carter’s vision to survive intact.

Last week Mr Carter outlined the strategic thinking that had informed his decisions. Seen from the Pentagon, the world, he says, looks “dramatically different” from how it has for the past 25 years. He identifies five challenges: the return of great power competition with Russian aggression in Europe and China’s rise threatening the stability of the Asia-Pacific region; North Korea as a nuclear-armed rogue state; the continuing malign intentions of Iran despite the nuclear deal; and the “tumour” of jihadist terrorism, above all in the form of Islamic State (IS), “metastasising” around the world.

There is nothing controversial about that list, but it means that the Pentagon must be able to deter sophisticated armed forces who are striving (quite successfully) to erode America’s traditional technological superiority; it must credibly reassure those allies who feel vulnerable to regional bullies; and at the same time it must relentlessly counter a variety of ever more potent threats posed by non-state groups.

Even with rising spending that would be daunting. But this budget is already $22 billion below what had been projected last year, so money will be tight (in a half-trillion-dollar sort of way). Mr Carter’s biggest bet is on the Pentagon’s ability to deliver the future technologies that will maintain America’s military advantage.

To that end, research and development is to be boosted by 4% over the previous year, to $71.8 billion. In the shorter term, the Strategic Capabilties Office, created by Mr Carter in 2012, is tasked with getting cutting-edge kit into the field as fast as possible. Mr Carter is particularly excited about all kinds of “swarming autonomous vehicles” to overwhelm opponents and inexpensive “hypervelocity smart projectiles” that can be fired from existing artillery to shoot down incoming missiles.

In the meantime, current threats have to be addressed. The European Reassurance Initiative, a response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, is getting $3.4 billion, a fourfold increase over last year to rotate more combat brigades in and out of Europe and position a lot more tanks and armoured fighting vehicles.

The campaign to destroy Islamic State is getting $7.5 billion, a 50% bump from last year. In addition, because of the rate at which smart bombs and laser-guided rockets are being used against the jihadists, $1.8 billion will buy 45,000 more of them. The fight against IS has also earned the venerable A-10 “tankbuster” a popular reprieve. So devastating is it against low-tech enemies that it will soldier on until 2022.

Aside from politics, the threat to Mr Carter’s budget comes less from the things he wants to do—which include spending $7 billion on cybersecurity—but from the difficulty of finding cuts elsewhere needed to pay for them. He proposes small reductions in a raft of legacy programmes with the some further savings from big-ticket items, such as the navy’s controversial Littoral Combat Ship (one fewer next year, down from 52 to 40 in total) and the air force’s F-35A Joint Strike Fighter (down by five next year, but 45 over five years).

One solution to the funding gap suggested by congressional Republicans is to raise the $58.8 billion Overseas Contingency Operations budget, a useful slush fund, by about $15 billion. A deal between the next president and Congress to lift the 2011 Budget Control Act caps before 2021 is also likely. If a successor with more money endorses this plans he has set out, Mr Carter will be happy.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21692892-new-technology-deterring-russia-and-fighting-islamic-state-go-hand-hand-mr-carter/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lobsters

Shell shock

Maine’s lobster industry is booming. It is fearful of hot water

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



NOT all that long ago, “You could set your watch to when the first lobsters would start moulting,” says Carl Wilson, head of Maine’s bureau of marine science. When the forsythia bloomed, spring lobsters would soon move offshore. Lobster boats have radar, sonar and other electronic aids, but Steve Train, a lobsterman for more than 30 years, still likes to keep an eye on apple and cherry blossoms. “And if we start catching mackerel off the dock, then usually we get shedders,” he says. (Lobsters grow by shedding their shells.) “New-shell lobsters come between two weeks and 20 days later”. Those natural patterns are starting to break down.



Early moulting in 2012 caused a glut in lobsters and a drop in prices. At the same time, there was a decline in cod and other natural predators of the lobster larva. This allowed the lobster population to flourish. Big hauls, or landings, are now the norm. To accommodate the larger volume, dealers began looking in earnest at overseas markets, especially Asia. Maine’s lobster exports to China have tripled since 2012. Chinese new year in February is an especially busy time for shippers. In Chinese lobster is called long xia, or dragon prawn, which has an auspicious ring to it. Tom Adams, owner of one of the larger live-shippers to China, says the critters must be carefully packed to survive the long journey.

But Mr Adams, as bullish as he is on lobsters, is worried about the long term. The lobster industry collapsed in southern New England and the Long Island Sound because of warming waters. The state’s 6,000 lobstermen, most of whom work on family-owned boats, are already protective of their lobsters. In 1872 they stopped catching egg-bearing females. They notch tails to identify good breeders. The state has minimum and maximum size restrictions to protect the young and the robust. Diving and dragging was banned in the 1960s. Only traps are permitted, which must have escape hatches for tiddlers and be biodegradable. The industry is mostly self-regulated. “I throw ten to 20 back for every one I keep,” said Mr Train. This is as well-managed as fisheries get. But if ocean temperatures rise, that may not be enough.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21692897-maines-lobster-industry-booming-it-fearful-hot-water-shell-shock/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

Rush-ing around

To understand the Republican race, turn on the radio

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



TO MAKE sense of the Republican race for the White House, here is a short cut: get in a car, turn on the radio and drive. On the face of it, the conservative activists tasked with choosing the Republican Party’s next presidential candidate are in a confounding mood. Until about five minutes ago, the received wisdom was that grassroots Republicans prize ideological purity above all—yet in the New Hampshire primary on February 9th they handed a thumping win to Donald Trump, a New York billionaire who invited Hillary Clinton to his most recent wedding and thinks government should play a much bigger role in providing health care.

The same wisdom holds that in a time of anti-establishment rage, voters are desperate for plain-spoken authenticity. But on February 1st activists handed victory in the Iowa caucuses to Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a Princeton and Harvard-educated lawyer whose wife works for Goldman Sachs, and whose highly polished campaign speeches lurch from sermonising—“Father God…awaken the Body of Christ, that we might pull back from the abyss”—to Ivy League pomposity, as when he tells crowds that this election represents an “inflection point” in history.

Mr Cruz did well in New Hampshire too, coming in third even though the state’s Republicans are less pious and more live-and-let-live than most. At snow-buffeted campaign rallies, a surprising number of New Hampshire conservatives said they liked both Mr Trump and Mr Cruz, two very different candidates who between them eventually scooped nearly half the state’s Republican primary vote.

A key to this puzzle can be found on conservative talk radio. It is a world of its own, built around codes of tribal identity, grievance and scorn for The Other. Each day such radio stars as Rush Limbaugh, Mark Levin or Glenn Beck describe a simple world, in which good guys would win and America’s foes tremble if only its rulers were braver (talk radio is keen on Mr Trump’s plan to bar Muslims from America, and likes Mr Cruz’s talk of carpet-bombing Islamic radicals). On talk radio Barack Obama is an America-hating, anti-white racist, and Republican Party bosses his collaborators. Even the advertisements seethe with paranoia, promoting gold coins as a hedge against economic collapse, or ammunition and survival provisions for those wishing to prepare themselves for civil unrest.

In recent elections, notably in 2008 and 2012, talk-radio hosts could not prevent the nomination of candidates whom they considered traitors. For Republicans, that was a relief: hewing to talk radio’s sour, chauvinist world view is no way to win a general election (for all their clout, even the top-rated talk-radio hosts pull in just 13m listeners a week, most of them older white men).

One way of summing up the crisis facing Republicans in 2016 is this. Mr Trump and Mr Cruz are each, in their own way, tribunes of talk-radio America. Mr Trump has the medium’s temperament down pat—one minute playing the snarling demagogue, and the next gleefully hurling schoolboy insults at rivals. Mr Cruz is a master of talk radio’s politics of insinuation, suggesting that Mr Obama has yet to defeat Islamic State not because that fight is complicated and hard, but because he is an “apologist for radical Islam”. No plausible candidate with a broader, sunnier message has yet emerged from the Republican pack.

Talk radio despises the Republican who came second in New Hampshire, Governor John Kasich of Ohio. Mr Kasich may have balanced budgets and put forward conservative priorities. No matter. Along with such figures as Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, Mr Kasich is derided as a quasi-Democrat. His crime is to defend the pragmatic business of governing. Worse, Mr Kasich often expresses empathy for the poor and those who “live in the shadows”, and says that conservative hardliners lack Christian compassion. Mr Kasich is an interesting man, but he lacks a clear path through the mostly southern states up next.

Beck and call

Not every Trump or Cruz voter is a Rush Limbaugh fan. Mr Trump, in particular, offers (false) hope to many Americans buffeted by such large forces as globalisation, automation, female emancipation, civil rights and cultural change. But talk-radio’s power in this cycle is real. Just consider Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a young Cuban-American raised by working-class migrants, with the knack of advancing sternly conservative policies while expressing personal sympathy for underdogs.

News reports focused on the gaffe that hurt Mr Rubio just before New Hampshire’s primary: a stilted performance in a TV debate when he used the same line on Mr Obama four times. The attack line causing Mr Rubio such trouble was a sop to talk radio. His stump speech used to be about the future, and how 21st-century America needs to equip its citizens to compete with workers anywhere in the world and with machines at home.

More recently, though, to reassure the hard right (who think him soft on immigration) and to quash the idea that as an inexperienced first-term senator he is a second Obama, Mr Rubio has started painting the president as a malign super-villain. On the home-front, he accuses Mr Obama of deliberately transforming America’s “identity”. Turning to foreign policy, he says that Mr Obama sees America as “an arrogant country that needed to be cut down to size, so he guts our military and betrays our allies.” Mr Limbaugh duly praised Mr Rubio this week for saying what other Republicans “do not dare say”.

The coming weeks of gruelling campaigning will show whether Mr Rubio can survive as a candidate. If you watch the senator work a rope-line, his sympathy for The Other—as when he praises the family values of some undocumented migrants—suggests he could be a champion for a more generous, open-minded conservatism. But in this race just now the loudest voices belong to the pinched demagogues.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21692906-understand-republican-race-turn-radio-rush-ing-around/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Economic data in Argentina: An Augean stable

Bello: A time to heal

How the White House race looks from Cuba: The Havana primaries

Latin American currencies: Border bazaar





Articles Sections Next

Economic data in Argentina

An Augean stable

The government is rebuilding its discredited statistics institute

Feb 13th 2016 | BUENOS AIRES | From the print edition



GOVERNMENT bean-counters do not, in most countries, have a reputation for derring-do. But in Argentina some have proved to be martyrs and heroes. Statisticians whose findings displeased Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, the country’s president from 2007 to 2015, were sacked and then prosecuted for their effrontery. “Teams were decimated,” says Jorge Todesca, who has been appointed by the new president, Mauricio Macri, to clean up and repair the government’s statistics institute (INDEC). If they were not fired, independent-minded statisticians “just resigned and left”, or were banished to back rooms without equipment. In 2011 Mr Todesca’s economic-consulting firm was fined 500,000 pesos ($123,000) for publishing an inflation index that contradicted the one put out by INDEC.

It is not the only Augean stable Mr Macri discovered when he succeeded Ms Fernández in December. In addition to an economy in disarray, she and her late husband, Néstor Kirchner, who governed before her, left a state apparatus bloated by patronage and weakened by fiscal incontinence. Some 5-7% of public-sector employees do not bother to show up to work but collect roughly 20 billion pesos ($1.4 billion) in wages, estimates KPMG, an auditing firm. Even Tango 01, a 23-year-old Boeing 757 that serves as the presidential jet, is in disrepair. To get to Davos for the World Economic Forum last month, Mr Macri flew Air France.

The mess at INDEC is one of the worst. That is because Ms Fernández took great pains to hide the consequences of her economic policies. The political appointees who oversaw INDEC leaned on statisticians to manipulate their results, especially the inflation rate. Graciela Bevacqua, a 24-year INDEC veteran, reckoned that consumer prices in January 2007 rose 2.1%. Her superiors demanded a number between 1.2% and 1.5%. They told her to take a holiday, and sacked her when she returned.

INDEC appeared to respond to criticism by devising a new index, the IPCNu, which monitored prices nationally rather than just in Buenos Aires and its suburbs, as the earlier index had done (see chart). But it, too, swerved from reality, reporting inflation rates 50% lower than independent estimates. The Economist stopped publishing INDEC’s data in 2012. A year later Argentina became the first country to be censured by the IMF for misreporting GDP and prices. With poverty rising, in part because of high inflation, INDEC simply stopped reporting the poverty rate in 2014.



Mr Todesca, who appealed successfully against his fine, arrived to find the institute denuded and demoralised. Just 25% of its staff hold university degrees, he says. The team that gathered data on inflation was “destroyed”. On December 30th Mr Macri declared a “national statistical emergency”, a decree that gives Mr Todesca a free hand to appoint new directors and allows INDEC to suspend publication of data on GDP, inflation, poverty and unemployment until the end of 2016. Mr Todesca has rehired boffins who were ousted by the old regime, including Cynthia Pok, who will resume responsibility for poverty and employment data, and Ms Bevacqua, who is overseeing the construction of a new consumer-price index.

By May Ms Pok intends to put together a “basic food basket” and publish its price, a step towards calculating the level of extreme poverty. She will also create a broader measure of poverty, using a bigger basket of goods and services, including transport. And she hopes to have a “multidimensional poverty index”, which is likely to include such things as access to health care and education, by early 2017.

Putting together a new consumer-price index is expected to take until September, even though it will probably be based on the widely-used methodology of the International Labour Organisation and, much like the series used until 2014, on prices just in Buenos Aires and its suburbs. The national samples used in the IPCNu may not be reliable enough. Ms Bevacqua says she needs the time to rebuild the teams that collect and analyse the data. Until a new consumer-price index comes out, INDEC advises Argentines to consult two in which it has some confidence: those published by the city of Buenos Aires and by the province of San Luis. Data on GDP and employment will take longer.

This will complicate the government’s efforts to steady the economy. Its early reforms, including a devaluation of the peso and a reduction in electricity subsidies, are pushing up inflation. To contain it, the government hopes to strike a deal on pay with trade unions. In the absence of reliable inflation data, it is “going into the negotiations blind”, says Juan Luis Bour, chief economist of FIEL, a think-tank. Union leaders want pay rises of at least 30%, their forecast of inflation this year. The government hopes to hold the rate to below 25% but may be forced to offer more.

In the medium term, the statistical overhaul will help to normalise the economy. On February 5th Argentina took a step towards normalisation when the government made an offer to pay foreign bondholders who rejected a debt restructuring proposed by Ms Fernández’s government, which prompted the country to default in 2014. The government plans to submit to economic monitoring by the IMF; that is normal for members of the fund, but Argentina has refused it since 2006. Mr Todesca hopes the IMF will soon lift its statistical censure. “Argentina was once a pioneer in Latin America” in publishing data, he points out. Now, just being one of the crowd would be an achievement.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21692915-government-rebuilding-its-discredited-statistics-institute-augean-stable/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

A time to heal

The promise and pitfalls of health care for all

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



ZIKA, a mosquito-borne virus, is the kind of epidemic that Latin America hoped it had put behind it. Yet in the past nine months Zika has spread to 23 countries in the Americas, infecting some 3m-4m people. The disease, which probably causes babies of infected mothers to be born with small brains, will put primary health providers and hospitals in the region under strain. Yet thanks to a complex but hugely positive transition towards universal health care, they are increasingly capable of coping with it.

Historically, health systems in Latin America have been marked by fragmentation and gross unfairness. The rich have private health insurance and patronise private hospitals, some world-class and others merely overpriced. Workers with formal jobs are enrolled in contributory social-security systems. Unusually, these do not just provide health insurance but also run hospitals. As for the poor, who tend to work in the uninsured informal sector, they have had to rely on the patchy services provided by health ministries, often having to pay for drugs and even for syringes and sheets. Serious illness often bankrupted poor families.

Over the past 30 years this picture has begun to change. Under democracy, many countries have written a right to health care into their constitutions. Latin Americans are living longer and are more in need of treatment for ailments such as cancer and diabetes that were once more prevalent in rich countries. In response, governments are stumbling towards universal health systems. There is no single route to that destination. But most have expanded both the coverage and quality of health care for poorer citizens. On many measures they are succeeding.

One model is that of a tax-financed system with government as sole payer (as in Britain’s National Health Service). That applies, of course, to the famed health service in communist Cuba, as well as in Costa Rica. It also applies in Brazil, where the 1988 constitution set up the Sistema Único de Saúde, merging the health schemes of the Social Security Institute and the health ministry. It has delivered improvements. The problem has been how to finance and staff it in a country where nearly everyone turns to public hospitals for treatment after retirement, even though 25% of the population has private insurance.

Other countries, including Mexico and Peru, have bolted on a subsidised insurance system for the poor. Colombia has taken insurance-based reform further, though not without problems. A new constitution in 1991 proclaimed universal care; a law separated purchasers from providers. The expectation was that two-thirds of the population would be covered by an expanded contributory scheme, says Alejandro Gaviria, the health minister. In practice, half are in a government insurance system in which they pay little or nothing. That encourages workers to remain in the informal economy.



The longevity gap: Does big health care spending pay off

The Constitutional Court ruled in 2008 that the benefit plans offered by each system have to be the same, even though the government scheme has less money. Drug companies got the courts to mandate prescription of expensive pills. Mr Gaviria, an economist, arrived in 2012 to find that many health-management companies, which rely in part on reimbursement from local governments in their role as insurers, were bankrupt.

He has adjusted judicial aspiration to financial reality. He has set up an equivalent of Britain’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence to decide which drugs offer value for money. He is defining benefit plans more tightly, requiring more payments by patients who can afford them. He accepts there are still “a lot of inequities”, but argues that a poorer Colombian who lives in a big city gets better health care than her peer anywhere else in Latin America.

Many health experts think the single-payer system is fairer and more cost-effective. But such radical reform faces resistance from vested interests. So it may be easier to merge contributory and non-contributory schemes into a single system, as France and Colombia have done.

According to Daniel Cotlear, a health specialist at the World Bank, Latin America offers lessons in its acknowledgment that the poor cannot pay for health care, in improvements such as benefits packages covering specified treatments, even if these entail “implicit rationing”, and in making public providers more efficient by giving managers more autonomy. With the economic slowdown putting pressure on budgets, he urges governments to continue to give priority to enrolling the poor in health schemes and to small-town clinics. To that list must be added caring for victims of those insidious mosquitoes.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21692919-promise-and-pitfalls-health-care-all-time-heal/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

How the White House race looks from Cuba

The Havana primaries

Cubans are not keen on a president from the diaspora

Feb 13th 2016 | HAVANA | From the print edition

At least Cuban-Americans can vote

NEITHER Ted Cruz nor Marco Rubio fared as well in the hills of New Hampshire on February 9th as they did in the plains of Iowa a week earlier. Even so, the two Republicans (pictured) are both closer to winning the White House than any Cuban-American has come before. You might expect the citizens of the country from which their parents emigrated to take an interest in their political fortunes, and they do. But it is not a friendly one. “I’d rather vote for Donald Trump,” harrumphs a professor in Vedado, part of Havana.

To judge from informal conversations and press chatter (nobody is systematically canvassing opinion) Cubans are underwhelmed by the prospect of a Cuban-American president. A big part of the reason is that both Mr Cruz and Mr Rubio are hardliners on the subject of Cuba, the traditional stance of émigrés and their families. Mr Rubio, who is the better known because he is a senator from nearby Florida, would roll back the rapprochement between Cuba and the United States initiated by the countries’ presidents in 2014. He has threatened to put Cuba back on the State Department’s list of state sponsors of terrorism. Mr Cruz is no friendlier to the new policy. The Obama administration is “being played by brutal dictators”, among them Cuba’s president, Raúl Castro, he thunders.

Mr Rubio “is the one who represents interests associated most with the politics of Bushiana,” wrote a commenter on the state-controlled Granma website, blackening him with George W. Bush’s reviled name. Some Cubans express pity for the Cuban-American duo, seeing them as dupes of the Miami-based diaspora, which is traditionally hostile to Cuba’s government (though it is warming to the idea of better relations). The candidates’ ideas are based on outdated stories that their exiled parents told them, says the professor.



America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

Several habaneros summed up their sense of betrayal with a well-worn expression: No hay peor astilla que la del mismo palo (“There is no splinter worse than one from the same stick”). Messrs Cruz and Rubio, in other words, spurn their own kind. “Unfortunately, it’s kind of a Cuban trait,” laments a rueful doctor.

Of all the front-runners, the one whose philosophy is closest to that of Cuba’s leaders is Bernie Sanders, a Democratic senator from Vermont, who calls himself a “democratic socialist”. Cubans, who live with undemocratic socialism, seem to find this baffling rather than attractive. “Has anyone told him that socialism is a bad thing?” whispers a secretary in her office on the Malecón, Havana’s oceanfront esplanade.

Donald Trump gets the most press coverage, as in the United States, but does not enrage Cubans as he does Mexicans. When Mr Trump fumes about immigrants, Cubans sense he does not mean them.

The clear favourite to win the Havana primary is Hillary Clinton, who has promised to continue Barack Obama’s opening toward Cuba. When it comes to rooting for a candidate to be the next occupant of the White House, Cubans seem to want continuity, not change.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21692929-cubans-are-not-keen-president-diaspora-havana-primaries/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Latin American currencies

Border bazaar

The weak peso draws Ecuadorean shoppers to Colombia

Feb 13th 2016 | LA HORMIGA, COLOMBIA | From the print edition

THE backwater Colombian town of La Hormiga near the border with Ecuador has experienced many booms and busts. In the 1990s there was coca, the raw material for cocaine. That frenzy ended when herbicide-spraying aeroplanes destroyed the crops. In the 2000s a pyramid scheme made many townsfolk rich, then ruined them. The government shut it down in 2008.

Today La Hormiga, a sweltering town surrounded by pasture in the department of Putumayo, is experiencing a somewhat more salubrious sort of boom. Merchants are cashing in on the sharp depreciation of the Colombian peso against the United States dollar, which Ecuador uses as its currency. The peso lost a quarter of its value in 2015 and continues to slide this year. This has been a windfall for Ecuadorean shoppers living near—and sometimes not so near—the border, and for Colombian shopkeepers who serve them.

“We can buy things 50% cheaper here than at home,” says Juan Carlos Andrade, who on a recent weekend drove for four hours from Coca in Ecuador to Putumayo with his family. They returned in a car laden with clothes and nappies for their two small boys. In Ecuador a pack of 50 Huggies nappies costs $18; the Andrades bought one in La Hormiga for the equivalent of $7.

As well as selling more, merchants in La Hormiga are charging higher prices. The price of clothes has doubled over the past year while that of fruit and vegetables has risen by 30-40%, according to Fernando Palacios, the town’s mayor. Shops and bakeries are diversifying by providing pop-up currency-exchange services. A ticket seller at a roadside bus terminal moonlights as a money changer, buying dollars at 2,800 pesos and selling them to banks at a rate of around 3,200, making a handsome profit for little effort.

Not everyone is happy. Residents of La Hormiga accuse shopkeepers of price-gouging. Mr Palacios has urged local merchants to show restraint. “I told them that if they keep raising prices the Ecuadoreans will shop elsewhere and locals will, too,” he says.

Retail tourism is also a worry for Ecuador’s government. The country adopted the dollar as its currency in 2000 to escape from hyperinflation. Its current strength, along with weak productivity and low prices for oil, Ecuador’s biggest export, helped make the economy contract by an estimated 0.6% in 2015. Colombia, by contrast, grew by around 3% last year and should grow by more than 2% in 2016 despite the oil slump, in part because its weaker currency is expected to boost non-oil exports.

To fight the downturn, Ecuador’s government is calling on its citizens to shop at home. “Prefer what’s ours,” pleaded a government statement issued in September. As long as the dollar is strong, many Ecuadorean shoppers will prefer Putumayo.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21692931-weak-peso-draws-ecuadorean-shoppers-colombia-border-bazaar/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Essay




The Mekong: Requiem for a river





Articles Sections Next

The Mekong

Requiem for a river

Can one of the world’s great waterways survive its development?

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



GUO, the driver, pulls his car to a merciful halt high above a crevasse: time for a cigarette, and after seven hours of shuddering along narrow, twisting roads, time for his passengers to check that their fillings remain in place. Lighting up, he steps out of the car and dons a cloth cap and jacket: sunny, early-summer days are still brisk 3,500 metres above sea level. Mr Guo is an impish little dumpling of a man, bald, brown-toothed and jolly. He is also an anomaly: a Shanghainese in northern Yunnan who opted to stay with his local bride rather than return to his booming hometown.

The ribbon of brown water cutting swiftly through the gorge below is rich with snowmelt. With few cars passing, its echoing sound fills the air. In the distance, the Hengduan mountains slump under their snowpack as if crumpled beneath its weight. Mr Guo recalls the drivers who have taken a switchback too quickly and fallen to their deaths in the valley below. He tells of workers who lost their footing or whose harnesses failed while building a bridge near his home town of Cizhong, 20 or 30 kilometres south. He pulls hard on his cigarette. “This river”, he says, “has taken so many lives.”





It has sustained many more. From trickles of meltwater in arid Qinghai, the river grows quickly as it passes through Tibet and Yunnan. Leaving China, and in doing so changing its name from the Lancang to the Mekong, it descends through a landscape ripening into jungle. Swollen by rainforest tributaries, it defines the Myanmar-Laos border and most of the Laos-Thailand border. It cuts Cambodia in two, and then splits into distributaries in south-western Vietnam, the lush, claustral delta landscape opposite in every way to the craggy austerity where it began.

The Mekong region is Asia’s rice bowl: in 2014 lower Mekong countries (Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam) produced more than 100m tonnes of rice, around 15% of the world’s total. The region’s fertile soil depends on nutrient-rich sediment that the Mekong carries downriver, mainly during the rainy season from June to October; more than half the sediment in central Cambodia comes from China. The river and the nutrients it brings also support the world’s biggest inland fishery, accounting for a quarter of the global freshwater catch, feeding tens of millions of people.

The region boasts remarkable biodiversity; only the vast basins of the Congo and the Amazon compare to or surpass it. There are more than 20,000 types of plant and nearly 2,500 animal species; freshwater dolphins and giant catfish; spiders 30 centimetres across and, in a limestone cavern in Thailand, a day-glo pink, cyanide-secreting millipede. The human diversity is striking, too: Tibetan monks pray; Burmese traders buy and sell; Cambodian fishermen cast nets; Thai farmers reap; Vietnamese markets float. The history is as rich as the soil. The Buddha smiled while resting at the northern Lao city of Luang Prabang. Angkor Wat on the Mekong-fed Tonle Sap lake was among the biggest cities of the preindustrial world. The Khmer empire that built it dominated South-East Asia for longer than there have been Europeans in the Americas.

Since its French colonial days the Mekong has been more of a backwater. But the life-changing development seen elsewhere in Asia is spreading into this mostly rural world. Pickup trucks are replacing bullock-carts, karaoke bars dot lonely two-lane roads, fishermen can catch up on soap-operas at night. People are getting richer, and their lives longer.

And as modernity comes into the region, it also seeks to take something out. Countries see a new resource in the Mekong: not the support it offers rich networks of life, but the simple fact of its flow. The hydroelectric dams now built on and planned for the Mekong amount to one of the largest-ever interventions in a river’s course. As its currents are rechannelled down copper conduits to power far-off cities the river itself will be trapped behind a series of concrete walls. Its fisheries, agriculture and biodiversity will suffer; the lives lived on its banks will be reshaped with scant regard for the feelings of those who lead them

In teaching his students that change was the one true constant, the philosopher Heraclitus told them that no one ever steps in the same river twice. At the second step both man and river are not what they once were. In space and in time, from narrow gorges to salty seas and from great empires to impoverished peasantry, the river at Mr Guo’s feet encompasses more change than most. These new developments, though, feel like something more profound. Flow means change, but it also brings identity, because it embodies continuity. As the river is stilled, precious identities risk being lost for ever.



THE scent of woodsmoke from Mr Guo’s cast-iron stove hangs heavy in the brisk evening air. The household generatoris switched off for the night, and the low kitchen in which his family and two guests gather is made cozy by the light of kerosene lamps. His wife brings a succession of bowls to the table: steamed rice, chunks cut from a salted pig’s leg that hangs above the stove, lettuce braised with garlic, scraps of beef sautéed with chilies, and tsampa, a roast barley powder favoured by his ethnically Tibetan family. His mother-in-law serves a medicinal-tasting infusion made from local leaves and berries, as well as eggshell cups of local wine. The wine tastes as though it was made by someone who knew only two things about wine: it is supposed to be red, and it is supposed to get you drunk.

French missionaries brought grapes and the Gospel to Yunnan in the late 19th century; wine has been made in Cizhong ever since. They left a more enduring monument too: a sombre stone church with a charmingly incongruous Tibetan-style roof that sweeps skyward at its edges. A priest from Inner Mongolia holds masses there for ethnic-Tibetan Catholics. Cizhong spreads out from the church like the bottom half of a Chagall painting: donkeys wander the stone streets; ramshackle houses squat along alleyways; vineyards and rice paddies frame the view.

But that is about to change. A little way downriver, a state-owned power utility is building the 990-megawatt Wunonglong dam. In 1995 the Manwan dam, some 600km farther downstream, became the first to stem the river’s flow. Since then five more dams have been finished along its Chinese reach; the Wunonglong dam is one of a further 14 being planned or built there.

China’s Communist Party has long been keen on dams. At least 86,000 have been built over the past six decades, providing 282 gigawatts (GW) of installed hydroelectric capacity by 2014. The government is building yet more to curb the country’s greenhouse-gas emissions. By 2020 it wants an astonishing 350GW of installed hydropower capacity; in the European Union that would be enough to meet about three-quarters of total electricity needs. The dam at Wunonglong, about 300 metres long and more than 100 metres high, will provide a smidgen less than one of those extra gigawatts. The other 13 are expected to add 15.1GW more.

Downriver countries intend to build another 11 large dams on the Mekong, with dozens more planned for its tributaries. In 20 years the Mekong could well be dammed from Tibet to just above Phnom Penh, where the delta begins. In no other large river basin in the world is the planned rate of growth of hydropower as great.

The dams will change the quality of the water in the river and the rate at which it flows. Some of this change could be for the better. Dams can prevent flooding by regulating the flow of water downstream. But some Mekong riverbank agriculture would not welcome too steady a flow. Increasing water in the dry season would shrink riverbeds, leaving less space for crops—millions of Mekong-basin dwellers grow vegetables on riverbanks. Reducing water in the rainy season produces smaller floodplains with less sediment deposited in them, impoverishing the soil.

According to International Rivers, an environmental NGO, the full cascade of dams planned for the Lancang would trap nearly all of the sediment coming from China, cutting the water’s sediment load in half. That will be bad for soils and bad for fish; the sediments provide the river’s nutrients. And the dams lower down could worsen the problem; the clear, “hungry” water that flows from them in spates will carry away existing sediment in riverbanks and riverbeds. Some of that will be deposited farther still downstream; some will wash uselessly out to sea.

Those lower dams will also make things yet harder for the nutrient-deprived fish. The 11 proposed in Laos and Cambodia could block the migration of around 70% of the Mekong’s commercial fish catch. Interfering with the fish’s feeding and reproduction to that extent would imperil the food security of populations across the lower Mekong basin, where the average person eats some 60kg of freshwater fish per year, more than 18 times what is on the menu in Europe or America. Considering how poor many of the people here are, replacing fish as a primary protein source is virtually impossible.

Dams restrict the movement of fish; they force movement on people. Along the road leading out of Cizhong, past the dormitories housing the construction workers for the Wunonglong dam, He Zhenghai, a friend of Mr Guo, points to a denuded spot where a village used to be. A few kilometres farther on he points out the resettlement: rows of squat, charmless concrete structures plonked down along the side of the road, near nothing.

Estimates by NGOs of the total number of Chinese people resettled because of dam projects exceed 20m. Dams on the Lancang have already added thousands more, mostly poor rural farmers, to the total. In 2013 the compensation received on relocation was about 80,000 yuan ($12,500). Some farmers complain that they have been resettled on sheer hillsides ill-suited to farming and, to add insult to injury, chronically short of water.

The Wunonglong dam will inundate Yanmen, a nearby village whose residents will be resettled on Cizhong’s rice paddies. And this means that, in a way, Cizhong, too, will vanish. Brian Eyler, deputy director of the South-East Asia programme at the Stimson Centre, an American think-tank, says Yanmen sits above Cizhong in China’s administrative league tables, meaning that after resettlement Cizhong will be renamed Yanmen, losing its name along with much of its charm.



AT HUAY XAI on the Thailand-Laos border, around 1,000km downriver from Mr Guo’s house in Cizhong, a sampan’s tubercular engine kicks in with a wheeze, a gag and a violent sneeze of black smoke. As the motor stammers a tiny conductor terrorises the boat, calling brusquely for tickets, chastising people for where and how they sit, shouting at the pilot to get a move on. As the boat pulls away she jumps off, smoking and yelling the whole time. Some of the locals immediately set about the business of napping, using rice sacks as pillows. Others spread bolts of fabric to picnic on, pulling out plastic bags of grilled chicken, sticky rice, bamboo shoots and tiny, floral South-East Asian oranges. The tourists, meanwhile, open cans of beer—except for the Brits, who open bottles of rotgut Thai whiskey. Tourists and locals alike start the journey staring at their phones. Eventually reception wanes and they are forced to gaze out at the wonder on all sides.

By the time it reaches Huay Xai the Mekong has already run more than the entire length of the Rhine and descended more than 3,000 metres—handily more than the Rhine manages. It still has almost two Rhine-lengths to go—but along that journey it will only drop a further 400 metres. It is a lowland river now, lush and steady. The evening chill of Mr Guo’s kitchen has been replaced by ripe, vaguely fetid South-East Asian warmth.

About two hours into the two-day journey east from Huay Xai to Luang Prabang, the boat pulls over to a muddy shore, distinguished only by a concrete staircase cut into the side of a mountain. As the boat approaches people suddenly appear out of the jungle at the top of the stairs. The scene repeats itself with minor variations throughout the journey: a muddy path rather than a staircase, a rickety little jetty or two. A couple of hours before the boat pulls in to regally sleepy Luang Prabang, it passes the Pak Ou caves: two caverns in a mountainside from which hundreds of Buddha statues brought by devotees stare down at passing boats.

Just downstream from Luang Prabang, the $3.5 billion, 1.3GW Xayaburi dam is rising—one of nine this country of 6.8m mostly rural, mostly poor people plans for the Mekong mainstream. Laos wants hydropower to be its main source of revenue by 2025: it plans to sell its capacity to neighbouring countries. The Thai government has agreed to buy 95% of Xayaburi’s power. Six Thai banks have financed the dam and a Thai construction firm is building it.

Laos’s downstream neighbours are far less enthusiastic. Cambodia (two dams of its own planned) and Vietnam (no suitable sites for dams at all), worried about the impacts that the Xayaburi dam will have on fisheries and water flow, have lodged objections with the Mekong River Commission that was set up by Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam in 1995. The MRC is meant to facilitate co-operation among the countries that share the watershed; China and Myanmar have the status of “dialogue partners”.

Environmental groups warn that by turning a free-flowing river into a series of reservoirs the upstream Lao dams could wipe out the Mekong’s two largest freshwater species: the giant catfish and the giant pangasius. Similar warnings have been raised about the Don Sahong dam—which would span the Mekong across the breathtakingly beautiful Si Phan Don (Four Thousand Islands) region near Laos’s border with Cambodia—and about Cambodia’s giant Sambor dam, which may destroy one of the last remaining habitats of the Irrawaddy dolphin.

The Xayaburi dam’s builders have redesigned its sluice gates to allow more nutrient-rich sediment to flow downstream, and widened its fish pass to accommodate more fish of different species. The Lao government says these tweaks will alleviate the worst harms. Environmentalists are less certain. Fish passes in dams have been repeatedly found not to live up to promises made for them, particularly when fish must pass through multiple sets, as they would if Laos builds all its planned dams.

The Mekong might survive a few big mainstream dams, but a dozen—plus dozens more on its tributaries—present a qualitatively different sort of threat. This highlights a recurring theme of Mekong development: dam-builders tend to assess the impact of each dam individually; NGOs pay more attention to the cumulative effect of multiple dams. The NGOs also worry that with every new dam built, further dam-building becomes more normal, and the next project thus becomes easier to justify.

Environmentalists think both that such synergies make the harm done by dams greater than governments claim, and that the benefits are overestimated. Touting hydropower as “green” because it can be used in the place of fossil-fuel derived electricity overlooks external costs such as compensation and relocation, lost agricultural productivity and biodiversity and lowered water quality. And although benefits may be large (especially for electricity exporters), they are hardly overwhelming, especially in the context of broader development. Power demand in the region is expected to more than double between now and 2025—having already doubled from 2005. According to Richard Cronin, a Mekong specialist at the Stimson Centre, an American think-tank, the nine Lao and two Cambodian dams currently discussed would provide just 6-8% of the total electricity needs of the lower Mekong basin by 2030, with most of the power going to Thailand. “For that,” Mr Cronin asks, “you’re going to kill the river?”

Pressure from downstream countries and international NGOs has slowed Laos’s progress on its next two dams, the Don Sahong and the Pak Beng, and has forced developers to spend more money studying potential downstream harms. But Laos is a poor country with few natural resources that sees hydropower as its route to development. In the absence of better options, concerned citizens and the governments of the downstream neighbours may be able to do little more than delay Laos.

For now the Mekong remains blissfully unobstructed as it passes from Laos into Cambodia—except for the bloom of tiny islands that give Si Phan Don its name. People live on just a few of these islands. Some cater to tourists happy to spend a few days rafting the occasional rapids and listening to the Mekong rush past. But many are little more than a clump of rock and mud on which sprays of rivergrass and shrubs have taken root, still green against flowing brown. Past the waterfalls roiling the water into spume the river relaxes again. On clear days it becomes a hazy mirror, the stark blue above turning to indistinct brightness below.



CHANG NAA stands up on the prow of his narrow wooden canoe and casts a small net into the water under the watchful eyes of his son Chang Thung, a four-year-old as solid and sombre as his father is lithe and placid. Beneath the canoe’s tattered fabric roof his wife stirs a pot of samlaa macchu, a sour soup. Before serving it she rinses the dishes in the murky water.

The Tonle Sap river is a two-way tributary which joins the Mekong about 800km downriver from Xayaburi, at Phnom Penh. In drier seasons it drains South-East Asia’s biggest freshwater lake, also called the Tonle Sap, into the Mekong; during the monsoon it flows the other way, bringing water and sediment from the Mekong to the lake. Mr Chang Naa and his family live in one of the river’s floating villages. He is 33 years old; he has been fishing the Tonle Sap for 15 years. His father fishes these same waters. In time, says Mr Chang Naa, so will Chang Thung: “With us, what the father does, the son will also do.”

Mainly he catches what he calls chkok and onpun—small, silvery fish. Some are destined for his wife’s soup pot. The rest—he catches between two and three kilos per day—he sells for prahok and tuk trey, a chunky paste and clear brown liquid both made from salted, fermented fish. Some fishermen supplement their meagre income with rice farming, but Mr Chang Naa and his family own no land. Like most people he knows, he is working off a perpetual debt incurred by money borrowed at extortionate rates for food, fuel and equipment. A fisherman from a village near Mr Chang Naa’s says he spends four or five months a year paying off local moneylenders.

The Tonle Sap lake yields around 300,000 tonnes of fish a year, accounting for most of Cambodia’s freshwater catch. In all, the MRC estimates that the Mekong yields around 2.6m tonnes of wild fish each year, worth at least $2 billion in dockside sales. Add in secondary industries such as fish processing, markets, fuel and equipment sales and boat building, and the total value of the Mekong’s fisheries is between $5.6 billion and $9.4 billion.

Small-scale fishing predominates along the Mekong—most boats in Cambodia weigh less than five tonnes and use engines with less than ten horsepower. Mr Chang Naa’s livelihood is not that different from his father’s or the vast majority of his peers. But that is starting to change with the rise in aquaculture. Production in the fish farms of Vietnam’s delta is now larger than that from its other freshwater and seawater fisheries combined. Prices for wild-caught fish are rising—Khai Ratana, who fishes a little way upriver from Mr Chang Naa, says he gets 12,000 riel ($3) per kilo, up from 3,000 riel five years ago—but that is because they have grown scarcer in recent years.

At this point in the river’s descent to the sea, its potential as a power generator has been used up. The lowest lying of the dams under discussion, Cambodia’s dam at Sambor, lies around 300km upriver. Cambodia’s fisheries thus illustrate the fundamental political tension at the heart of the region’s development: upstream economies overwhelmingly reap the benefits of changes to the river’s regime, while those downstream bear the cost.

This is the way with all rivers, but all the more so with the Mekong, because the geographical hierarchy reflects the geopolitical one. China, the most powerful nation, has the high ground and the most hydropower potential. It is also least dependent on the river’s water for other purposes (though it has plans to divert some of it away to its thirsty east anyway), the least susceptible to civil-society pressure and the least interested in binding itself to an international order.

This worries everyone downstream. China and Thailand have long enjoyed good relations, and China has bought goodwill in Laos and Cambodia with massive infrastructure investments. But Myanmar has opened up to the West in the past five years in part to counterbalance Chinese influence. Vietnam fears its powerful northern neighbour—China invaded as recently as 1979, and the two countries contest territory in the South China Sea—and anti-China sentiment has been rising in Laos. As China has grown more regionally assertive, Laos and Vietnam have sought to deepen their relations with America. Yet that will probably do very little to dissuade China from building more dams, any more than the objections of Laos’s vastly richer and more populous neighbour Vietnam deterred it from building its dam at Xayaburi.

These tensions will be kept in check by the general desire for a commodity quite as valuable as water: peace. For a long time it was in short supply, with decades of war, political division and the spiralling horrors of the Khmers Rouges perversely protecting the Mekong from exploitation. Nobody wanted to put up the capital for a dam that would be bombed, nationalised or left to rack and ruin. Those days are over; none would wish them back. The problem is managing equitably, and without permanent environmental degradation, the prosperity peace brings

A hundred kilometres or so south-east of Mr Chang Naa’s fishing grounds, tourists in Phnom Penh sip mojitos in front of cafés as an endless parade of late-model sedans and smoke-spitting tuk-tuks jostles for space along Sisowath Quay. It is Cambodia’s one big, bustling city, with a sleazy edge to its tattered colonial elegance. Away from the river tens of thousands live in crowded slums—mainly rural Cambodians yearning for a bit of urban prosperity. Chang Naa expects his son, Chang Thung, to fish in his footsteps; he may want it so. But like all sons Chang Thung will step into a different river—or perhaps, in this case, onto a different shore. Phnom Penh was a city of just 189,000 in 1980. It could be home to 2.5m by 2030, and Chang Thung may choose to be one of them. His choice may be a free one. People in backwaters, both figurative and literal, choose cities all the time. But it may not be. By the time he reaches working age, the fears of dam sceptics may have been realised. There may be no more fish for him to catch.



FIVE waitresses work the busy rooftop bar, ferrying drinks to the bright young things of Can Tho, the Mekong delta’s biggest city. Melodic, minor-key Vietnamese pop blares from the speakers as smartly turned-out young men and women sip lurid drinks, their faces lit by their phones. In the early evening the Hau river, a broad Mekong distributary, has taken on the same blue-grey cast as the sky, reflecting rows of quayside lamps as it flows into the distance, reaching for the sea.

Can Tho has the feel of a minor boomtown: scooters still outnumber motorcycles which still outnumber cars; there is plenty of commerce but few chain stores; tourists remain rare enough that a wedding party will invite a passing foreigner to eat, drink and toast with them. It is a gentler, friendlier place than Phnom Penh, but with an underlying sadness that one does not feel further upstream: Phnom Penh will grow more crowded and unmanageable in the coming decades; Can Tho may vanish.

To drive the four hours from Phnom Penh to Can Tho is to witness an increasingly blurry line between land and water. Narrow, glittering streams bisect rice fields. Rills, canals and other waterways flow deep into lush jungle, while the river itself wanders lazily toward the sea. Cambodians like to remind visitors that much of this delta region was theirs before the French partitioned the territory in 1949. The Vietnamese dispute this. The delta’s fertile soil has long been worth arguing over—or fighting for.

The famous floating markets of the delta are a little way south of Can Tho; their products abound on the city’s streets. Older women preside over rainbow mounds of dragonfruit, pomelo, durian and jackfruit, while young men tend grills of muddy-tasting snakehead fish. Of the Mekong delta’s 18.6m people, about a fifth of Vietnam’s population, more than three-quarters work in agriculture; on its roughly 4m irrigated hectares, the average farm size is just 1.2 hectares. From only 12% of Vietnam’s surface area the region provides most of the country’s fish and fruit, as well as half its rice; farmers can get seven crops in two years. Dang Kieu Nhan, a researcher at Can Tho university, points to an old Vietnamese saying: “If you want to make a good living, go to the Mekong delta: it’s hard to be hungry there.”

The worry is that some of what the region enjoyed in the past may now be beyond purchase. Few places in the world are as threatened by climate change as the Mekong delta. A brief stroll around Can Tho already leaves you coated in sweat, and the city is set to grow much sweatier. Average temperatures in Can Tho rose by 0.5ºC between 1979 and 2009. Vietnam’s natural-resources ministry predicts that temperatures will rise by a further 1.1-3.6ºC by 2100. It also expects more severe storms, wetter wet seasons and drier dry ones; all those effects, it says, will be greatest in the south.

Though rice thrives in wet, warm climates, it cannot stand too much of either. Rice fails when submerged underwater for long periods. Flooded fields can also hinder planting, and therefore harvesting. Rice yields may decline by an average of 10% for every 1ºC rise in average night-time temperatures. A changing climate may also lead to a flourishing of weeds and pests in rice fields.

Rising sea levels threaten not just the crops, but also the fields themselves. A report from the International Centre for Environmental Management, a consultancy, projects a 28-33cm rise in Vietnam’s seas by 2050, and 65-100cm by 2100—levels exacerbated, in the delta, by declining sediment flow from upstream. A sea-level rise of one metre could flood more than a quarter of the delta, and leave five million homeless. Can Tho is just 80cm above sea level.

The ocean could make farming impossible well before it finally swallows the land. Rising seas cause saline intrusion: seawater moving into places unaccustomed to it, such as wetlands and freshwater aquifers. Salt in a rice field can ruin the crops. Up to 70% of the delta’s agricultural land could be subject to saline intrusion this century. Some delta farmers have responded by switching from rice farming to aquaculture: shrimp, in particular, thrive in brackish water. But they fare poorly when the water gets as salty as the sea proper, meaning rising sea levels will eventually render shrimp farming just as impossible as rice farming.

Mangroves once provided a healthy buffer against both salinity intruding into the water table and the heavy winds that drive seawater inland, but population pressure and aquaculture have put paid to a lot of Vietnam’s mangrove forests. That leaves the delta reliant on dykes and hydraulics to mitigate saline intrusion, and these are expensive to build and maintain. Less intensive agriculture could relieve the stress on the delta, but Vietnam has a growing population to feed, and makes billions of dollars from exporting rice, fish, shrimp and fruit. Sediment carried downstream can help repair coastal erosion, but not if dams trap it in reservoirs. Mr Nhan mentions the prospect of shifting crops: cultivating rice and shrimp in the brackish lowlands, fruit and vegetables in the centre and high-value export rice in the upper delta. This makes sense—it may be the best that can be done until drought ruins the rice and rising seas reach the fruit.

For now the Mekong, which began as a trickle of snowmelt high up in Tibetan cloud-country, slices through riots of tropical green to meet the South China Sea in a network of river mouths known as the “nine dragon river delta” in what appears to be much the same way as it always has. Tourists who watch women haggling in floating markets over baskets of mangosteen and fresh fish, or who see peasants in conical hats farming paddies by hand, imagine that they are witnessing something timeless—life as it always has been, its rhythms dictated by seasons, land and sea. But though it seems they are witnessing a pastoral, what they are seeing is in fact the opening scene of a tragedy: the part where the characters act as they always have, but their fate looms large.

Eventually, all rivers empty into oceans; water comes together with other waters. But for this river, at this delta, the sense of an eternal return is lessened, that of an ending heightened. The seas, driven by a century of global industry, rise higher, while for the sake of a little more industrial power, the gifts of the river are being squandered. Life as it has been is not life as it will be. The days of stepping into the river are numbered.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21692854/print





Articles Sections Next





Asia




China, North Korea and America: Between Punxsutawney and Pyongyang

Tasmania charts a new course: Water into wine

Tasmania’s forests: Saving the swift parrot

Banyan: Of Yorkies and Great Danes





Articles Sections Next

China, North Korea and America

Between Punxsutawney and Pyongyang

The Hermit kingdom is becoming a bigger cause of contention between China and America

Feb 13th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



NORTH KOREA sent its latest satellite into orbit on February 7th, five days after Groundhog Day. Much of the world could be forgiven for thinking that, like the protagonist in the 1993 film of that name, they are stuck in a time loop. They wake up, North Korea tests a nuclear weapon, other countries condemn its actions and the UN Security Council descends into bickering until the cycle begins again. But just as in the film each day is subtly different, so with North Korea now: the latest test may actually mark the end of a period in which China was prepared to get tougher on its unruly client. From now on, China and America may disagree more strongly about how to deal with the nuclear risks that North Korea poses.

In 2012, after Kim Jong Un, the North’s third-generation dictator (pictured above), last tested a satellite, China endorsed a UN resolution that tightened sanctions against his regime and even sounded a warning, via Global Times, a Communist Party newspaper, that if the North “engages in further nuclear tests, China will not hesitate to reduce its assistance”.

Three years on, a Chinese spokeswoman merely expressed “regret” at the new launch, while the foreign minister, Wang Yi, sounded a warning that any UN resolution “should not…destabilise the Korean peninsula”. In contrast to such mildness, South Korea said it would shut down the Kaesong industrial complex that it runs jointly with the North. That is a big step. The factory park just on the north side of the two countries’ border employs 54,000 North Koreans working for dozens of South Korean companies. It is the first time the South has shut the park—previous closures were initiated by the North, when it wanted to apply pressure on the filthy capitalists running the South.

South Korea’s move over Kaesong is an indication of how seriously it takes both the satellite launch, which was really a cover for testing a long-range missile, and the test of a nuclear device, the fourth such, which took place on January 6th.

The three fatties

A change in China’s attitude does not reflect greater friendliness towards the regime in Pyongyang. Leaders are exasperated with Mr Kim. Ordinary Chinese deride him online as “the third fatty”. (The previous two were his grandfather, Kim Il Sung, and his father, Kim Jong Il.) Junior’s insistence on the satellite test made China’s president, Xi Jinping, look ineffectual. Mr Xi had sent a veteran diplomat, Wu Dawei, to Pyongyang, presumably to persuade Mr Kim to postpone or scrap the trial.



All the same, after a period in 2012-14 when Chinese officials engaged in a lively and sometimes public debate about whether North Korea really was a strategic asset, China’s government has reasserted its traditional support for its troublesome neighbour. According to diplomats, Mr Xi took the decision last summer: a domestically stable North, he ruled, was preferable to an unstable one, even if the country is building a nuclear arsenal. China will keep the North afloat.

And so China has done little to shut off the flow of goods to the North. That matters. The $7 billion-odd a year in bilateral trade is nine-tenths of North Korea’s total trade. Nearly half of the North’s food, seven-tenths of its oil and four-fifths of its consumer goods come from China.

China has long feared that upheaval in the North could cause a refugee crisis. But the clinching argument for Mr Xi may have been that he saw relations with the North in the context of deteriorating relations with America. “It is impossible to co-operate fully on the Korean peninsula,” one official told a visiting professor from South Korea, “so long as the United States continues to engage in provocative behaviour in the South China Sea.” It may be doubted who is really being provocative there. But China’s calculation is that North Korea is a buffer between itself and South Korea, a staunch American ally and host to American forces. At a time when China sees itself as a rival in Asia to the United States, that buffer grows more important.

Yet the cost of keeping the buffer may be going up for China. Jonathan Pollack of the Brookings Institution, a think-tank in Washington, DC, sees “tangible changes in the tone and substance” of American policy since North Korea’s satellite and nuclear tests. John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, called the nuclear test “reckless and dangerous…an overt threat”. He demanded more UN sanctions, just as America’s House of Representatives passed a bill to allow America to punish firms from third countries, such as China, if they help the North evade American sanctions.



Fantasy reunification: What the two Koreas would gain from each other if Kim Jong Un's regime fell

Further, after the satellite launch South Korea began talks with America on deploying an advanced missile-defence system, the Terminal High-Altitude Air Defence platform (THAAD), meant to destroy missiles from the North. China thinks the system could be used against its own weapons; for years it has tried to stop deployment. It has expressed more concern about THAAD than North Korea’s satellite.

Perhaps that is not surprising. South Korea’s decision to adopt THAAD is a big setback for Mr Xi. He has met Park Geun-hye, his South Korean counterpart, six times (in contrast, he has never met Mr Kim). If he had hoped to tempt South Korea to downgrade its alliance with America, he has failed. In addition to talking about THAAD, the two countries said they would hold larger joint military exercises this year. In short, and to China’s dismay, North Korea has provided America with the justification for increasing military deployments in North-East Asia. Mr Kim may one day test Mr Xi’s patience to destruction. For now, the gap is widening between America and China as they try to rein in Mr Kim’s nuclear ambitions. At least until the next Groundhog Day.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21692932-hermit-kingdom-becoming-bigger-cause-contention-between-china-and-america-between/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Tasmania charts a new course

Water into wine

An island state bets on water to revive its fortunes

Feb 13th 2016 | LAUNCESTON | From the print edition



FOR 27 years Yvonne and Noel Gerke ran a transport business, hauling logs from Tasmania’s forests to mills grinding woodchips for customers in Japan and elsewhere in Asia. Then came the global financial downturn as well as campaigns to protect Tasmania’s native forests (see article). It clobbered the timber industry. “We employed 45 people until it crashed and burned,” says Ms Gerke. Four years ago the Gerkes took a payout from Australia’s federal government to quit logging. They are now gambling on another commodity: water.

Australia is the world’s driest continent. Climate change is expected to make its droughts even more frequent. The country is still paying for years of overexploitation of its biggest river system, the Murray-Darling basin. The federal government in Canberra is spending A$3.2 billion ($2.2 billion) buying up and cancelling farmers’ water entitlements in a bid to reduce salinity and repair other environmental damage stretching back a century.

While mainland farmers are being paid to give up water, those in wetter Tasmania are being enticed to buy more. The island state accounts for just 1% of Australia’s land mass and 2% of its population. Yet it receives 13% of the country’s rainfall. Tasmania may be blessed with water, but most of it falls in the mountains of the west, making it useless to farmers elsewhere.

So the island has embarked on a project to capture more water for its drier east and north, shifting it through pipes to these regions’ farms. Almost 800 farmers have already bought into ten irrigation schemes that are up and running. They will allow farmers to do more than graze sheep and cattle; they will be able to grow fruit and vegetables, including more of Tasmania’s exotic stuff: cherries, grapes for the island’s increasingly fashionable wines and even poppies (the island is a big opium supplier for legitimate pharmaceuticals).

If another five planned schemes involving 200 farmers go ahead, Tasmania’s investment in shifting its water around the island will be almost A$1 billion. The federal and Tasmanian governments are putting up some of the money. But that comes with conditions. Farmers and other investors must first agree to meet at least two-thirds of the costs of each irrigation project before governments commit the rest.



The Gerkes have bought into one of the newer projects near Scottsdale in northern Tasmania (see map). Pastures in this dairy region are parched after Tasmania’s lowest spring rainfall on record. In recent years two timber mills and a vegetable-processing factory have closed. Jeremy Rockliff, Tasmania’s deputy premier, says the region is among those “most devastated” by the forest industry’s downturn. He reckons the irrigation projects will “future-proof” Tasmania against drought. Perhaps. But the prospect of water prompted the Gerkes to swap the known risk of timber for the unknown one of farming.

They bought 445 hectares (1,100 acres) of grazing land north of Scottsdale. “It was run down,” says Ms Gerke. A creek was its only water source, “and that dried up.” When Tasmanian Irrigation (TI), the public company that operates the irrigation schemes, proposed one for Scottsdale, the Gerkes and 91 other farmers offered to buy in. But that was not quite enough to secure public money for the scheme. So Dorset council, the region’s local-government authority, said it would invest A$1.7m in the water. Greg Howard, the mayor, argued it would help bring back jobs. TI designed a storage dam on a rivulet near Scottsdale, with pipes to start pumping water to each of the participating farmers’ gates in two years. It will flow through about 70 kilometres of pipes before it reaches the Gerkes’ farm.

Joining the scheme will cost them A$189,000. This entitles them to 135 megalitres of water a year; if other farmers want more, they will have to pay more. The irrigation company will charge the Gerkes another A$11,000 a year towards maintaining the network’s pipes and pumps. By the time they pay for their own infrastructure to distribute the water on their farm, they estimate their total investment in obtaining water at almost A$500,000.

They plan to use the water to turn some grazing land into vegetable plots. On the rest of their land, they hope to grow lusher grass for livestock. So they will probably make more money. And once the water reaches them, they can trade some of it each year with other irrigators in their scheme who need more. The Gerkes’ water will not be fixed at A$1,400 a megalitre, the price they paid: the market will find the new price. “Everyone in the area is quite excited,” says Ms Gerke. “We’ve taken such a hit recently.”

Tasmania’s new water market has already been kind to one of its biggest investors. David Williams, a Melbourne banker, owns no Tasmanian farms. But he put A$10m into two central Tasmania irrigation schemes after local farmers had bought in. Mr Williams likens the arrival of reliable water in such regions to technological change: “I punted that it would change the way land is used.” He calculates that trading his water entitlement with farmers in both schemes could turn his investment into A$16m.

Mr Williams compares water management on Australia’s eastern mainland, where he lives, unflatteringly with Tasmania’s approach, which looks more efficient. Small hydroelectricity systems have been designed to power three of Tasmania’s schemes. This will cut farmers’ energy costs, and even raise revenues from sales to the public grid.

In some mainland states Tasmania’s public-private partnership approach is seen as a model for mending old improvident ways with water. In Tasmania there are hopes that a water boom could make people think differently about the state’s economy. A mainland mining bonanza, linked to trade with China, enriched the rest of Australia but bypassed Tasmania. Instead, it boosted Australia’s currency and hurt Tasmanian exporters of timber and farm products.

Now that the mining bonanza is over, signs of a Tasmanian upturn are emerging. Attracted by a cheaper currency, more than 1m people visited Tasmania in the latest fiscal year, a record. Tourists are drawn to Tasmania’s clean air, natural beauty, good food—and increasingly hip image. A huge and provocative underground gallery, the Museum of Old and New Art, or MONA, opened five years ago just outside Hobart, the capital. With installations that include a machine that makes excrement, it has proved a hit with visitors.

Among the foreign tourists coming to sample Tasmanian Riesling, oysters and marbled beef are plenty of Chinese. When China’s president, Xi Jinping, visited Hobart in late 2014, he sent signals that China wanted more seafood, beef and other costlier food exports from Tasmania. China’s relentless pursuit of reliable food supplies is likely to do Tasmania a lot of good. Lu Xianfeng, a Chinese businessman, is bidding to buy a big dairy producer, Van Diemen’s Land, in north-west Tasmania. Mr Lu says he wants to tempt China’s newly affluent class with top-quality food from Tasmania.

In a recent report to the Tasmanian chamber of commerce, Saul Eslake, an economist, pondered a large gap that has opened between Tasmania’s economic performance and the rest of Australia’s. Tasmania’s gross state product per person was 27% below the national average last fiscal year. Mr Eslake reckons that making more niche goods of the type that attract Mr Lu (he highlights wool, wine and wagyu beef) offers Tasmania a better chance of closing the gap than the “bulk, undistinguished products” of old, like woodchips. Water can be turned not only into wine, but also into wealth.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21692945-island-state-bets-water-revive-its-fortunes-water-wine/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Tasmania’s forests

Saving the swift parrot

A critically endangered bird suggests the logging wars are not over

Feb 13th 2016 | HOBART | From the print edition

The race is not always to the swift

BRUNY island, off south-eastern Tasmania, is a home to the swift parrot. Small and green, with patches of red and blue, it breeds only in Tasmania, feeding on nectar from the blue gum tree, a eucalypt, and migrating to south-eastern Australia for the winter. But the logging of Tasmanian forests has destroyed its habitat. (And the parrots’ habit of crashing into office windows of Hobart, Tasmania’s capital, does them no favours.) Only 2,000 individuals may survive.

In November the state government stopped logging on Bruny Island after an outcry over the parrot’s plight. An earlier study by Dejan Stojanovic, of the Australian National University, and colleagues had revealed how logging and land-clearing for farms in Tasmania had left swifts, which breed in the trunks of old gum trees, vulnerable to predation by sugar gliders, an introduced possum.

Unlike the swift parrot’s other Tasmanian breeding grounds, Bruny Island has no sugar gliders. But the Wilderness Society, a conservation group, says that the birds will still be harmed if logging goes ahead. It estimates that the logging planned on Bruny Island for the next two years would destroy almost 40% of the parrots’ habitat there.

Loggers and environmentalists have long disagreed on what should be allowed in the forests that cover about half of Tasmania. Both sides signed a peace deal four years ago under a former Labor state government that protected more forests and bought off loggers. A UNESCO-listed world heritage wilderness area was expanded to embrace the Styx valley west of Hobart, thick with eucalyptus trees thought to be 600 years old. The listed region now covers almost a quarter of Tasmania.

But the truce did not last. On becoming premier two years ago, Will Hodgman of the conservative Liberal party said he was tearing up the deal, concerned that his state’s growth lagged the rest of Australia. He now proposes opening up some protected areas for logging.

UNESCO wants commercial logging in the listed forests banned. It will soon report to the federal government, also Liberal, which is responsible for protecting Australia’s world heritage regions. Meanwhile, as it promises a “management plan” for the swift parrot, Mr Hodgman’s government seems keen to expand logging outside Bruny Island. Protesters against plans to log in Lapoinya, in north-western Tasmania, were arrested last month. Some predict that Tasmania could be heading back to the old days of greens and lumberjacks at loggerheads.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21692939-critically-endangered-bird-suggests-logging-wars-are-not-over-saving-swift-parrot/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

Of Yorkies and Great Danes

For closer ASEAN-American relations, thank China

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR two days next week Barack Obama will lay on a party for an unlikely club at Sunnylands, a Californian estate used for bigwig retreats. Among his guests are: a recent coup leader; Asia’s longest-serving autocrat; a prime minister who thinks there is nothing untoward in having several hundred million dollars paid into his bank accounts; two superannuated communist leaders; and a hereditary sultan with 420,000 loyal subjects and 257 bathrooms. Oh, and there are even a couple of democrats. The club is ASEAN, the ten-member Association of South-East Asian Nations. It is the first time an American president has played host to all South-East Asia’s leaders at once.

Why the summit? Businesswise, ASEAN matters to America. Taken together, which increasingly it wants to be, its members would be the world’s seventh-biggest economy. American foreign investment in ASEAN was $226 billion in 2014, more than in China, South Korea and Japan combined. South-East Asia is young and economically vibrant.

Second, democracy in South-East Asia needs the kind of boost Mr Obama’s attentions will provide. Myanmar’s extraordinary democratic transition remains fragile. In Thailand politics has lurched backwards since Prayuth Chan-ocha’s coup of May 2014 suspended democracy. This irks America, Thailand’s chief ally. As the annual Cobra Gold military exercises, involving Thailand, America and 25 other countries, began this week, the American ambassador in Bangkok called for a return to elected government. Meanwhile, in Malaysia the money scandals and racial politics of the prime minister, Najib Razak, are undermining democratic institutions. A little lecturing by Mr Obama behind closed doors would not hurt.

But, above all, American officials boast that the gathering underlines the success of Mr Obama’s “pivot” or “rebalancing” towards Asia. That is disingenuous, given the scant material evidence of a pivot. Certainly, Mr Obama has attended to South-East Asia more than his predecessors did. No president has made more trips to the region, with unprecedented visits to Cambodia and Myanmar and, later this year, to Laos and perhaps Vietnam, once America’s nemesis. Mr Obama has also appointed America’s first ambassador to ASEAN and has regularly attended ASEAN leaders’ meetings. And having spent four happy childhood years in Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital, he has a personal link with the region that is shared by no previous president.

Yet leaders are coming to Sunnylands less because of Mr Obama’s engagement than because of China and its recent assertiveness. China’s once-vaunted “smile diplomacy” in the region has seemed to turn to scowl. Its expansive claims in the South China Sea have greatly strained relations with neighbours with overlapping claims. In 2014 China dragged an oil rig into Vietnam’s territorial waters, provoking confrontations at sea and violent anti-Chinese protests on land. Chinese aggression towards the Philippines in disputed waters near the Spratly Islands emboldened the government of Benigno Aquino to ask an international tribunal in The Hague to adjudicate on the nature of China’s South China Sea claims, which are as legally vague as they are grabby. Meanwhile, ASEAN members have boosted naval co-operation and defence ties with America, Australia, Japan and India. There is even talk of tensions driving a naval arms race.

Some now divine a softening on China’s part. Perhaps it sees the public-relations damage. Perhaps it remembers how, in 2010-11, Myanmar plopped out of China’s orbit and into the West’s. At any rate, some of the smiles are being turned back on. Under its “one belt, one road” initiative of building globe-girdling trade links, China is promising to invest in ports and railways across South-East Asia, assisted by another Chinese-led venture, the new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. (Besides the diplomatic payoff, this is intended to provide an outlet for goods from half-idle Chinese factories.) China has always welcomed South-East Asian autocrats such as Mr Prayuth and Hun Sen of Cambodia. Now even democrats with Nobel peace prizes are going to Beijing. Last year President Xi Jinping received Myanmar’s Aung San Suu Kyi, who had long been shunned.

American policymakers sneer that, with its chequebook diplomacy, China is crudely attempting to buy influence across the region. Perhaps that is true. But if so, it hints that China understands the damage its sabre-rattling has done and is trying to make amends. ASEAN members no doubt appreciate its largesse. However, they remain suspicious of its intentions. So they turn to America as a counterweight to Chinese influence. Much like a Yorkshire Terrier sharing its bed with a Great Dane, small countries bordering big ones tend to be nervous: even if the big dog is inclined to be good-natured, it could still roll over and crush the Yorkie. Just ask Canada or Mexico.

Hedges make good neighbours

So the Sunnylands summit cannot have pleased China—especially since it was there that Mr Obama welcomed Mr Xi for a groundbreaking love-in in 2013. South-East Asian diplomats crow that the choice of place shows that America considers ASEAN to be just as important as China. Yet the meeting between the two presidents was an introduction. This one will be more like a valediction. At least five of the 11 leaders gathering in California, including Mr Obama, are on their way out of office. And among those who will remain, Mr Prayuth and Mr Hun Sen preside over dangerously fragile polities.

The summit is unlikely to yield much more than the promise of future summits. But for ASEAN, obsessed with process more than with destinations, that may be just fine, with America remaining a hedge against China. If China really wants the region more firmly in its orbit, it will have to do a better job of speaking softly and concealing the stick.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21692870-closer-asean-american-relations-thank-china-yorkies-and-great-danes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Hong Kong-mainland relations: Over troubled water

The fire-monkey stirs: Street violence and politics

Corruption: Portrait of a purge





Articles Sections Next

Hong Kong-mainland relations

Over troubled water

Cross-border transport links are overshadowed by political fears

Feb 13th 2016 | HONG KONG | From the print edition



IN HONG KONG, public trust in both the central government in Beijing and the territory’s own administration is stretched perilously thin. A seemingly routine event on February 8th—food-hygiene patrols targeted at illegal street vendors—triggered hours of rioting. Activists suspicious of the mainland’s influence in Hong Kong were among those who piled into the rampage (see article). Anxieties about the Communist Party’s sway in the territory have been whipped up recently by the disappearance of five booksellers; many believe they were arrested by agents from China’s mainland to stop the publication of a book about President Xi Jinping. It is widely thought that one of those detained was seized by a snatch squad in (supposedly autonomous) Hong Kong itself.

Resentment of the mainland is aggravated by the party’s refusal to grant the territory full democracy, as well as by a hotch-potch of other fears and prejudices. It is even affecting debate about such matters as building transport infrastructure. Work is under way on two huge projects: one of the world’s longest bridges and a high-speed railway. These are intended to improve transport links with the mainland, but critics of the schemes are legion. Some of their objections are coloured by disgruntlement with the mainland and with Hong Kong’s own government, which tends to do what the party says.

This was evident on January 1st at an annual march by anti-government groups. Protesters focused on the 40-kilometre (25-mile) road, tunnel and bridge structure linking Hong Kong with the gambling enclave of Macau and the mainland city of Zhuhai, as well as on the high-speed rail project (see map). Leading their procession was a life-size likeness of Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, sitting on a model of a white elephant. This symbolised the protesters’ view of the infrastructure projects: wasteful sops to the party’s fondness for grandiosity and for symbols of national unity.



Officials say the bridge—paid for jointly by Hong Kong, the mainland and Macau—will cut the journey time from Hong Kong to Zhuhai, a manufacturing centre in Guangdong province, from three hours to just 30 minutes. The high-speed rail service, also partly paid for by Hong Kong, will put Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong, within 50 minutes’ reach of Hong Kong, compared with the present two-hour journey by conventional rail (pictured is an artist’s impression of the high-speed rail terminus being built in Hong Kong’s Kowloon district).

The projects, however, are hugely expensive and technically challenging. The bridge across mainland waters will be reached from Hong Kong by a new 19km stretch of road, part of it under the sea. Beset by engineering difficulties and rising costs, the government in November said that completion would be delayed by a year to 2017. That may be optimistic.

The bill for Hong Kong’s contribution to the bridge and the link to it had been set at HK$83 billion ($10.7 billion). Last year the government asked the Legislative Council (known as Legco) for approval to spend a further HK$5.5 billion on it. Pro-democracy legislators, who tend to be the ones least keen on close links with the mainland, tried filibustering. But the government’s supporters hold a majority in Legco. On January 30th, ahead of a government-imposed deadline, it approved the extra funds—much to the anger of pro-democracy politicians, who accused the pro-government camp of violating procedures in order to force the issue to a vote.

The rail project has already passed its target date of 2015 for completion. A new one has been set for 2018. The government also wants approval to increase the budget for this scheme by 30%, to HK$84.4 billion. If it fails to secure this by the end of the month (unlikely, given the majority backing it enjoys), work may have to stop.

As with the bridge, pro-democracy legislators are complaining. One downside they see to the rail link is that it may bring yet more mainland tourists to Hong Kong (as may a planned third runway for Hong Kong’s airport, which is also mired in controversy). Many in the territory resent the influx, blaming it for congestion on buses and subways, as well as shortages in shops, where the tourists strip shelves of lower-priced household goods. The rail project has also raised hackles because of plans to allow mainland police to check the documents of Guangzhou-bound passengers in Hong Kong itself. Especially following the disappearance of the booksellers, many in Hong Kong worry about allowing mainland security personnel to work in the territory, even in such an innocuous role.

Objectors say there are economic reasons to worry, too. Original plans for the projects did not anticipate the extent of China’s economic slowdown. This may affect the growth of demand for the new links. Tourist arrivals from the mainland are already falling, partly because the Hong Kong currency’s peg to a strengthening US dollar has made goods in the territory more expensive for mainlanders to buy. A clampdown on corruption on the mainland (see article) has also made it riskier to spend money on luxury items.

Mainland officials appear unfazed. Their dream is to create a “megacity” of more than 40m people in Guangdong’s Pearl river delta, partly by improving connections between urban centres (plans have been announced to link Guangzhou and Shenzhen, which borders on Hong Kong, by subway by 2020). They are too diplomatic to talk of folding Hong Kong into a border-spanning megalopolis: that would be too open an assault on the territory’s autonomy. But they do hope the new bridge and railway will bind the region more closely together.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21692935-cross-border-transport-links-are-overshadowed-political-fears-over-troubled-water/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The fire-monkey stirs

Street violence and politics

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



February 8th began as a day of celebration in Hong Kong: it was the start of the Chinese new year (this one influenced by the “fire-monkey”, according to Chinese astrology). It ended in the worst outbreak of rioting since the 1960s. The violence flared amid rumours that officials were trying to clear away unlicensed hawkers selling local delicacies, including fishballs. Reports that some rioters shouted “establish Hong Kong as a country!” suggest that it was about more than fried food. Ninety police were among more than 120 people injured. More than 60 alleged participants were arrested, including a leader of an anti-China group called Hong Kong Indigenous. Members of it had used social media to rally support.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21692930-street-violence-and-politics/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Corruption

Portrait of a purge

Who is being investigated for corruption and why?

Feb 13th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



BEIJING in the winter of 2016 is a bit like Moscow in the winter of 1936: every day brings news of more purged officials and you never know who will be next. On February 4th four more high-ranking party members were kicked out, bringing to 67 the number known to have been investigated, expelled or sentenced this year alone. Among prominent establishment figures who have been dealt with in such ways recently are the head of the National Bureau of Statistics; a former chairman of Wuhan Iron and Steel, a large state-owned firm; and a former deputy chief of the country’s police.

Observers trying to understand the campaign’s complexities now have a bit more help, thanks to a database compiled by ChinaFile, part of the Asia Society, an American NGO. It includes everyone known to have been targeted: 1,496 of them, which is double the number of people who had been outed as suspects a year ago (thousands of others have been investigated but not identified publicly).

Only 151 people on the list are those who might be called “tigers”—a term used by President Xi Jinping to describe errant senior officials. The vast majority are those whom Mr Xi calls “flies”, or wayward low-level ones. Tigers and flies named as having been rounded up so far have been accused of stealing a total of 6.3 billion yuan (nearly $1 billion), 50% more than investigators were saying had been misappropriated by named suspects a year ago.

By occupation, the biggest number of targets come from state-owned firms and the armed forces (see chart). Of the military officials, 44 are tigers—an exceptionally high proportion. The property sector, however, produces the most swag. There are just ten property magnates on the list, but they are said to be responsible for stealing 40% of all the money.

Geographically, corruption tends to be patchy—or perhaps the investigation of it is. Shanxi, a northern province, has seen almost twice as many tigers arrested than any other region outside Beijing. They include five members of a so-called “Shanxi group” linked to another tiger, Ling Jihua, who was chief of staff to Hu Jintao, Mr Xi’s predecessor (the authorities would love to get their hands on his brother, Ling Wancheng, who is reported to be in America and spilling valuable secrets to officials there). Two provinces where Mr Xi served before becoming president—Fujian and Zhejiang—have got off relatively lightly.

A big puzzle is whether the campaign is a genuine attempt to clean up or mainly a cover for political vendettas. The database lends some support to the idea that the purge began by concentrating on politically influential groups. But by tracking whether someone under investigation is connected to others on the list, it appears to show that the focus has changed. Of the first 100 people named as suspects when the campaign began, 25 had links with other targeted officials, including to Bo Xilai, a fallen rival to Mr Xi. Among the most recent 100 cases, however, only seven are members of identifiable networks.

Those in the database who have ties with one another are often members of a group suspected of opposing Mr Xi. The shift from targeting such officials to tackling individuals without apparent connections may be a sign that eliminating corruption—rather than simply getting rid of rivals—is becoming a more important objective. Or it may be that Mr Xi has run out of rivals in need of crushing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21692928-who-being-investigated-corruption-and-why-portrait-purge/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Aviation in Africa: Departure delayed

Saving Africa’s rhinos: Pooches v poachers

The veil in west Africa: Banning the burqa

Syria’s war: Assad on the offensive

The Mosul dam: A watery time-bomb





Articles Sections Next

Aviation in Africa

Departure delayed

Africa is ripe for air travel. A pity its governments are holding it back

Feb 13th 2016 | 30,000 FEET ABOVE THE SAHARA | From the print edition



SEASONED air travellers who criss-crossed Africa a decade or more ago usually have no shortage of hair-raising tales. One mining executive tells how on take-off in an old Russian jet one of the engines burst into flames. An imperturbable crewman stepped out with an extinguisher, sprayed down the engine and then announced the plane would leave as planned, trying to block the mass exodus of passengers. Another traveller recalls the amusement in the eyes of fellow passengers when he boarded an ancient plane in west Africa. Soon after take-off, as clouds billowed into the cabin, they had a good laugh at the panic on his face until one explained that this always happened when the air-conditioning was turned on.

It is not just the tales that were hair-raising. Hard statistics alone might have grounded all but the most daredevil of travellers (except for the fact that shoddy roads continue to make driving in Africa even more dangerous than flying). In 2011, for instance, Africa accounted for almost a third of all deaths in air crashes around the world, even though it accounted for less than 3% of all air traffic.

The European Union (EU) has banned no fewer than 108 airlines from 14 African countries from its airspace because of safety concerns. These include all airlines registered in, among other countries, Zambia, Sierra Leone, Mozambique and both of the Congos. A recent accident in South Sudan underscores the EU’s worries. In November a 44-year-old Antonov crashed on take-off in Juba, the capital. Its Ukrainian manufacturer said it should never have been allowed to fly, because it had not been maintained.

Yet on the whole safety has improved vastly in recent years. Although headline accident rates are still sky-high—in 2014 aircraft in sub-Saharan Africa had a crash rate about 8-11 times higher than those in America and Europe—most of the accidents involved small propeller-driven planes. Look only at jets and the rate falls sharply. Flying on a passenger jet in Africa is now about as safe as it would have been to board a European or American one about two decades ago. And the best African airlines are almost as safe as their global counterparts, says the International Air Transport Association (IATA).

Safety concerns force travellers to make some unusual compromises. Many international corporations forbid their staff from flying on one Nigerian airline because they think its rival—which is notoriously tardy—is maintained better. Passengers must choose between being late or being less safe.



Another big change is in the number of flights and destinations knitting Africa together. The number of air travellers in Africa has almost doubled over the past decade. New routes have also opened, most visibly linking east and west Africa. But routes are often still convoluted, taking long detours via Europe. This is because most African states still regulate flights as if they were in the 1970s. Airlines hoping to open a new route between two countries have to ask their governments to negotiate a bilateral treaty. Approvals can take years, if they are granted at all, as governments try to protect their state-owned carriers.

In instances where African governments have taken steps to liberalise their markets, as Europe and America did from the late 1970s, fares plunge. That, in turn, makes flying affordable to more people, so the number of passengers soars. Fastjet, a London-listed low-cost airline with operations across Africa, says fares charged by the existing carriers flying between Tanzania and Kenya dived 40% overnight when it got permission to fly the same route.

Yet few governments seem willing to open up to competition for fear it would harm their national carriers. “The benefits would be huge,” says Andrew Charlton, head of Aviation Advocacy, a Swiss-based consultancy. “But you would almost certainly see some African airlines disappear.” Protectionism raises fares without making African airlines profitable. They probably lost a collective $300m in 2015, and are likely to lose another $100m this year, IATA reckons. When given a choice of airlines on international routes, passengers almost always opt for foreign carriers over African ones. The African Airlines Association laments that the continent’s own airlines only carry 20% of passengers to or from it.

Simply opening up the skies to more competition will not, in itself, allow African aviation to reach its full potential. One barrier is that jet fuel costs about 20% more in Africa than it does elsewhere. This is partly because of antiquated infrastructure but also because governments tax it heavily. There is also little competition between airports, allowing some to charge outrageous landing fees. Countries such as the Central African Republic are unable to control traffic in their airspace, leaving pilots to chat directly with one another to avoid collisions. That works in uncrowded skies but gets riskier as they fill up.

Still, some airlines are innovating in the face of adversity. Many of Fastjet’s customers don’t have credit cards, so it accepts mobile money sent from their phones instead. One Nigerian airline seems to have hit upon a subscription model of ticket sales: after your correspondent bought a single flight on a credit card, the airline proceeded to charge him again every month for the flight until an employee, aptly named Amicable, put a stop to it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21692871-africa-ripe-air-travel-pity-its-governments-are-holding-it/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Saving Africa’s rhinos

Pooches v poachers

In the struggle to save the rhino, dogs still beat drones

Feb 13th 2016 | KRUGER NATIONAL PARK | From the print edition



THE stench of rotting flesh hangs heavy over the half-eaten carcass of a rhino, killed by poachers who hacked off its horns and left the rest to the lions. Barricade tape marks out the gruesome discovery in the South African bush: this is a crime scene. Two young women search for bullet fragments and casings with a metal detector, and use a chef’s knife to cut away tissue samples and a toenail. The evidence is bagged and carefully logged in a database. It is grim work but these women, wildlife crime investigators with the South African parks service, are used to it.

Kruger National Park was home to 826 of the 1,175 rhinos killed last year in South Africa. This was a slight dip from 2014, but the number of rhinos killed by poachers increased in neighbouring Namibia and Zimbabwe. Overall, 2015 saw the most rhinos killed since the poaching crisis began nearly a decade ago, fuelled by demand from Vietnam and China, where many people wrongly believe it will cure everything from hangovers to cancer.

Some firms have promoted drones as a sophisticated (and pricey) way to monitor the Kruger park and detect gangs of poachers. “They come with drones promising they will solve everything,” says one park official. But the drones have so far failed to impress the rangers. The Kruger park is huge (about the size of Israel or Wales) and drones have had technical problems with its harsh climate and rugged landscape. Heat-seeking drones, meant to spot poachers hiding in the bush, get confused, because large stones absorb heat during the day and then release it at night. Rangers were being dispatched to hunt rocks.

A low-tech solution still works better. Tracker dogs, working alongside their human handlers, are responsible for more than 70% of arrests of suspected poachers in the Kruger. The powerful nose of a Belgian Malinois called Killer has led to 115 arrests over the past four years. Although the park is continuing to test drones in a project with Denel, South Africa’s state-owned arms manufacturer, the goals now are more modest. “They’re not the game-changer they have been portrayed to be,” says Julian Rademeyer, author of “Killing for Profit”, a book about the illegal rhino-horn trade.

The real problem is that although South Africa tries fairly hard to catch poachers, no one is doing much to tackle the Asian crime syndicates that buy the horns. Unless Asian and African police work together better, the rhino’s future looks grim.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21692823-saving-africas-rhinos-struggle-save-rhino-dogs-still-beat-drones/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The veil in west Africa

Banning the burqa

Why more countries are outlawing the full-face veil

Feb 13th 2016 | LAGOS | From the print edition



LAST June, a few months after Chadian forces had crossed into Nigeria to fight the Islamist insurgents of Boko Haram, two suicide-bombers detonated their belts in N’Djamena, Chad’s capital, killing more than 30 people. Two days later Chad’s government banned the wearing of the burqa, the Muslim woman’s covering that hides even the eyes. Henceforth, said the prime minister, security forces could “go into the markets… seize all the burqas on sale and burn them”. Those spotted in such “camouflage” would be “arrested, tried and sentenced after summary proceedings.” Heavy-handed as that sounds, several other sub-Saharan governments have followed suit. A month after Chad’s ban, Cameroon did the same in its northernmost region following suicide-bombings by people clad in burqas. Now the ban has been extended to five of Cameroon’s ten provinces, including its two biggest cities. Niger’s government has banned the garment in Diffa, a southern region that has also been hit by Boko Haram. And late last year Nigeria’s President Muhammadu Buhari, a Muslim, said that a ban even on the hijab, which shrouds a woman’s head and chest but leaves her face on show, may be necessary if bombings persist.

Even countries unharmed by Islamist terror are banning the burqa. Last year Congo-Brazzaville barred it in public places to “prevent any act of terrorism”. And Senegal, which the French security service says is vulnerable to an attack, is pondering a ban, too. Only one west African country seems to be moving in the other direction. The Gambia’s eccentric dictator, Yahya Jammeh, who recently declared his nation to be Islamic, told all female government workers to cover their hair.

For decades Muslim countries outside the Gulf (where the garb is common) have discouraged the full-face veil—and the strict form of Islam it denotes. In recent years some governments in Europe, notably France and Belgium, have ruled against the full covering of the face, arguing that it allows terrorists to disguise themselves and violates European notions of secularism and sexual equality. Now many African governments have similar fears.

Bar Congo-Brazzaville, all those that have banned various types of religious covering for women have been threatened by suicide-bombers with a record of hiding explosives under loose-fitting clothes. Many locals feel nervous if they cannot identify a figure in a mosque or market. “Banning burqas is not a fail-safe, but at least it allows security forces to identify suspects,” says Martin Ewi of South Africa’s Institute for Security Studies.

Across the region around Lake Chad such rules have accompanied a stream of new security measures, including curfews, embargoes on motorbikes (the attackers’ vehicle of choice) and checks on cars with tinted windows. People in Congo-Brazzaville have been banned from sleeping in mosques. Last year Nigeria even outlawed horse-riding in the north-east, because Boko Haram, short of fuel, has occasionally made its lethal raids on horseback.

Most people in Chad, Senegal and Niger are Muslim, as are nearly a quarter of Cameroonians. Islam expanded south of the Sahara in the tenth century and most of its adherents have opposed the most puritanical versions of Islam. Many Muslims in the region are Sufis, who wear colourful clothes, practise a mystical kind of Islam, and tend to see the full-face veil as drab and unAfrican. “Sometimes people don’t want the black [material] to touch them,” says a burqa-wearer at an Islamic school in a poor bit of Lagos, Nigeria’s commercial capital. “They think it signifies death.” An imam in Yola, a north-eastern Nigerian town hit by Boko Haram, says, “Even Muslims think [the burqa] is an extremist thing, or it’s linked to Boko Haram.”

Ultra-austere forms of Islam, in particular the Wahhabist version, sprung up in sub-Saharan Africa only in the past few decades, as traders and students travelled to the Gulf and Saudi Arabia poured money into Islamist institutes and mosques.Though a small minority, fundamentalists are growing in number. A tenth of Muslims in Cameroon may now be Wahhabists. Sufis in Chad fear they will soon be outnumbered by them, says Thibaud Lesueur of the International Crisis Group. “We thought it would never be part of the culture in Senegal, but more and more people are following these rituals,” says Aliou Ly, a Senegal-born assistant professor at Middle Tennessee State University.

Yet it is not clear that banning the burqa, let alone the hijab, will help the fight against extreme groups such as Boko Haram. Some fear it could play into their hands. A few weeks after Chad banned the burqa, a veiled man blew himself up in N’Djamena’s main market. In Cameroon police have pulled the hijab off women in the street. That enrages ordinary Muslims. In Chad, 62 women were arrested for wearing burqas and told that if they did so again they would be charged with complicity in terrorism. If Mr Buhari penalises women for wearing the burqa, there could be a backlash. “There would be a war bigger than Boko Haram,” says an imam in Lagos, as his wife and daughters sit silently in the corner, under veils.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21692902-why-more-countries-are-outlawing-full-face-veil-banning-burqa/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Syria’s war

Assad on the offensive

The encirclement of Aleppo consolidates the regime’s comeback

Feb 13th 2016 | BEIRUT AND KILIS | From the print edition



HOW the tables have turned. In February last year Bashar al-Assad’s forces launched an offensive to take back Aleppo, once Syria’s most populous city but divided between the regime and rebel fighters since 2012. Not only were Bashar’s battalions pushed back from the city; the rebels then turned west and routed them from Idlib too. A year on, Mr Assad is attacking Aleppo again. This time he is succeeding.

Almost five years since the war started in Syria, the regime is making a comeback. Unlike previous ebbs and flows in the brutal conflict, this one looks as if it may prove decisive. In what has long since become a proxy war, Mr Assad’s allies are simply more dedicated to their cause than the backers of those fighting to oust him; and there is little sign that this will change.



Aleppo is now almost encircled by the Syrian army and Shia fighters from Iraq and Afghanistan under Iranian command. They have taken back Zahraa and Nubl, two Shia towns north-west of Aleppo (see map), and have cut off the rebels’ last supply route into Aleppo from the Turkish border. Russian airstrikes cleared the way. They are bombing civilian areas at least as heavily as front lines. Ezz al-Din Attar, a refugee from Aleppo now in Kilis, says that includes hospitals, schools and markets.

It is likely the regime intends to move onto villages around the city, and then towards Idlib to Aleppo’s west. The road to Idlib is the only one out of rebel-held Aleppo still open, through a 5km (three-mile) corridor separating two regime positions in the north-western corner of Syria. And it may not last long. The regime, which has a column only 3km from it, is shelling this road too. Hizbullah and Shia fighters are only 20km from two towns in Idlib province that, if captured, would help the regime to advance in the province.

The UN reckons 300,000 people in the eastern part of Aleppo under rebel control are in danger of being cut off and starved, as Mr Assad has deliberately done to other towns and villages. Aleppo town councillors have sent a detailed list to donors of the food, fuel and medical supplies they will need to survive the siege, which could last many months since the city is too big to fall quickly. Thousands of others have fled towards Turkey’s border. “People are beginning to panic,” says Bahaa Jabali, a photographer in Aleppo.

Iran has long been sending thousands of Iraqi and Afghan Shia militiamen to Syria. But it is Russia’s intervention in the autumn last year that has made the difference. Sold as being against Islamic State (IS), Russia has mainly set about bombing the more mainstream Sunni rebels. Despite yet another report this week accusing Mr Assad of crimes against humanity for “exterminating” prisoners, Russia knows that his regime is more palatable to the West than IS.

America, focused on fighting IS, has continued to hope, without any real evidence, that Russia will help force Mr Assad to the negotiating table. Not surprisingly peace talks fell apart in Switzerland last week almost as soon as they had begun, over the assault on Aleppo. Mr Assad and his allies appear to see the only point of the talks as being a place to consolidate their gains, in hope of receiving a stamp of approval from a weary UN.

The opposition’s backers are at odds, too. The Gulf states are angry with America for focusing on IS instead of Mr Assad. On February 10th Turkey lashed out at America for working with the Kurdish PYD, Syria’s offshoot of the Turkish PKK, which Turkey considers a terrorist group.

The PYD is in tacit alliance with the regime. Its fighters are moving in to hold some of the areas taken by the regime around Aleppo, on the border with Turkey. The silent agreement may soon become formal. Word is that Russia has promised the Kurds what Western backers would not: a continuous Kurdish area in the north-east of Syria that is their stronghold.



An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts

The rebels say their last hope is a promise from Gulf states to send ground troops to help them out, though the Gulf states say their main aim is to fight IS. About 30,000 fighters from various groups have joined an umbrella group, Jaish Haleb (the Army of Aleppo), to defend the city. Elsewhere the choice is harder: in the town of Tel Rifaat, near the border, the rebel fighters are local men tempted to flee to safety with their families. What any Gulf force would consist of is unclear, but even if it materialises, it is unlikely to do much in the face of the regime’s firepower.

Even in the south of Syria, where the rebels are in better condition thanks to more consistent and organised support by the opposition’s backers, the regime, once again with Russia’s help, has made advances. In January it took Sheikh Miskeen, a rebel stronghold. “Russia, Iran and Assad know that this year America is weak because of the election and that Obama will not do any more so they are using this time to destroy the opposition,” reckons Fabrice Balanche, a scholar at the Washington Institute, a think-tank.

Jordan is unlikely to do much to help, wary of Mr Assad and of more refugees. The Turks say they will not intervene directly in Syria unless the Americans do; but they are setting up an informal buffer zone. Rather than allow in the thousands camped out in the open between Aleppo and the border, Turkish relief organisations have been crossing over to the Syrian side and building new camps there. But it is unclear who will protect the area should the regime decide to attack. Any action at this point risks direct conflict with Russia. Aleppo may determine what happens in Syria, the region and beyond.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/21690203-city-was-once-syrias-largest-faces-siege-assadu2019s-grip-tightens/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Mosul dam

A watery time-bomb

The most dangerous dam in the world

Feb 13th 2016 | BAGHDAD | From the print edition

It seemed a good idea at the time

“FIRE or flood” goes an old saying about the turbulent history of Iraq; and just now flood is the one to fear. American officials are ringing alarm bells over a potentially catastrophic collapse of the country’s biggest dam, 50km (30 miles) upstream from Mosul, Iraq’s second city, currently held by Islamic State (IS)

“What we do know is this—if this dam were in the United States, we would have drained the lake behind it,” said Lieutenant-General Sean MacFarland, who commands American forces in Iraq, to reporters last month in Baghdad. Sensors installed by American army engineers in December show widening fissures in the fragile gypsum base underneath the dam, though no one can predict when a breach might occur.

Iraqi authorities have downplayed the danger, in part because they have not had the money to fix it. But after repeated warnings from American experts and an infusion of $200m from the World Bank for urgent repairs, the Iraqi government has now contracted with the Trevi Group, an Italian firm, which it hopes will offer a more advanced and permanent method of plugging cavities in the stone base than the constant maintenance it has required for the past 30 years. That maintenance came to an abrupt halt after IS seized the dam in August 2014, and has continued only intermittently after it was seized back three weeks later. Essential equipment went missing then, and half its staff decided not to return to work.

One study says that if the dam collapses, Mosul would be submerged within hours. Another warns that half a million Iraqis could be killed by floodwaters, and more than a million forced from their homes. Disease and looting as the floodwaters raced through Baiji, Tikrit, Samarra and even parts of Baghdad would complete that dreadful scenario.

The dam was built by an Italian-German consortium and started operating in 1986. Because of the high proportion of gypsum in the area, the construction included a grouting tunnel to allow almost constant injection of cement and drilling mud into crevices in the base that are widened by the water flowing through them. America’s Army Corps of Engineers warned in 2005 that the “extraordinary engineering measures” needed to maintain its structural integrity made the structure potentially the most dangerous in the world. But taking the dam out of commission is not an attractive option. Emptying the reservoir would leave Iraqis seriously short of drinking and unpolluted irrigation water in the summer.

What is clear, according to Iraqi military leaders and engineers, is that if the Mosul dam collapses, the city below it would be flooded so quickly that it would not stand much of a chance. “Downstream we can do many things” in co-operation with the UN and other Iraqi ministries, says Mehdi Rasheed of Iraq’s water ministry in Baghdad. “In the current situation that is not possible for the people in Mosul city.” The Italians had better get moving.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21692903-most-dangerous-dam-world-watery-time-bomb/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




Corruption in Ukraine: Dear friends

Smoking in France: Between a puff and a Kalashnikov

Spanish politics: Back to the bullring

Germany and refugees: Is the welcome culture legal?

Russians in London: Government in exile

Charlemagne: Special privileges





Articles Sections Next

Corruption in Ukraine

Dear friends

Ukraine’s grace period for tackling cronyism may have run out

Feb 13th 2016 | KIEV | From the print edition



IN TSARSKOE SELO (“Tsar’s Village”), a smart district in Kiev, Ukraine’s president, Petro Poroshenko, owns a swathe of desirable land. Across the street sits a sprawling compound belonging to Ihor Kononenko, the president’s friend and deputy head of his parliamentary faction. The two men met during their Soviet army service. After Ukraine gained independence they rose together in business and politics. Last week Ukraine’s economy minister, Aivaras Abromavicius, resigned, accusing Mr Kononenko of obstructing reform. Mr Abromavicius said he refused to cover for officials who, “very much like the old government, are trying to exercise control over the flow of public funds”.

Ukraine’s Maidan revolution was supposed to roll back corruption and cronyism. Mr Abromavicius, a Lithuanian-born investment banker, was one of several foreigners invited into government to change the old ways. He ran up against vested interests in the circles of both the president and the prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk (pictured, being uncomfortably hoisted during a brawl in parliament). Mr Abromavicius is the second economy minister since the revolution to quit for similar reasons, and the fifth minister to resign from the current government. Western ambassadors lamented his departure. In unusually blunt language, Christine Lagarde, the head of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), threatened an end to Ukraine’s $18 billion bail-out programme “without a substantial new effort to invigorate governance reforms and fight corruption”. Following Ms Lagarde’s comments, Mr Poroshenko pledged to do more.

Yuri Lutsenko, the head of Mr Poroshenko’s parliamentary bloc, says the country now faces a “full-blown political crisis”. A cabinet shake-up is inevitable. A collapse of the ruling coalition and early parliamentary elections look increasingly likely. Ukraine’s Western allies argue that elections would be destabilising and open the door to radicals and populists. Yet an exasperated public may demand them. At stake is Ukraine’s chance of moving past its history of post-Soviet misrule.

Mr Abromavicius’s problems mounted last year after his ministry was given control over Naftogaz, the state gas firm, and the power to appoint chief executives at the 60 top state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Ukraine’s SOEs exemplify the crooked relationship between business and government: interest groups in parliament install “loyal” managers who funnel cash to oligarchs and political parties. Mr Abromavicius says he was pressured to let these appointments go through. His security detail was abruptly cut off for several weeks. The “tipping point” came when Mr Kononenko demanded that he appoint a crony as his deputy minister. (Mr Kononenko declined to comment.)

Figures like Mr Kononenko abound in Ukraine’s parliament; locals call them “grey cardinals” or lyubi druzi (“dear friends”). The lines between friends, business partners, relatives and political allies are blurred, says Mr Abromavicius, and reforms have stalled. “It’s not a technical problem, it’s a political problem,” says one foreign adviser to the government.

Dissatisfaction with the country’s direction is rising and trust in the authorities is falling (see chart). Not a single government institution has a positive trust rating, according to the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology. Investors are worried, says Tomas Fiala, the head of Dragon Capital, Ukraine’s largest investment bank. Bond yields have spiked in the past week.



On February 16th Mr Yatsenyuk is set to present his yearly progress report to parliament. A vote of no confidence may follow. Political stakeholders have been scrambling to prepare. Mr Poroshenko summoned the ambassadors of the G7 nations for a meeting, hoping to regain their trust. Mr Yatsenyuk gathered his cabinet to push for a last-ditch attempt at unity. Young reform-minded deputies are holding cross-party strategy sessions. The central bank chief summoned the heads of the top 40 banks for a dour meeting earlier this week. Western diplomats have been urging calm, concerned that instability could derail both Ukraine’s reforms and the Minsk peace process. Sensing weakness in Kiev, the Kremlin may be rocking the boat: last week saw an uptick in ceasefire violations and snap drills by the Russian army along the border with Ukraine.

The crucial question is the fate of Mr Yatsenyuk, who is reviled but controls a large faction in parliament. Although he and Mr Poroshenko are partners in public, insiders say the president wants the prime minister out. About 70% of Ukrainians also want Mr Yatsenyuk gone, but there is no consensus on who should take his place. The American-born finance minister, Natalie Yaresko, is favoured by some reformers, including Mr Abromavicius, yet she has expressed no interest. Two old hands, Yulia Tymoshenko, a former prime minister, and Mikheil Saakashvili, the ex-president of Georgia who is now governor of the Odessa region, do have designs on Mr Yatsenyuk’s seat.

There is a circular quality to Ukraine’s reforms. Mr Poroshenko was among the lyubi druzi of a previous president, Viktor Yushschenko, after the 2004 Orange Revolution. This time, many had hoped that real work on reforms would begin after local elections last autumn. The opposite has proved true. Mr Yatsenyuk has focused on saving his job, despite approval ratings in single digits. Mr Poroshenko, facing a backlash over his support for an incompetent prosecutor general, has seen his credibility steadily eroded. For some activists his failure to demand Mr Kononenko’s resignation is the last straw. “R.I.P. Poroshenko,” says Daria Kaleniuk, the head of Ukraine’s Anti-Corruption Action Centre. “He’s digging a political grave for himself and for the country.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21692917-ukraines-grace-period-tackling-cronyism-may-have-run-out-dear-friends/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Smoking in France

Between a puff and a Kalashnikov

Fighting for the right to smoke at school

Feb 13th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition

A national sport

WHEN France imposed a state of emergency in November, following the terror attacks in Paris, it implied some constraints on liberty. But the freedom to smoke was probably not one many observers had in mind. Fully 32% of French 17-year-olds admit that they smoke daily, and by law pupils can do so only outside school premises. Yet head teachers now fret that, by letting them out of the school gates during the day to light up, they face a greater threat: terrorism.

Improbable as it seems, the country’s biggest head-teachers’ union, SNPDEN-Unsa, wrote last month to the prime minister, Manuel Valls, demanding clarification. Did the ban still apply under the state of emergency, as the health ministry insisted? Or, given the security risk of gathering on the pavement, could head teachers make an exception, as the education ministry seemed to suggest, and allow smoking on school grounds? This, argued some, was the lesser danger. “Between a cigarette and a Kalashnikov, the risk is not the same,” said Michel Richard, a head teacher at the union.

Nobody seems to have thought of banning young people from smoking altogether. Smoking, like café culture, seems embedded in French life. Every year 350 tonnes of cigarette butts, the equivalent in weight to two blue whales, are cleared off the streets of Paris alone. Most European countries have curbed smoking over the past decade, thanks to sales taxes, public-health campaigns and stricter rules. The proportion of people who smoke has dropped by six percentage points to 20% in Britain; by 13 points to 13% in Norway, and an average of eight points across the OECD rich countries. In France, however, the figure has remained stable, at around 25%, and since 2008 rates for teenagers have gone up. Tobacco is the leading cause of preventable death in France, far ahead of alcohol or road accidents.

Successive French governments have tried to discourage the habit. Although cigarette taxes were not raised last year, as the state auditor noted disapprovingly this week, smoking has been banned in cafés and offices. In May, after years of resistance by the tobacco lobby and tabac-sellers, Marisol Touraine, the health minister, will impose “neutral packaging”. A manufacturer’s brand name will still be visible. But all packets will be henceforth sold in “unattractive” shades of mud-brown and khaki, with lurid health warnings.

The French do not exercise much. But they don’t snack, eat much junk food, or binge-drink like British teenagers. And they live longer, stay slimmer, and suffer lower rates of cardiovascular disease than most other rich countries. Yet they seem ready to ignore health warnings when it comes to smoking. Teenage girls say it keeps them from getting fat. “If you want to be with the cool kids, you hang out with the smokers outside the gate,” says one.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21692913-fighting-right-smoke-school-between-puff-and-kalashnikov/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Spanish politics

Back to the bullring

Does Spain need a government? Apparently, yes

Feb 13th 2016 | MADRID | From the print edition



WHEN Spaniards voted at a general election in December, they chose to change the way politics works. What they did not expect was that it would stop working altogether. Yet eight weeks later, they have no government and, with a fractured parliament, might not have one until the summer. The question that quickly arose was: does it matter?

Surprisingly, many thought the answer was no. Luis De Guindos, the finance minister, estimated that Spain could hold out for six months with the current caretaker government led by Mariano Rajoy of the Popular Party (PP). A 2016 budget was passed last year. “In the short run political uncertainty is likely to have limited impact on fiscal policy,” noted Fitch, a ratings agency, after the elections. Much of the spending, on services like health and education, is done by regional governments. More important, the economy is recovering, unemployment is falling and growth looks set to continue at about 3% this year. Spanish newspapers, recalling Belgium’s 589 days without a government in 2010-11, predicted everything from an economic boom to less corruption.

But with jittery financial markets now threatening to upset Spain’s fragile recovery, attitudes are changing. “The assumption in Spain was that it didn’t matter because in an environment with benign financial conditions and growth and employment being created, who cared?” says Fernando Fernández, an economist at the IE Business School in Madrid. Yet it would be foolish to forget that the Spanish economy is still vulnerable, he adds. Spain is heavily in debt, as are many Spanish families. The deficit remains high and unemployment, although falling, is still sky-high at 20%. If the current market turmoil provokes a large hike in bond yields, then the provisional government may have to make tricky spending decisions. And the problems are not just domestic. In Europe, too, Spain may have to take a stance on everything from Brexit to immigration.

With a weak government, any major decisions risk being viewed as ephemeral, warns José Fernández-Albertos, a political scientist at Spain’s National Research Council. Unlike Belgium, Spain is not used to consensus-based coalition politics. It is more like the United Kingdom, where a change of government can bring a big shift in policy. Any decision Mr Rajoy takes could be reversed by a new government within weeks or months.

All this could be avoided if Spain’s political parties could agree on a new government. That is unlikely to happen soon, if at all. Mr Rajoy has run out of options and the socialist leader, Pedro Sanchez, is now trying to see if he can piece together a coalition. His two main potential partners are either the centre-right insurgent party Ciudadanos or the new left-wing radicals of Podemos. Yet both coalitions would result in unstable minority governments.

If Mr Sanchez fails, new elections must be called. Whether that will resolve things is unclear. Polls show that the distribution of seats would be fairly similar. This might lead to a coalition with Podemos, a thought that frightens many investors. If that happens, Spaniards may look back on this period of political uncertainty fondly, says Lorenzo Bernaldo de Quiros, an economist. “A caretaker government,” he says, “is better than a bad one.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21692922-does-spain-need-government-apparently-yes-back-bullring/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Germany and refugees

Is the welcome culture legal?

Under pressure to reverse her refugee policy, Angela Merkel faces a court case

Feb 13th 2016 | BERLIN | From the print edition

Tying her hands

OF ALL the people stoking the pressure on Germany’s chancellor these days, the most relentless is Horst Seehofer, Bavaria’s premier and leader of its governing party, the Christian Social Union (CSU). Angela Merkel’s refugee policy, he said this week, amounts to a “reign of injustice”—or “illegality”, depending on the translation. This month he will decide whether Bavaria will sue the federal government in the constitutional court in Karlsruhe.

The argument that Mrs Merkel’s “welcome culture” is not only naive but downright illegal is popular among German conservatives. Proponents include eminent jurists such as Hans-Jürgen Papier, a former president of the constitutional court (and a member of the CSU). Claiming asylum in Germany is technically impossible for anybody arriving on a land route, he points out. Under the German constitution, since an amendment in 1993, protection is not available to people entering from “safe” states, a description that fits all nine of Germany’s neighbours.



European Union law brings him to the same conclusion. The EU’s so-called Dublin agreement stipulates that refugees must claim asylum in the first member state they reach. Geographically, this cannot be Germany, unless refugees take an aeroplane or ship. Mr Papier concedes that Dublin has broken down. But while it allows Germany to process asylum claims voluntarily, it does not oblige it to. Given the magnitude of the crisis—with 1.1m refugees arriving in Germany last year—such a decision would have to be made by parliament rather than Mrs Merkel. Since the Bundestag has never yet voted on her overall policy, Mr Papier calls it “quasi-legal”.

Another former judge on the constitutional court, Udo di Fabio, goes a step further. Approached by Bavaria for a legal opinion on the suit, he concluded that it could win. His argument—which will sound more familiar to Americans than to citizens of more centralised states—is based on German federalism.



How do Angela Merkel's 10 years in office compare to other European heads of state?

In the Federal Republic of Germany, the nation, its 16 states and its municipalities all have their own forms of “statehood”, as well as obligations to one another. In the refugee crisis, these divisions and responsibilities have become muddled. Federal agencies control the external borders and decide on asylum claims. But the states provide accommodation and social services, as well as deporting rejected applicants. If the federal government neglects its role by allowing chaos on the borders and an uncontrolled inflow of people, this could undermine the statehood of Bavaria, say, by compromising its ability to provide public safety and other functions.

Germany’s constitutional court, unlike America’s, does not make a habit of resolving political disputes, and may not take such a hot-potato case even if Bavaria files it. But spelling out the legal logic exerts great political force. Mrs Merkel governs in a partnership between her Christian Democrats, the centre-left Social Democrats and the CSU. Mr Seehofer’s legal threat amounts to “a declaration of breaking the coalition”, says a top Social Democrat. At a pinch, Mrs Merkel could govern without the CSU. But given her waning popularity (see chart), she may not wish to. In fact, she has already been tightening asylum law piecemeal. Should she decide to close Germany’s borders to refugees for political reasons, her critics’ legal argument might serve as a handy excuse.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21692916-under-pressure-reverse-her-refugee-policy-angela-merkel-faces-court-case-welcome/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Russians in London

Government in exile

A new generation of émigrés has plans for the homeland they never wanted to flee

Feb 13th 2016 | LONDON | From the print edition



LAST week Vladimir Ashurkov, a former executive at Russia’s Alfa Bank, stood at the front of a tour bus full of journalists and academics threading its way through London’s Whitehall district, lecturing into a microphone as he pointed out an £11m ($16m) apartment belonging to a senior Russian official. Mr Ashurkov is a close ally of Alexei Navalny, a Russian anti-corruption campaigner and opposition politician, and the event was one of a series of “kleptocracy tours” organised by émigré activists to publicise how corrupt regimes launder their fortunes in London’s property market.

Mr Ashurkov fled Moscow in 2014 after prosecutors, in the midst of a crackdown on Mr Navalny, targeted him in an investigation that he says was politically motivated. He was granted asylum in Britain, where he joins a growing community of exiles who have left or been pushed out of Vladimir Putin’s Russia.

The first Russian to inquire about political asylum in Britain may have been Tsar Ivan the Terrible, who wrote to Queen Elizabeth I in 1570 asking whether she would take him in if things got too hairy in Moscow. (Elizabeth replied that he could come if he paid his own way.) Ivan never came, but England has since offered refuge to generations of Russian political exiles. Alexander Herzen, Russia’s first socialist, came to London in the 1850s and published his newspaper Kolokol (Bell), which was smuggled back into Russia. Lenin lived briefly in Bloomsbury, and is said to have met Stalin at a pub in Clerkenwell. Today London is home both to Mr Putin’s cronies and to opponents of his regime trying to lay the groundwork for the day it vanishes.

Putin or the Ritz

The most prominent political exile is Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who was one of Russia’s most powerful oligarchs until the government seized his companies and jailed him in 2003. Freed in 2013, Mr Khodorkovsky now calls London “the second-best place to be after Moscow, if you follow Russia”. From his Mayfair office he runs Open Russia, a civil-society group that sponsors discussions between Russian experts, journalists and artists, streamed to Russia via the internet. He has also launched an online university project that looks at Russia’s modern history, in particular the 1990s, not as a period of chaotic weakness (as Mr Putin describes it) but one of cultural vitality and opportunity.

Unlike many earlier dissidents, Mr Khodorkovsky is not directly working to hasten the regime’s end. Instead he aims to nurture a new Russian political elite, so that when the transition comes “we don’t end up in the same place as we did when the Soviet Union collapsed”, lacking leaders with democratic experience. As for what might bring about that change, Mr Khodorkovsky does not think it will be elections. Either Mr Putin will anoint a successor, or there will be “a revolution, with luck a bloodless one”. He has no illusions about how long that might take. “Putin may stay till 2024. This is why I am not working with anyone who is over 40.”

Mr Ashurkov, too, is thinking about the future: “We want to have a seat at a virtual round table about what Russia would look like after Putin.” As a first step, he has launched a project to analyse all the repressive laws passed by the Russian parliament in recent years that would need to be revoked by a future democratic Duma.



A timeline of Vladimir Putin’s unshakeable popularity

One obstacle to building a post-Putin elite is that many of the young people who might form one are leaving the country. The Soviet Union of the 1970s and 1980s prevented its citizens from defecting, forcing young, independent-minded people to sit tight and hope for change. In contrast, Russia has kept its borders open, letting the steam escape.

The result has been one of the largest brain drains in Russian history. Leonid Bershidsky, a former editor of Vedomosti, a business daily, has called the latest exodus an “emigration of disappointment”. Mr Bershidsky himself moved to Germany in 2014, after his hopes that Russia would become a normal European country were dashed by the annexation of Crimea and the war in Ukraine. Shortly before leaving, he wrote on his Facebook page that he did not wish to “pay a single kopeck for Crimea. Stolen goods are stolen goods.”

Most young Russians in London are neither exiles nor oligarchs, but professionals in search of the careers and intellectual fulfilment they can no longer find at home. Eduard Uraskulov, 30, who works at the London office of Goldman Sachs, was born in the small North Caucasus republic of Karachavo-Cherkessia. He considers himself a globalised Russian, wearing his nationality as lightly as his German, French or Brazilian peers. His road to London’s City started with a degree at Moscow’s prestigious New Economic School, then headed by Sergei Guriev, one of the country’s top economists. In 2013 Mr Guriev, who had advised Mr Navalny and testified in favour of Mr Khodorkovsky, was forced to flee himself. (Now a professor in Paris, he has just been appointed chief economist at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.)

Like many of his friends, Mr Uraskulov was at the protests in Moscow’s Bolotnaya Square in the winter of 2011 that sparked off Russia’s latest saga of oppression and exile. “There was a really good atmosphere then. It is very sad that nothing came of it,” he says. Mr Uraskulov does not consider himself an émigré. “As soon as I see that things are starting to change, I will go back,” he says.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21692934-new-generation-migr-s-has-plans-homeland-they-never-wanted-flee-government/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

Special privileges

In shaping a deal to suit British interests, the EU may be storing up trouble for itself

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



IF BRITAIN adhered to Groucho Marx’s dictum of never joining a club willing to have him as a member, it would be on its way out of the European Union. The “renegotiation” of Britain’s EU membership pursued by David Cameron, the prime minister, has been a fanciful exercise designed to keep his Conservative Party in check. But it has at least forced Britain’s EU partners to accept that, if pushed, they are better off with the infuriating islanders as part of the family. The EU, said Bild, an exuberant German tabloid, would be “spiritually” poorer after a Brexit (even if that may be read as a plea not to be left with the French and Italians).

The paper was responding to a draft settlement for Britain sent to EU governments last week by Donald Tusk, president of the European Council. Mr Cameron aims to convert Mr Tusk’s paper into a deal during a summit of EU leaders on February 18th-19th, and then put Britain’s membership to a referendum, probably in June. There is plenty of time for hiccups before then. The Poles and others are grumbling about an “emergency brake” that allows Britain to restrict benefit payments to working EU immigrants. France is suspicious about safeguards for non-euro members. Last week Martin Schulz, president of the European Parliament, warned an audience in London that Britain had tested Europe’s patience. He and his fellow lawmakers could hold up the legislation needed to implement parts of the deal. Mr Tusk himself admits that the situation is “fragile”.

But broadly, although Mr Cameron has taken a hammering at home over the draft, the signs in Europe look good. Few seem in the mood for a showdown; even the Poles are less obstreperous than expected. Mr Cameron’s peers decided that they needed to give him enough goodies for him to make his case to voters. And the prime minister secured some victories that many had argued were beyond his reach, even if they hardly amount to the fundamental change in Britain’s membership that he once promised.

For that Mr Cameron can thank the litany of woes afflicting Europe. Next to security fears, euro-zone sclerosis and the worst migrant crisis the EU has ever known, Britain’s little problem looks eminently solvable—and the departure of an economic and foreign-policy heavyweight an accident best avoided. Mr Cameron helped by steadily restricting the scope of his demands (see article). And the dread prospect, should Britain vote to leave, of spending years in painful negotiations over an exit settlement probably did Mr Cameron no harm. When everything else is falling apart, says a European official, at least the Britain talks give us a chance to get something right.

Where does this leave the rest of Europe? Mr Tusk’s great fear was that other countries would seek their own special treatment during the renegotiation: a carve-out from climate rules for the Poles, say, or a more lenient fiscal regime for the periphery. So worried were the deal’s brokers that they explicitly warned some governments not to try any funny business during the talks.

And by and large, apart from Catalonia’s chancer of a president (who mused that he could exploit the flexibility the EU showed with Britain in his bid for independence from Spain), they did not. Indeed, the most contentious elements of the Tusk deal seem designed to avoid such antics. Much of the package consists of clarifications of existing law designed to soothe British anxieties without upsetting the workings of the EU (or tampering with its treaties). A “red card” granting groups of national parliaments the right to block legislation, for example, gives Mr Cameron something to boast about. But the threshold of 55% of parliaments means it will rarely, if ever, be used.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

Most strikingly, the legislation that will satisfy Mr Cameron’s obsessive demand to deny in-work benefits to migrants for four years will be crafted to limit its application beyond British shores. The European Commission, which will draft the law once the governments have struck their deal, has even stated that Britain satisfies the criteria for pulling the emergency brake before specifying what they are. Downing Street could not resist crowing about this concession before it was announced.

Then everyone will want one

Thus does the circle look squared. Mr Cameron will probably win a deal that he feels able to sell to British voters. Assuming there are no nasty accidents at referendum time, the rest of the EU reduces its list of crises by one without fatally damaging itself in the process. Could this turn out to be that rarest of beasts: a European diplomatic triumph?

Not quite. Mr Cameron says other countries can enjoy the fruits of his renegotiation, but few will. Apart from a rule allowing governments to pay lower child benefits to parents with children abroad (which migrant-worker magnets such as Germany may exploit), most EU countries do not care about the provisions Mr Cameron negotiated. This is a deal to satisfy British concerns.

Alas, that may be the problem. A package designed as an improvement for the whole machine might be presented as a one-off. But special treatment for the British sets a precedent. The Italians might cite it to pursue their vendetta against the fiscal limitations of the Stability and Growth Pact. Easterners could call for exemptions from refugee-sharing schemes. Previous special deals (such as the Danish opt-outs of the Maastricht Treaty of 1992) did not have this effect, but they were struck in happier times. Today the EU is under siege from populists looking to bring the edifice down, and joint projects like the passport-free Schengen zone are in grave danger.

Still, before all that British voters will have to be seduced by their prime minister’s diplomatic dance. So far, despite the EU showing Britain that it wants it inside the club, many Britons still seem distinctly unimpressed. Mr Cameron, hoisting his renegotiation prize triumphantly, does not want to follow Groucho’s example. But there is no guarantee that the electorate will agree.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21692894-shaping-deal-suit-british-interests-eu-may-be-storing-up-trouble-itself-special/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




Britain’s tax code: Spaghetti junction

The Brexit debate: The budget that didn’t bark

Intelligence oversight: Snoopers scolded

The energy business: Switched off

Problem-solving courts: Smart justice

Sugar taxes: Do as I say, not as I chew

Refugees: Marginal benefits

Bagehot: Britain’s new ambassadors





Articles Sections Next

Britain’s tax code

Spaghetti junction

The chancellor promised to rationalise the tax code, but he has done the opposite

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



GEORGE OSBORNE sees himself as a reformer. The chancellor promised that, unlike his Labour predecessors, he would take tough decisions to improve the economy, whether this was liberalising planning to boost housebuilding, promoting competition between energy firms, or cutting red tape for businesses. When in opposition, Mr Osborne also set his sights on the tax code. In 2008 he proclaimed (with some hyperbole) that Britain’s code was “the longest [and] probably the most complex in the world”, promising “long-term thinking on simplification” if he got into power. He even mulled the idea of a flat income tax, where everyone pays the same rate regardless of their earnings.

Yet eight years on, the tax system looks as fiddly as ever. In 2010 Mr Osborne set up an Office of Tax Simplification (OTS) to hold the government to account, rather as the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) acts as a watchdog over fiscal policy. The OTS identified 1,042 tax reliefs in Britain. Plenty were ripe for reform. People could even get relief for the first 15p of “luncheon vouchers”, an idea dating from a time of rationing in 1946.

Relief on luncheon vouchers is no more, but other wheezes have proliferated. In 2012 oil firms charged with decommissioning old rigs were given relief on corporation tax. A year later Mr Osborne allowed workers to cede employment rights, such as the ability to claim unfair dismissal, in exchange for tax-free shares in their firms. From March children under 16 will not have to pay air-passenger duty (only in economy class, mind). By March 2015, the OTS found, the number of reliefs had risen to 1,156. From 2009 to 2015 the number of pages in the tax code grew by about a third.

Not all tax reliefs are foolish or damaging. The largest, costing roughly £80 billion ($115 billion) a year, is the personal allowance for income tax, a simple and progressive policy whereby people pay no tax at all on the first £10,600 of their earnings. So Adam Corlett of the Resolution Foundation, a think-tank, tries to capture the underlying complexity by adopting a restrictive definition of tax reliefs, which covers measures designed to “promote economic and social objectives”. Such reliefs resemble public spending. The state could, for example, give selected small firms either a grant or a tax break; the effect on the recipient (and on taxpayers) is practically identical. By this measure, the cost of tax reliefs rose in 2010-15 from 5.5% to 6% of GDP.

All this has made life no easier for business. A report on the coalition government’s tax policies from Oxford University’s Centre for Business Taxation found “little evidence of real simplification”. According to the World Bank, since 2010 the time taken by the average firm to pay corporate, value-added and labour taxes has remained unchanged, at 110 hours a year (though, happily, this remains relatively low by international standards).

On top of this, a failure to eliminate or simplify tax reliefs also hits the public finances. They encourage tax avoidance, which official estimates put at around £3 billion a year. And in a world of tight budgets, with spending by departments under ruthless scrutiny, many seem to offer poor value for money. Tax reliefs for film-makers, for example, whereby a production company can claim a rebate of 25% of film-production spending, has boosted the number of British flicks (“Last year alone we saw eight British-made films nominated for an Oscar,” Mr Osborne enthused in 2015). But it is not clear that this is worth the £2 billion cost to the government over the period from 2007 to 2015.

Meanwhile, relief on capital-gains tax for entrepreneurs costs £3 billion a year, three times more than official forecasts predicted. Yet a report commissioned by the tax office found “few cases where [it] appeared to have a major influence on the business behaviour and tax planning of claimants”. At £100 billion a year, according to Mr Corlett’s calculation, revenue forgone in tax reliefs is roughly equal to the NHS budget; but few have been assessed to see whether they are worth the cost.

The first year of a new parliament is when big decisions on tax are best made. Mr Osborne will have to announce some in next month’s budget, not least because the fiscal outlook has deteriorated since his autumn statement in November. The Bank of England has cut its forecast of GDP growth in 2016 to 2.2%. The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), a think-tank, reckons that receipts from income tax and national insurance in 2020 may be £5 billion lower than expected in November. So Mr Osborne will be looking for ways to make up the shortfall. He could choose a 33% flat rate on pension tax relief, yielding about £5 billion a year, according to Capital Economics, a consultancy. A more modest possibility is cutting tax relief on claims for travel expenses, which would yield £300m.

Such reforms could even make the tax system a mite simpler. But the direction of travel is, as ever, towards greater complexity. The Treasury has never published an overall strategy for the tax system, complains Paul Johnson of the IFS. Instead, chancellors pick tax policies for reasons of political expediency. In July Mr Osborne raised the threshold for inheritance tax from £650,000 for a couple to £1m. The increase applied only to housing wealth, not financial assets. The effect is perverse, encouraging people to funnel yet more cash into Britain’s bubbly housing market.

The OTS might have acted as a check on such wheezes. But it has little power. Unlike the OBR, few people have heard of it. It has had a small budget and has not been sufficiently independent of government, argues Julian McCrae of the Institute for Government, a think-tank. The Treasury fiercely guards its tax prerogatives. So far the OTS has not even been involved in pre-budget discussions about new tax measures, says Tracey Bowler of the IFS.

In an ideal world the Treasury would ditch its long-standing practice of keeping policies under wraps until the chancellor presents them in his annual budget, argues Mr McCrae. Consulting in advance would encourage officials to consider fully the impact of proposed changes, thus dissuading economically damaging political grandstanding. It is getting better at this, consulting on changes to corporate taxation, for instance. But that is tinkering around the edges. Unless Mr Osborne changes course and revives the idea of simplification, the unfortunate reality is that the tax system is likely only to become more byzantine.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21692884-chancellor-promised-rationalise-tax-code-he-has-done-opposite-spaghetti/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Brexit debate

The budget that didn’t bark

Why Britain’s EU budget burden is no longer a valid Eurosceptic gripe

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

Hey small spender: Tusk and Cameron

DAVID CAMERON is frantically working to secure agreement at next week’s European Union summit to proposals recently set out by Donald Tusk, president of the European Council, to satisfy British demands for reform of the EU. The prime minister hopes a deal will allow him to hold his planned referendum on Britain’s EU membership in late June.

One striking contrast with past British rows over Europe is the lack of any fuss over money. In Harold Wilson’s renegotiation of 1975, and again when Margaret Thatcher asked for her money back in 1979, Britain’s budget contribution was the central issue. Its absence this time may seem surprising, since it is an article of faith among Eurosceptics that Britain pays too much for its membership: some £20 billion ($28 billion) a year gross, or about half that net of receipts (roughly 0.5% of GDP).

There are three explanations. The first is that, contrary to myth, the EU budget is modest, less than 1% of GDP. And it has been shrinking, not growing. The budget is smaller as a share of GDP than in the 1990s, even though the club has taken in ten poor countries from eastern Europe. Thanks partly to British parsimony, the multiyear budget in 2014-20 will also cut spending.

The second reason is that it is hard to assert that Britain now bears an unfair burden. In the 1980s, before the Thatcher rebate, Britain came next to West Germany as a net contributor; without some corrective action it would have become the biggest, despite being one of the poorest members of the club. Thanks to the rebate, which refunds some two-thirds of its net contribution, Britain ranks eighth out of the ten net payers per head (see chart). This is despite surrendering part of the rebate after 2005 to ensure that Britain paid a fair whack to new members from central and eastern Europe.



As the chart suggests, indeed, several other countries have a stronger case than Britain for complaining about their EU budget contributions. It is partly because of this that no fewer than four—Germany, the Netherlands, Austria and Sweden—have secured special reductions in their share of the British rebate. That means the burden of repaying Britain falls most heavily on France and Italy.

The third answer is that a post-Brexit Britain would almost certainly go on paying into the budget, even as it lost EU funds for farmers, universities and scientific research. This is because the EU exacts cash in exchange for access to its single market. Norway, which has access via the European Economic Area, pays roughly 90% of Britain’s net contribution per head. Switzerland, which is not in the EEA but has bilateral trade deals, pays around 50%. Both countries subsidise their farmers even more lavishly than the EU, so the idea that Brexit would save taxpayers from supporting British farmers is also questionable.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

Eurosceptics insist that Britain could get a better deal than Norway and Switzerland. Or it might forgo full access to the single market and do a free-trade deal like Canada’s, ending budgetary payments. Yet the first seems unlikely in a bitter post-Brexit atmosphere: a country that walks out of the EU can hardly expect better terms than ones that might join one day. As for a Canadian deal, not only would it be hard to negotiate but it would exclude most services, including financial services, a key component of British exports.

The EU budget has many faults: too much goes on agriculture, plenty of spending in Mediterranean and east European countries is wasted, Eurocrats’ pay is excessive, and fraud and misappropriation are distressingly common. But the dream that Brexit would yield a pot of gold by saving the Treasury a huge and unfair contribution to Brussels is mostly just that.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21692883-why-britains-eu-budget-burden-no-longer-valid-eurosceptic-gripe-budget-didnt-bark/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Intelligence oversight

Snoopers scolded

A parliamentary committee blasts government surveillance plans

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



“SUPINE” and “deferential” have been some of the adjectives applied to the Intelligence and Security Committee, the nine-member body of MPs and peers which oversees Britain’s spy agencies. Unlike its counterparts in America’s Congress, it has a small staff, and it has failed to make much impact on issues such as the alleged participation of British officials in torture or rendition of suspected terrorists.

Not any more. The committee’s report this week on the government’s draft bill on investigatory powers—termed the “Snoopers’ Charter” by critics—adopted a tone of blistering disdain. It accused the government of hurrying the bill through, said its language was in places “incomprehensible” and that the powers it authorised were far too sweeping. It bemoaned the lack of explicit protection for journalists’ sources and lawmakers. In particular, it said that the protection of individual privacy, not the promotion of spookdom, should be the centrepiece of the bill.

The report echoes strong criticism from another parliamentary committee, dealing with science and technology, which complained that the bill did not explicitly rule out forcing companies to create back doors in the encryption they provide for customers. That, and the new burdens placed on internet companies to collect and, if required, hand over records of their customers’ activity online, risked damaging Britain’s competitiveness, it argued.

A third joint committee, created to scrutinise the central measure in the bill—a new system of judicial oversight, under which warrants will be issued not by the home secretary alone, but by new commissioners—reported on February 11th. It broadly welcomed the new measures but said the government had “further work to do” in allaying worries about the necessity and cost of collecting internet records, and in justifying so-called “bulk powers” (bugging and snooping en masse).

The criticism is directed chiefly at the government, not at spooks. Britain’s spymasters insist that they are happy to work within any legislative framework, and note that nobody has shown any evidence that they abuse their snooping powers under the existing one. None of the committees disputes the idea that the intelligence and security agencies should have the right, in some circumstances, to get hold of people’s private data, bug their phones and trawl databases in search of patterns and connections. The question is under what authority this happens, on what grounds, with which exemptions in case of urgency, and with what retrospective scrutiny.

The government is now in difficulty. It needs to pass the new bill: the existing laws are barnacled, vague and out of date, and are liable to fall foul of judges in Luxembourg (at the European Court of Justice) and in Strasbourg (at the Court of Human Rights). Both are due to rule this year on cases which could rattle Britain’s intelligence agencies, particularly GCHQ, which deals with electronic surveillance and code-cracking. The new system of judicial authorisation for warrants should help reassure outsiders that Britain’s spooks are under control. Moreover, a stopgap law, which gives them temporary authority to bug and snoop, expires this year.

But it is hard to see how, given the withering criticism it has received, the draft bill can proceed in its current form. A hurried rewrite risks running into the same difficulties as the current version. The fundamental problem is that the government has not been able to define the meaning of vital terms such as “necessary”, “proportionate” or “urgent” in a way that even sympathetic lawmakers find convincing.

Despite the government’s pickle, the bigger point is a positive one, about Britain’s system of intelligence oversight. The same privacy advocates who once derided the Intelligence and Security Committee as a poodle are now cheering its resolve.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21692918-parliamentary-committee-blasts-government-surveillance-plans-snoopers-scolded/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The energy business

Switched off

What to do with a market in which consumers ignore the cheapest prices?

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

Small print, big bill

IN JANUARY the “big six” energy companies, which dominate the retail markets in gas and electricity, began their winter ritual of lowering prices. E.ON kicked off, cutting its standard gas tariff by 5.1%; Npower, SSE and Scottish Power then made similar reductions. On February 11th British Gas, owned by Centrica, and EDF followed suit. Rejoicing all round, surely, especially for anxious consumers awaiting their winter heating bills.

Not a bit of it. Instead the reductions were met by angry complaints. It was “too little, too late”, said many; after all, the wholesale price of gas plunged by one-third last year. And only gas prices have been cut; electricity is not coming down. So, as usual, the big six are in the doghouse.

The high price of energy was an election issue last year. Now energy firms have to worry about the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA). Responding to the continuing public outcry over high prices, the CMA launched an inquiry into the energy market two years ago; its final report is due at the end of March. As the CMA has already stated that too many customers are paying too much, it is expected to recommend some intervention in the market, maybe even a price cap in the short term. Unsurprisingly, the big six are against this, and insist that the market is competitive.



Many customers are caught out by the high price of the standard variable tariff (SVT) relative to those of the fixed one-year or two-year deals that are available if they shop around. The SVT is the default option, rolled over unless a customer actively switches to another tariff. And whereas the fixed deals have fallen in line with the wholesale price of gas, the average SVT has not (see chart). Switching has got easier, but still about 70% of the big six’s customers cling on to their SVTs, thereby forking out about £160 ($230) a year more than if they switched to a cheaper deal, even within the same company, according to the CMA.

Why so few customers switch when it is clearly in their interest to do so is the matter of greatest controversy, and the focus of the CMA investigation. Critics argue that switching remains too difficult, and that firms still do not do enough to alert their customers to the lower fixed-rate tariffs. Edmund Reid, an analyst at Lazarus, a consultancy, says that the big six have “generally focused on maximising the profitability of their disengaged customers”, as they make much less money on the other tariffs. This is a risky strategy politically, as these non-switching customers also tend to be those who are least able to afford the higher prices.

The big six say that they are caught in a squeeze. There is now an unprecedented number of suppliers—about 30—and the market share of smaller companies has risen rapidly, from about 2% in 2012 to over 10% today. The big six are thus haemorrhaging customers, while their fixed costs, of transmission and regulation, will rise this year from April 1st when a new round of so-called Renewable Obligations comes into effect. Companies such as SSE argue that, according to the CMA’s own surveys, most customers know they can switch, but many prefer to avoid the hassle.

Nigel Cornwall, an energy consultant, suggests that the CMA should scrap the limit on the number of tariffs that companies can offer, now four, to introduce more price differentiation. But whether that would induce the big six to reduce their SVTs is an open question.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21692921-what-do-market-which-consumers-ignore-cheapest-prices-switched/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Problem-solving courts

Smart justice

The government once again tries to make courts more caring

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



IN A speech on February 8th David Cameron set out what he claimed was “the biggest shake-up of prisons since the Victorian era”. The package included more freedom for governors, league tables for jails and measures to improve ex-cons’ job prospects. But Mr Cameron also announced a proposal which could reduce the number of people who end up behind bars in the first place: the introduction of “problem-solving courts”.

Such courts were established in Miami in 1989 to deal with drug offenders. First- and second-timers were sent to treatment programmes, rather than prison, and their progress was overseen by a judge who could send them to jail if they relapsed. Other states soon began to copy the idea, which was cheap (or at least cheaper than prison) and added a hint of tough justice to rehabilitation. By 2012 there were 1,122 problem-solving courts in America, dealing with everything from school truancy and gambling addiction to gun crime and domestic abuse.

Mr Cameron is not the first British politician to be inspired by the model. In 2005 the Labour government set up a pilot court, the North Liverpool Community Justice Centre (NLCJC), which was billed as a one-stop shop for tackling crime. It was run by a single judge, bringing together justice agencies and services such as housing and domestic-violence support. Problem-solving meetings were often held after a guilty plea (someone steered towards crime by their homelessness might get help finding housing, for example). And some offenders could be dragged back to court to have their progress reviewed.

The early signs were good. Visitors enthused and staff spoke of the innovation made possible by different services sharing a home. But in 2012 a report by the Ministry of Justice found that criminals who had been through the NLCJC were no less likely to reoffend, and were more likely to break court orders, than a control group. Partly as a result, the Ministry of Justice closed the NLCJC in 2014.

Many still defend the project. Some argue that the outcomes for the toughest cases were good, even if the average results were no better than regular courts; others say that it struggled because it was largely forgotten by central government, after strong support in the early stages.

The family courts, which deal with disputes over divorce, custody of children and so on, have been more successful in introducing problem-solving. A study by Brunel University in 2014 found that 40% of mothers with drug or drink problems who went before the London Family Drug and Alcohol Court (which involves fortnightly meetings with the same judge, regular drug-testing and the threat of removing children) kicked their habit, compared with 25% of those going through the normal family courts. Specialist domestic-violence courts and Miami-esque drug courts have also proved effective, though to varying degrees.

What lessons can be learnt from these mixed results? First, that regular meetings with a familiar judge who can review sentences in light of offenders’ behaviour are crucial (by contrast, the NLCJC only occasionally assessed progress). A wide range of services must be consulted on the best approach in each case: much of the success of the family drug courts is due to the work of social services, says Penelope Gibbs of Transform Justice, a charity. And costs must be kept low. The NLCJC was so expensive that it was unlikely ever to be copied.

Michael Gove, the justice secretary, has worked hard to win over judges, some of whom are sceptical of an approach they see as infringing their independence. The potential of problem-solving courts makes such efforts wise. As well as reducing reoffending, says Andrew Neilson of the Howard League, another charity, they could bring about a valuable cultural shift. “The criminal-justice system currently makes sentencing decisions on very little evidence about what works,” he says. Regular contact between judges and the people they sentence might provide an incentive for that to change.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21692920-government-once-again-tries-make-courts-more-caring-smart-justice/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sugar taxes

Do as I say, not as I chew

MPs are united against sugar consumption—except in their own canteen

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



THE drumbeat of war reverberates around the House of Commons. The enemy, deadlier than al-Qaeda or Islamic State, lurks in every home: sugar. In January the National Health Service announced plans for a “sugar tax” on sweet drinks and snacks in hospital canteens. The same month Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, introduced a levy of 10p ($0.15) on cans of drink sold in City Hall. Later this month the government will launch a strategy to combat childhood obesity, perhaps including a tax on soft drinks and sweets, as imposed in countries such as France and Mexico.

Yet MPs decrying sugar’s impact on the nation’s health should first examine their own diets. A freedom of information request by The Economist to the House of Commons canteen shows that employees of Britain’s lower chamber have a sweet tooth of their own.

In 2014-15 Commons caterers ordered confectionery and soft drinks containing 4.8 tonnes of sugar, equivalent to 1.2m sugar cubes, or 680 cubes per full-time equivalent staff member. (Sugar content was available for only three-quarters of the items ordered, so the real total will be higher.) During the last parliament, from 2010 to 2015, 625,464 cans and bottles of Coke were chugged, and 659,470 chocolate bars and packets of sweets guzzled. KitKats are Parliament’s choc of choice, accounting for one in six snacks. Each contains 26% of an adult’s recommended daily sugar intake.

At least Commons staffers are tightening their belts. The number of chocolates and sweets ordered dropped from 150,572 in 2010 to 99,412 last year; staff have cut their soft-drink consumption by 10% and prefer Diet Coke to the full-fat variety. Their intake is much less than that of the average British child, who consumes 22kg of sugar per year. Still, the sugar gobbled by MPs and their aides during working hours is two-thirds their recommended daily intake (and they may not eat only salad at home). That, says Jennifer Rosborough of Action on Sugar, a lobby group, is too high. She suggests fruit, unsalted nuts and water.

One item in the saccharine census stands out. Perhaps unsurprisingly given the amount of time MPs spend shouting at each other over the dispatch box, 480 packets of throat lozenges were ordered last year. Sugar tax or no, some sweets are likely to remain popular.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21692923-mps-are-united-against-sugar-consumptionexcept-their-own-canteen-do-i-say-not-i-chew/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Refugees

Marginal benefits

Asylum-seekers are sent to the poorest parts of Britain. What happens next?

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



ONCE, Britain’s asylum-seekers could live where they pleased, but since 1999 they have been sent to a few places, mostly on Britain’s margins. These districts tend to be poor: Middlesbrough, which has the country’s highest number of asylum-seekers per person, also has its largest proportion of deprived neighbourhoods. Since most of Britain takes almost no asylum-seekers, officials in “dispersal areas” often complain this is unfair. Simon Danzuck, MP for Rochdale, which has Britain’s second-highest concentration of asylum-seekers, recently grumbled that his constituency is being used as a dumping ground.

In some ways the policy is a good one. It sends asylum-seekers to places where housing is cheap and plentiful (houses in Middlesbrough sold for less than half Britain’s average in December 2015; many of the houses asylum-seekers now live in were previously boarded up). And the habit of concentrating refugees in the same places over many years may actually help integration. One theory goes that fellow ex-countrymen have a protective effect on new migrants; and, although tensions remain, locals tend to become more welcoming after years of new arrivals, says Heather Petch of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, a think-tank.

This can be seen in Stockton, in north-east England, which has Britain’s fourth-highest number of asylum-seekers per person. Teatime drop-ins have grown into dedicated asylum-support groups; charity workers reminisce proudly about refugee children who are now at university. Growing groups of migrants have created demand for particular food and clothing: some refugees have set themselves up in the catering businesses. Bini Arai, who arrived in Middlesbrough from Eritrea 15 years ago and now runs a basement drop-in centre for asylum-seekers, says the community has become more supportive.

The main problem is that these areas have higher-than-average unemployment rates, and that people tend to stay there once granted asylum, rather than finding work elsewhere. According to Kath Sainsbury, who works for a refugee charity in Stockton, it is almost impossible to move on unless you already have a job lined up. Local authorities are obliged to provide refugees with welfare only if they have already been living in the area. There is also often a gap between the end of asylum assistance and the start of state benefits, meaning that people cannot afford to travel and must fall back on local shelters to avoid homelessness.

Few have jobs lined up. And although local businesses have learned to value industrious new refugees, says Ms Petch, it is hard to make connections with employers elsewhere if you don’t speak much English. English teaching is both patchy and in the wrong patches. One refugee charity in Bolton says it is the district’s only service offering formal English lessons, and the waiting list is around six months.

Asylum claims also take a long time to be processed, which means that claimants get rooted in a place. Gulwali Passarlay, an Afghan refugee originally placed in Kent, says it took a friend 15 years to gain refugee status from a dispersal area near Birmingham, and by that time he had seven young children in a local school.

Alexander Betts of Oxford University believes the Home Office could start placing asylum-seekers according to skills shortages in local areas. This might not be enough. Britain’s history of refugees includes stories of great success, such as the Ugandan Asians and the Vietnamese boat people. But these involve free movement and have city backdrops. The IMF found that Europe’s current crop of refugees could raise economic growth if integrated well into the job market. Britain’s restrictive policy may mean it loses out.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21692914-asylum-seekers-are-sent-poorest-parts-britain-what-happens-next-marginal-benefits/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

Britain’s new ambassadors

The EU renegotiation has made an unlikely diplomat of David Cameron

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



ALMOST a decade ago a new, ruddy-faced Conservative Party leader urged his comrades to stop “banging on about Europe”. David Cameron was right: his party’s neurosis was making it look clammy and xenophobic. He tried to kill the subject by marginalising it and, whenever his MPs became restless, flashing some Eurosceptic ankle. Hence in 2009 he pulled his party out of the European People’s Party (the EPP, the continent’s main centre-right grouping); in 2011 he tried to block a pact to save the euro zone; and in 2013 he pledged to renegotiate Britain’s membership and put the result to a referendum within four years. Thanks to this last gambit, Mr Cameron must now switch positions: having long played footsie with Eurosceptics and confronted his continental partners, today he must take on the former and flirt with the latter, especially in the build-up to the summit on February 18th at which the 27 other members of the European Council will discuss the draft renegotiation published on February 2nd.

This all amounts to a morality play about the risks of short-termism. Take the domestic picture. Though once mocked as a Tory replica of Tony Blair, Mr Cameron ditched his predecessor’s quest to put Britain at the “heart of Europe”, redefining the EU as a necessary evil. That was risky. As Ken Clarke, a pro-EU former chancellor, warned: “If you want to go feeding crocodiles then you’d better not run out of buns.” Today the prime minister’s bun store looks sparse, his talks having extracted some decent but, to many, paltry concessions. Perhaps 150 of 330 Conservative MPs remain undecided on EU membership, the merits of which were once party orthodoxy. “The mood is hardening,” reports one eminently pro-leadership Conservative MP surprised to find himself contemplating an Out vote, despite the angry civil war raging between different would-be Brexit campaigns. Meanwhile commentators are debating whether Margaret Thatcher would have backed an In vote, none of them having had the common decency to pay for a séance.

Questions swirl about the cabinet. So far five members have come out for Brexit. A larger number, including George Osborne, the chancellor, seem committed to membership. But three especially big Tory names are awaiting Mr Cameron’s deal. Theresa May, the home secretary, has indicated but not confirmed that she will back In. Michael Gove, the justice secretary and a quietly snappy crocodile, is torn between his ideals and his loyalty to the prime minister. Meanwhile Boris Johnson, the pro-EU mayor of London, is torn between his ideals and his loyalty to his own ambitions. He will back membership only at the last possible moment, as this will mean doing his three least favourite things: hitching his lurching wagon to someone else’s steady train, admitting that Mr Cameron is right and revealing his cards in any future leadership contest.

All of which has forced Mr Cameron and his allies at last to come out with a hearty case for the EU. In a speech hailing the draft deal the prime minister asserted: “Britain is better off, more secure, more prosperous…inside the European Union.” The following day, to some grumbling, he invited his MPs to make up their own minds rather than bow to their local associations. Meanwhile Ms May boasts of her close links with her French and German counterparts and Nick Herbert, the Eurosceptic now running the Conservative pro-EU campaign, phones MPs stressing the case for membership.

In a similar fashion, Mr Cameron’s dealings with his European partners have evolved from tactical raids into relationship-building (see article). By quitting the EPP he cut himself off from the EU’s most powerful information-sharing network. His veto in 2011, for example, was not a bold heresy but a misreading of the European mood (the prime minister had expected to trade it away for a change in voting rules). Likewise, in 2014 he alienated partners by ignoring diplomatic advice and mooting a cap on the number of migrants from the EU to Britain. In bilateral meetings last year he even threatened to lead the Out campaign.

But in the past months he has backed out of these positions, partly at Angela Merkel’s behest. Both he and Mr Osborne have toured Europe wooing their counterparts. One adviser claims the prime minister now gets on better with some—especially Mrs Merkel and Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister—than with many in his own party. “He got diplomacy pretty late in the day, but better late than never,” agrees Charles Grant of the Centre for European Reform. This has not gone unnoticed in Brussels. “He has rediscovered the art of building relationships with people,” says a European Commission insider, crediting the moderating influence of Tom Scholar and Ivan Rogers, Mr Cameron’s two top advisers on European matters.

Vanitas vanitatum, omnia vanitas

What does this say about Britain’s prime minister? It is clichéd (and worse, unfair) to claim Mr Cameron is just a breezy toff, an “essay crisis” incumbent. In fact he has strong views about how society should look, works at a rate that would exhaust most and is well aware of his political mortality. He is a versatile and astute chancer. His renegotiation is the product of these traits—and two fundamentals in particular. First, of the many things Mr Cameron has long known and cared a lot about, the EU is not one. Second, his faith in his ability to devise and execute canny manoeuvres exceeds the (albeit impressive) reality. So on matters continental, the PM is a powerful car with a wobbly steering wheel. The result is tactical short-termism from a prime minister otherwise capable of being long-termist—but endowed with the wit and charm to extricate himself from the ensuing scrapes and to keep the show, albeit chaotically, on the road. Expect the coming months to bring theatre, brinkmanship, clever-clever flourishes and ultimately, in all likelihood, an In vote. Whether this circus will have merited the drama and risk is another matter.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21692886-eu-renegotiation-has-made-unlikely-diplomat-david-cameron-britains-new-ambassadors/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




Marine conservation: Rejuvenating reefs

Corals in the South China Sea: A thousand cuts





Articles Sections Next

Marine conservation

Rejuvenating reefs

Though pollution and overuse are damaging corals, their biodiversity offers hope for their future

Feb 13th 2016 | COCONUT ISLAND, KANE’OHE BAY, HAWAII | From the print edition

More fish to fry

THE waters off the Hawaiian island of Oahu are visited each winter by migrating marine mammals such as humpback whales. All year round they are home to much smaller animals that form vast reefs: corals. Intricate pink structures stand out amid contortions of vegetable-green ones; dark-striped fish flit among them and turtles hover above. Corals lay down limestone skeletons of different shapes and sizes: branching types like small trees; ground-huggers spreading squat.

The colours that lure snorkelling and scuba-driving tourists are produced bysingle-celled algae that grow symbiotically in corals’ tissue. These use carbon dioxide respired by their host to make oxygen and carbohydrates through photosynthesis, giving corals most of the energy they need to form their skeletons. But this delicate balance is threatened by humans, both in the short term and over the coming years.

Overfishing, tourism and pollution are the most immediate perils, disrupting reefs’ ecosystems and the ability of corals’ algae to photosynthesise. In the longer term, rising levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will hit reefs in two ways. Oceans absorb about 30% of carbon dioxide emitted into the atmosphere, which makes them more acidic; as concentrations of carbon dioxide in the water rise, it will be harder for coral skeletons to calcify. And as oceans warm, corals will lose their colourful algae, which can only cope within a narrow range of temperatures. Reefs will be reduced to bleached-looking skeletons, vulnerable to disease.

Only twice before has such bleaching occurred worldwide. The first time coincided with El Niño in 1997-98, the world’s largest climatic phenomenon, which causes surface temperatures to soar in the Pacific Ocean. The second was in 2010. A third is now under way. About 16% of corals died in the 1997-98 disaster. The current bleaching event, once more occurring alongside a Niño, may have affected 38% of the world’s corals. Conditions now may offer a foretaste of the damage climate change could wreak on these already vulnerable ecosystems.

The harm before the storm

Coral reefs are found from the Middle East to Australia and America. They cover less than 0.1% of the ocean floor. But their importance is far greater than that figure suggests. They protect 150,000km (93,000 miles) of shoreline in more than 100 countries and territories by acting as coastal buffers, enduring the brunt of high waves and rough weather. They also support perhaps a quarter of all marine species, and act as nurseries for many others. In South-East Asian waters, the richest reefs are in the “coral triangle” (see map). This area of 86,500 square km holds two-thirds of the world’s coral species and more than 3,000 species of reef fish—twice as many as are found anywhere else.

More fish to fry

In the past half-century, though, these beautiful, biodiverse structures have been put under pressure by human activity. About a quarter of all coral cover has died. The reefs that are in worst shape are those off the most crowded beaches. “People don’t leave enough time for their sun cream to soak in, so it gets in the water,” says one deckhand with Eo Wai’anae Tours, which organises boat trips off Oahu.

More damage is caused by fertiliser-rich run-off from farms, leading to algal blooms which block light the corals need. Fishing near reefs cuts the number of herbivorous fish, allowing vegetation to grow out of control. Some fishing methods are particularly harmful: for example, blast fishermen in Colombia, Tanzania and elsewhere use dynamite to stun and kill fish without regard to the harm done to nearby reefs.

Crown-of-thorns starfish, coral-chompers that have proliferated in some areas, including Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, add to the stress. In the South China Seaisland-building and fishing for giant clams are crushing some reefs beyond the possibility of recovery (see article). The World Resources Institute, a think-tank, estimates that about 60% of reefs face such immediate threats.

The bounty that reefs provide accrues to those living near them, and in the short term. Without strong property rights, the result is an unfolding tragedy of the commons, in which fishermen and tour operators destroy the resources they rely on.

Tourism generated by the Great Barrier Reef is worth about $4.6 billion annually to nearby Queensland alone. Australian bigwigs bent over backwards last year to keep the UN from listing the reef, a World Heritage Site, as “in danger”. Estimates suggest that the economic value of Martinique and Saint Lucia’s corals comes to $50,000 per square km each year, thanks largely to tourism. But overdevelopment threatens the reefs the visitors come to gawp at. Sediment from construction clouds waters, burying corals and blocking the light they need. Hotels close to the shore may be convenient for tourists, but the process of building them can kill the reefs that snorkellers like to swim over.

The mix of problems varies from place to place, meaning policies must be locally tailored to tackle them. But even when governments and environmentalists focus on the long term, the need to limit fishing means they often struggle to craft policies that do not cause immediate harm to poor people. The three countries with the largest numbers of people who fish on reefs are all in the coral-triangle region: Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and the Philippines. In Indonesia and in the Philippines, up to 1m people’s livelihoods depend on reefs.

Averting a tragedy of the commons means agreeing which activities should be restricted and enforcing the rules. For coral reefs—and other biodiverse marine environments—the usual approach is to give ecologically sensitive areas special status under local or regional laws. In such “marine protected areas” (MPAs), activities that are deemed harmful, such as fishing, drilling and mining, can then be restricted or banned, with penalties for rule-breakers.

Command and conquer

The Aichi targets, agreed in 2010 under the UN Convention on Biological Diversity, seek to reduce “anthropogenic pressures” on coral reefs to “maintain their integrity and function”. The aim is to have at least 17% of inland water and 10% of coastal and marine areas under conservation by 2020. Most countries have signed up. But the targets are far from being met. Less than 3% of the ocean’s surface is within an MPA.

The most urgent action is needed close to shore. The nearer humans are to reefs, the worse their effect on the fragile ecosystems. A global register of fishing vessels, long under discussion, would also help identify wrongdoers. And beefing up the UN law of the sea could inspire further action. Decades old, it has little to say about biodiversity.

But simply declaring an area protected does not make it so. In 2009 George Bush junior, then president of America, established three national marine monuments in the Pacific, including nearly 518,000 square km of coral islands and surrounding areas. Their remoteness makes it hard to stop vessels entering illegally; Hawaii’s coastguard is already stretched.

Satellites are sometimes used to police MPAs, but they pass over infrequently. In the future, sailing robots could play a larger role. America’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has been working with a private firm, Saildrone, on hardy models equipped with carbon-fibre fins. They cost less than $500,000 each and can roam remote ocean regions for months, making them far cheaper than manned boats.

Such drones could photograph rogue fishing vessels, obtaining hard-to-gather evidence for any criminal proceedings. And they could carry out other useful work at the same time, such as monitoring ocean temperature and acidity or tracking tagged members of endangered species. Saildrone plans to provide its robots as a service, so that universities and other cash-strapped organisations do not have to buy one outright.

Richer countries are better able both to administer and to enforce MPAs. Three-quarters of coral reefs in Australian waters are in MPAs, but only 16% of those within the coral triangle. “It is difficult to ensure systematic monitoring,” says Rusty Brainard of NOAA, who has advised marine scientists in the region. Indonesia has more than 17,500 islands, he points out.

In poor parts of the world, low-tech methods of surveillance are needed. Just 0.09% of Malaysia’s territorial waters, and those within its exclusive economic zone, are protected by an MPA. But a national programme requires fishermen to paint their vessels according to how far out they have permission to fish within the nearshore area. Other fishermen can then spot when a rogue vessel has strayed, even if they cannot read. And as boats require regular painting anyway, little extra cost falls on their owners.

Public-private partnerships could also help. A pilot project in Barbados, supported in part by local hoteliers and tourism organisations, will charge visitors to enter a coastal MPA managed by Blue Finance, an alternative-investment outfit with support from the UN Environment Programme (UNEP). About $1m was needed to set up the area; its upkeep will require half that each year. “We find private investors who don’t mind if their returns are a little below market rates because they are benefiting Barbados,” says Nicolas Pascal, an environmental economist who directs the company.

Other pilots are under way in Colombia and Martinique. But more backers are needed. According to research conducted under the Convention on Biological Diversity, investment will need to quintuple for the Aichi targets and other conservation goals to be met.

The effectiveness of marine reserves is hard to measure. Reefs are complex, ancient systems, and the effects of better policies will become known only gradually. “You can’t manage ecosystems: you can only manage the impact of humans upon them,” says Jerker Tamelander, the head of the reef unit at UNEP.

Even if the right policies are adopted to keep corals healthy in the immediate future, longer-term threats loom. Neither oceanic warming nor acidification can be kept out by an MPA. And both may be happening too fast for corals to adapt, especially as recent global climate deals will not slow them much. Back slaps and handshakes accompanied the inclusion of an aim to limit global warming to just 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels in the Paris Agreement last year. But only an incorrigible optimist would bet on that aim being achieved. And even if it is, that much warming could breach the environmental limits within which most reefs can thrive.

Nurture, not nature

So researchers are turning their attention to ways to help corals cope. Their global diversity, scientists hope, may hold the key. The same coral will grow differently under different conditions: corals of the western Pacific near Indonesia, for example, can withstand higher temperatures than the same species in the eastern Pacific near Hawaii. Such disparities can be found even quite locally. In Kane’ohe Bay, where the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology lies, 70% of some reef patches has been bleached in the current event. Others, less than 200 metres away, suffered bleaching to just 40% of their corals.

The characteristics that help some reefs survive unusual conditions could allow others to endure climate change. But tough corals from one place cannot simply be transplanted to another. So a team at the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology is in the early stages of engineering reef ecosystems, with $4m from the Paul G. Allen Foundation, a charity set up by Bill Gates’s former business partner.

Organisms respond to environmental changes through both genetic processes (adaptation) and non-genetic ones (acclimatisation). With corals, the nature of their symbiotic relationships can also alter. So selectively breeding and conditioning them, and investigating whether certain types of algae confer resistance to heat or acidity, could create hardier varieties faster than they would develop naturally.

These could then be used to repopulate ravaged reefs—once more is known about how and where to transplant them. “We’re assisting evolution,” explains Ruth Gates, who leads the research. Her team aims to help corals withstand changing ocean temperature and chemistry. Despite all her effort, she says: “if the tools we develop are never used, I would be the happiest person in the world.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21692868-though-pollution-and-overuse-are-damaging-corals-their-biodiversity-offers-hope-their/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Corals in the South China Sea

A thousand cuts

Greed and politics are destroying some of Asia’s most valuable coral reefs

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

Illicit cargo: a clam-laden Chinese fishing vessel

THE giant clams that lurk in the coral reefs of the South China Sea can live for more than a century and grow more than a metre wide. Their shells are coveted by China’s rich as swanky furnishings or cut into trinkets, such as jewellery. Large specimens can sell for thousands of dollars. The trade is damaging some of the world’s most important ecosystems.

China’s giant-clam industry operates from the port of Tanmen on the southern Chinese island of Hainan. There skippers load rickety wooden fishing vessels with provisions for a month. Barrels of water are lashed down at the stern and pigs led to pens at the bow. On the sidedecks sit crude open boats with single-cylinder engines and long propeller shafts. Once the mother ship reaches distant reefs, these are lowered and the propellers used to chew up submerged coral. When the murk clears divers bring up any giant clams that are revealed. The plunder is illegal in China, and trade in giant-clam shells is banned under international treaties. But in Tanmen it operates in broad daylight.

Recently the fleets have pushed deeper into the South China Sea and into waters claimed by neighbouring countries, including Vietnam and the Philippines. Satellite photos collated by Victor Robert Lee, an analyst, show that tell-tale scarring from clam-harvesting is now visible on more than two dozen reefs.

Enforcement has become laxer since China stepped up its claim to all the islands, reefs and rocky outcrops contained within a “nine-dash line” that encompasses most of the South China Sea. In some places the build-up of Chinese naval and coastguard vessels has made it less likely that clam-harvesters will be chased off by foreigners. Many Chinese feel that fishermen help to project sovereignty, and should be allowed to secure for China a bounty which “poachers” from abroad might otherwise seize. Three years ago President Xi Jinping even visited fishing boats on Tanmen’s quay, though the offending shells were hidden from photographers.

If this were not enough, reefs are also suffering from efforts to build new islands in the sea, mainly but not only by China. Seeking a stable base for runways, weather stations and other installations which might help promote territorial claims, dredgers have been sucking debris from the sea bed and spraying it over reefs which sit just beneath the surface. Such muck-spreading not only kills many square kilometres of coral, but obliterates any chance that it will regrow.

Ecologists fret that the tense security situation prevents them from measuring the extent of the vandalism. Chinese authorities are not entirely deaf to their complaints; since last year they seem to have tightened restrictions on clam-harvesting somewhat (and an anti-corruption drive led by Mr Xi may be lowering demand for the showiest shells). But China’s stance on island-building is uncompromising. In January one Chinese bigwig promised that any damage being done to reefs was “recoverable”. Almost no one outside China agrees.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21692869-greed-and-politics-are-destroying-some-asias-most-valuable-coral-reefs-thousand-cuts/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Railways in America: Doing the locomotion

France’s almighty bosses: In praise of the splits

Twitter: Clunky Dorsey

Corporate governance in Japan: Sharp elbows

Foxconn: Pointed questions

Indian business: Crossing the desert

Turkish wine producers: Sour grapes

Drone-racing: Whizz kids

Schumpeter: Diversity fatigue





Articles Sections Next

Railways in America

Doing the locomotion

The second golden age of American railroads is drawing to a close. Consolidation may follow

Feb 13th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



DURING the crisis of 2008-09, Warren Buffett made two big bets in the midst of the panic. He bought a slug of preferred stock in Goldman Sachs. And he took over BNSF, a huge railway. Goldman’s 32,500 bankers and BSNF’s 32,000 miles of tracks, stretching from the Pacific to Texas, had nothing in common, except that it was impossible to imagine American capitalism without them. “It’s an all-in wager on the economic future of the United States,” declared Mr Buffett when he bought the railway company, which, naturally, was advised by bankers working for a certain “vampire squid”.

How right Mr Buffett was. The last decade has been a golden one for shipping goods around the world’s biggest economy (each citizen’s consumption of goods and power requires the movement of 36 tonnes of freight a year). American railways have been a rare example of capitalism working well, with a virtuous cycle of demand, giant profits and vast investment in rolling stock and tracks.

Foreigners who snipe at America’s late-Brezhnev-era airports, smelly subways and rutted roads should, as the Proclaimers sang, take a look up the rail tracks from Miami to Canada. Fixed assets at North America’s six biggest freight-rail firms rose by 58% between 2004 and 2014, to $250 billion (see chart). Private firms have been spending almost as much each year on modernising American locomotives and tracks as the federal government has on roads. The infrastructure splurge has helped the environment, too, since trains are about four times as fuel-efficient as lorries. America’s freight railways are more efficient and far busier than their counterparts in Europe.



But now this privately fuelled locomotive has been derailed. In the last quarter of 2015 the combined earnings of the big American and Canadian freight-rail firms fell by a fifth, compared with a year earlier, mainly because of the commodity-price crash. The industry has tried to shrug this off as a temporary blip. But if the downturn persists, the investment extravaganza will be over.

Tougher times also raise the spectre of rail mergers, a phenomenon that has vexed America ever since the first transcontinental line was hammered together in the Utah desert in 1869. Dealmaking is already in the air, with Canadian Pacific (CP) pursuing a reluctant Norfolk Southern. This week CP said it would propose a shareholder resolution calling on Norfolk’s board to negotiate a merger. The deal is backed by Bill Ackman, an activist investor. It has thrilled Wall Street, peeved rival firms and put regulators on red alert.

Before asking how the industry’s fortunes could go wrong, however, how did it all go right? Since being deregulated in 1980, American railways have gradually got their acts together. Plenty of tailwinds are behind them. Freight volumes typically grow with GDP. And rail, with a market share of about 40%, should take business from road haulage, now with over 50% of traffic, which faces tightening emissions rules and a struggle to recruit drivers.

Greasing the tracks in the past decade was the commodity bubble. Newly drilled shale oil needed to be shipped from remote basins, and coal moved to power stations and ports—American coal exports doubled between 2005 and 2011, thanks to demand from East Asia and Europe. Intermodal transport (containers moved from ship to rail to lorry) rose rapidly, too, and now accounts for a fifth of sales.

Rail managers discovered their inner rottweilers. Hunter Harrison, who runs CP (and before that was at CN, Canadian National), is eulogised by investors for his ruthless scheduling—he is said to monitor individual trains as they chug across the continent. Most important of all, after declining steadily since the 1980s, freight prices were jacked up stealthily, rising by 42% in real terms since 2004.

Railroads could be accused of gouging their customers: pre-tax return on capital for the big six firms rose from 10% in 2004 to 19% in 2014. But that misses the bigger point. For every dollar of gross cashflow in 2014, 67 cents was reinvested. The industry’s appetite for capital spending is all but unique in America, where most firms spend bumper profits on share buy-backs to boost their stock price. Rail firms’ resistance to this corporate crack cocaine is hard to explain, but may reflect the lingering presence in their boardrooms of gnarled railmen with a love of horn blocks and glad-hand connectors, rather than earnings-per-share enhancement.

What is clear is that the investment spree is now under threat from slumping profits. The shale industry is reeling. Coal volumes have fallen, as domestic power generators switch to dirt-cheap natural gas and the strong dollar hurts coal exports. The industry has solid enough balance-sheets to weather a storm, with net debt of 1.8 times gross operating profit. But an age of austerity beckons. Capital investment fell by 15% in the last quarter of 2015 compared with a year earlier. In 2016 it could drop by 20%.

The industry’s unspoken plan is probably to keep raising prices while investing less and returning more cash to shareholders to keep them happy. This approach is likely to enrage everyone else. Customers such as carmakers, energy utilities and shipping firms will complain of being squeezed. Regulators will fret that the pace of modernisation has slowed. Despite a decade of huge investments there are still pressing congestion problems, particularly in Chicago, a bottleneck through which much of America’s freight is rammed.

So how can the industry continue to satisfy both investors and society if demand and profits are lower and the need for capital spending is just as high? Perhaps by turning the big six railways into four, or even two. How big the rewards would be from mergers is fiercely contested. Mr Harrison says he could cut $1.8 billion a year from Norfolk’s costs (equivalent to a quarter of the total), although most of those gains would come from running it better, not from synergies through bolting it onto CP. Norfolk says he is exaggerating.

Take your hands off my train set

Train mergers have been an explosive subject for over a century, with a dread of isolation or exploitation at the hands of railway robber-barons lodged deep in America’s subconscious. The last round of deals was permitted in the 1990s, when the number of big train firms fell by half. The antitrust apparatus today is clunky. The federal Surface Transportation Board (STB) has had broad powers to block rail mergers on public-interest grounds since 2001. But it struggles to articulate a logic for assessing what it thinks makes a system better—does it want choice, modest returns on capital, lots of operators, lots of route combinations, or low prices?

The industry already consists of three geographical duopolies—the West (where BNSF and Union Pacific dominate), the east (Norfolk and CSX) and Canada and its links to the United States’ industrial north (CP and CN). It is not obvious why linking two non-overlapping rail networks would make any area less competitive.

But even saying that is taboo, and a giant head of steam is building up across the country against the CP-Norfolk deal. The Alabama State Port Authority is sceptical, Ohio’s soyabean farmers are livid, western Kentucky’s coal miners are perturbed, and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen foresees a “death spiral”. Most are worried about services and jobs being slashed. Both Union Pacific and CSX have said they oppose a deal. On February 4th nine members of Congress from Indiana asked the STB to be vigilant. The regulator itself is likely to be worried about the short-term disruption dealmaking could create. Consolidation in the 1990s caused chaotic delays.

So Mr Harrison’s proposed deal looks likely to struggle. Yet the near-universal hostility to consolidation reflects a complacency born of the golden years. Now that cash is no longer raining down it will be harder to satisfy investors, customers and the long-term national interest all at once. Perhaps a rationalised rail system will ultimately be seen as the best solution for congestion. It may, however, take someone with Mr Buffett’s legendary patience to witness it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21692867-second-golden-age-american-railroads-drawing-close-consolidation-may/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

France’s almighty bosses

In praise of the splits

Pressure to separate the roles of chairman and chief executive is growing

Feb 13th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition

Kocher and Mestrallet: a double act from now on

LETTING go is hard, especially for a French boss. Consider Gérard Mestrallet, who for 15 years has run Engie, a giant energy utility formerly known as GDF Suez. Under him the firm has prospered: it gathers annual revenues of around €75 billion ($84 billion) from 70 countries. At 66 the wily baron no doubt believes he has the vim to keep building his empire.

In fact he will be replaced as CEO in May by his deputy, Isabelle Kocher, letting Engie celebrate something rarer than a badly dressed Frenchman: a female leader of a company in the CAC 40 index, which has only happened once before. (Continental Europe lags on corporate sexual equality: none of Germany’s DAX 30 firms has a female CEO or chairman.)

However, a report in the French press on February 4th, citing a senior official, suggests that Ms Kocher will not have the run of the place. Her predecessor may hang on for two more years as chairman. Engie’s board meets this month and may confirm the news then. Since the government owns over one-third of the firm, it is said to be a done deal. But Ms Kocher will be able to put a positive spin on her situation. Assuming she remains just CEO, and does not in time become chairman too, Engie is joining a growing club of French firms that split their main leadership roles.

That is something shareholders increasingly demand, arguing that having two leaders reduces risks in times of crisis, complexity and increasing regulation. The CEO runs the company while the chairman leads the board’s oversight of the management. In Britain it is the norm, and in Germany a legal obligation, to split the two roles. European Union rules force banks to do so, to reduce financial risk, so French banks are among the splitters.

A big institutional investor reckons that shares in firms which have yet to split the roles suffer discounts of perhaps 5-10% as a result. Yet firms resist, mostly for cultural reasons. Since the Vichy government in the second world war, corporate France has concentrated clout in an over-mighty Président Directeur Général, “le PDG”, just as in politics power has been centralised in the president’s hands. “We have a cultural bias, we love having one person at the top, we love to personify power,” admits the chairman of a large French firm.

“The PDG was God,” adds the chairman of another, who says conservative corporate culture makes quick change impossible. “People need to get used to the idea that becoming chairman and CEO is not the only goal in life, which will take a lot of maturing,” he says. Guy Sorman, a rare liberal commentator on French business, says shareholders have long lacked influence over such matters, but may be gaining ground now.

Engineering a split

One model is Safran, a big aerospace firm, which appointed a separate CEO and chairman after its last PDG, Jean-Paul Herteman, retired just over a year ago. Things have gone peacefully since, with shareholders, the board and managers content. The government, a big shareholder, favoured the split. Emmanuel Macron, the reformist economy minister, appears influential in pressing for change at firms in which the state has a stake. Other big firms to have done the splits include Valeo (car parts), Michelin (tyres), Unibail-Rodamco (property) and Danone (food).

However, there have been examples of backsliding. AXA, a big insurer, split the two top jobs for a while until Henri de Castries, who had become chairman, also grabbed the CEO’s job in 2010. Total, an energy firm, divided the roles after its boss died in an accident in 2014; but in December his successor as chief executive, Patrick Pouyanné, also became chairman.

Firms with a globalised share register—foreigners hold roughly half of the stock traded in CAC 40 companies—may change sooner than others. “When I talk with my colleagues, this is the kind of discussion we have,” says the boss of a big French firm, noting that Medef, the main business chamber, has been weighing up whether to recommend that companies divide up the top jobs.

One chief executive, who has experienced having both a unified and a split role, says it is “much, much better if there is a dual structure”, as long as the chairman and CEO co-operate, especially in public, and exchange advice without meddling. Most importantly, he says, boards are getting used to the idea, so more firms are destined to become splitters. If so, whatever happens at Engie, the days of “le PDG” look numbered.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21692866-pressure-separate-roles-chairman-and-chief-executive-growing-praise/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Twitter

Clunky Dorsey

The firm’s returned boss has yet to turn it around

Feb 13th 2016 | SAN FRANCISCO | From the print edition

The trials of St Jack

FAITHFUL followers of Twitter believe that Jack Dorsey, one of the social network’s founders, is the only person capable of turning around the struggling firm. Mr Dorsey (pictured below, during a recent Old Testament beard experiment) returned as its boss last year, taking over from Dick Costolo, who had led the company during a chaotic round of executive departures and strategic changes. True believers hope Mr Dorsey will be a reincarnation of the late Steve Jobs, who returned from exile to restore Apple to greatness.

So far, however, Mr Dorsey has yet to perform miracles. On February 10th Twitter reported lacklustre earnings for the first full quarter that he has been back in charge. It now has 320m monthly users, no more than it had in the previous quarter, and it is unlikely to turn a profit until 2019.

When Twitter went public in 2013, some believed it could become larger than Facebook, an older rival. Mr Costolo promised to build the “largest daily audience in the world”. Its prospects looked bright. Unlike Facebook, which began as a service on desktop computers, Twitter has always been popular on mobile devices, so it did not have to cope with a difficult transition.

However, it has become clear that Twitter will never become the giant it was supposed to be. The pace at which it is adding users has slowed far sooner than it did at Facebook (see chart). Mark Zuckerberg’s outfit, which now has 1.6 billion monthly users, has grown swiftly by buying potential competitors such as Instagram, a photo-sharing site. One sign of Twitter’s ill health is that its number of users in America has stayed flat, at around 70m, for a full year, suggesting that it is approaching a ceiling in the world’s most important advertising market.



Three problems have been hampering Twitter’s growth. First, there has been too much turnover of executives. At least 20 have left in the past two years. This has made it impossible to decide and act on a consistent strategy. Second, the reports about management turmoil have heightened an impression among some potential advertisers that the platform is not as mature as Facebook or Google, and thus is not worth taking as seriously. Third, new users find Twitter too fiddly compared with the alternatives (including Instagram and messaging services such as WhatsApp), which discourages them from continuing to use it.

That said, many users and advertisers do still value Twitter. It is one of the best ways to reach people who influence the public’s conversations about brands, says Laura Desmond of Publicis Groupe, a giant advertising firm. However, to expand its audience, Twitter is in the difficult position of needing to keep long-time users happy while it makes changes that will increase its appeal to new ones. Mr Dorsey’s changes so far include “moments”, a new function which offers users a selection of the day’s top stories; and giving more prominence to tweets that Twitter’s algorithm judges more relevant. But more radical steps will be needed.

Twitter is not the only tech firm with which investors, concerned by rich valuations and a gloomy economic outlook, are losing patience. In this volatile market, being a listed company with slowing growth is as bruising an experience as being attacked by trolls on social media. Yahoo and Yelp, two other struggling internet firms, have also been battered by the market. On February 4th LinkedIn, a professional networking site, beat analysts’ expectations for its quarterly earnings but forecast that its growth rate would slow significantly. This sent its shares down 44% the next day, wiping nearly $11 billion off LinkedIn’s stockmarket valuation.

The sagging share prices of Twitter and other fallen internet stars have inevitably prompted takeover speculation. Twitter’s market capitalisation is now around $10 billion, less than a third of what it was a year ago. That makes it affordable for quite a number of firms. News Corporation, whose boss, Rupert Murdoch, is an active tweeter, recently denied rumours it might bid. Mr Dorsey is unlikely to want to sell up yet: he wants his flock to keep the faith, and still hopes to pull off a miracle.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21692858-firms-returned-boss-jack-dorsey-has-yet-turn-it-around-twitter-flatlines/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Corporate governance in Japan

Sharp elbows

New twists in the battle for control of an ailing electronics firm

Feb 13th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



IT IS surely a promising sign for Terry Gou, the boss of Foxconn, that Japan’s largest business newspaper, the Nikkei, is reporting unflatteringly on his efforts to buy Sharp, a near-bankrupt electronics firm. At first the Innovation Network Corporation of Japan (INCJ), a government-backed fund, had seemed certain to snap up the company, and the Nikkei said little. But now the paper is calling Mr Gou a domineering, wilful “warlord of business” with close ties to China who it says has antagonised Sharp’s management with its tactics. So he must be getting somewhere.

Mr Gou scored a coup on February 5th when he appeared to secure Sharp’s agreement to favour Foxconn’s bid of ¥660 billion ($5.6 billion) for the firm, rather than that of the INCJ, which is offering about half as much. Mr Gou says the two firms are set to strike a deal this month. If so, it would be one of the biggest foreign takeovers of a Japanese firm (see article). Sharp says it is still talking to the INCJ.

Many foreign buyers have failed before. Japan Inc effectively slammed the door shut to overseas takeovers in 2007 when, backed by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), Bull-Dog Sauce, a venerated condiment brand, cooked up a poison-pill defence to rebuff the advances of Steel Partners, an American hedge fund. Four years ago the INCJ, which has ¥2 trillion to invest, prevailed over KKR, an American private-equity fund, in buying Renesas Electronics, a chipmaker.

An all-Japanese deal for Sharp would be awkward for Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, given his flagship policy of seeking to revive the economy via reforms. One element of his programme is to attract more foreign investment. Mr Abe’s advisers may even have had a say in Sharp’s abrupt change in attitude to Foxconn.

Last year Mr Abe brought in a corporate-governance code that emphasises shareholder rights and the duty of outside board directors to promote them. Sharp’s external directors are said to have feared being sued by shareholders if they opted for the INCJ’s much lower bid. It was also difficult for Sharp’s two main banks, Mizuho Financial Group and Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, to shun Foxconn’s offer to assume some of Sharp’s debts.

Losing Sharp to Foxconn would be a singular humiliation for the INCJ and METI. The INCJ had aimed to merge Sharp’s LCD-panel business with that of Japan Display, a firm whose creation it oversaw in 2012 and which is now Japan’s main maker of smartphone screens. Another scheme was to meld Sharp’s domestic-appliances business with those of other Japanese firms, including Toshiba, another troubled industrial group.

The INCJ’s leaders are incensed at, and baffled by, the way the Taiwanese firm inched ahead. They argue that their plan is far tougher on Sharp and its banks. (As well as relieving the banks of much of Sharp’s debts, Mr Gou has hinted that he will keep the firm’s management and says he will not fire employees under 40.) “The biggest difference between the two bids is that we are asking Sharp’s Japanese main banks to cancel some of the firm’s debts and take a loss on them, since they are responsible for the company’s difficulty,” says Tetsuya Hamabe, chief strategy officer of the INCJ. That argument should go down well with reformers, who criticise the banks for propping up failing firms, if not with the banks’ own shareholders.

The INCJ may fight to the last, but a deal with Foxconn would show that Japan is changing its attitude to outsiders. One reason it may come off is that as a failing firm, Sharp matters less for national pride. A foreign takeover of a more successful firm would be different. If, say, Tata Steel of India were allowed to buy Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corporation, imagines a government adviser, that would really signal that Japan is open to foreign buyers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21692900-new-twists-battle-control-ailing-electronics-firm-sharp-elbows/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Foxconn

Pointed questions

Foxconn’s bid for Sharp is a risky attempt to reinvent its business model

Feb 13th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition

AT FACE value, there is little sense in the $5.6 billion proposal by Foxconn, the world’s largest contract electronics manufacturer, owned by Hon Hai of Taiwan, to buy Sharp of Japan. It seems an extravagant price for a debt-laden firm that is bleeding red ink and squandered two previous bail-outs. Terry Gou, Hon Hai’s frugal boss, had the sense to walk away from a previous deal for his firm to invest $800m in Sharp in 2012, after the target’s finances deteriorated sharply.

Why is he now so keen to spend lavishly on something that may prove a millstone around his neck? Mr Gou is not saying, but there are several possible explanations. Hon Hai surely wants to gain bargaining power over Apple, which provides around half its revenues. Foxconn, which has more than 1m workers on the Chinese mainland, has long been the biggest assembler of iPhones and other devices for the Californian firm. Since Sharp, which makes display panels, is also a big supplier to Apple, the combination would have more clout in negotiations over margins—which, at barely 3%, are now meagre at Hon Hai.

Another factor might be Mr Gou’s desire to diversify Foxconn away from the grinding business of making devices for other firms, which profit nicely from owning the brands. About two-fifths of Foxconn’s revenues come from making networking equipment and servers for just a handful of Western firms, such as Cisco and HP. Foxconn assembles handsets for many firms, including Xiaomi, an ambitious Chinese company (although the mainland’s market for smartphones is reaching saturation). The rise of handheld devices has severely dented sales of desktop and laptop computers, which Foxconn also assembles. If Foxconn could design and sell its own devices under Sharp’s globally recognised name, it could at least keep the brand owner’s margin for itself.

The desire for a low-margin assembler to move up the value chain is understandable. Foxconn has been making great efforts to become more inventive. A study in 2014 by the United Nations’ World Intellectual Property Organisation rated it as one of the most prominent filers of high-quality patents among firms officially resident on the Chinese mainland (as the company is, despite its Taiwanese parent). Foxconn also files its patents in America, whose standards are more demanding than China’s, and files lots of full “invention” patents as opposed to less important “utility” patents. Sharp has a proud history of technological advances, so perhaps that is why Mr Gou is ready to pay top dollar—especially if, having made a personal investment in one of Sharp’s display divisions a few years ago, he believes it has an important breakthrough in the works.

If so, buying Sharp may help Mr Gou with his grand “eleven screens” strategy, by which he hopes his firm will become the dominant maker of displays for all sorts of devices, from computers to cars to smart watches. All this may explain his willingness to pay dearly for Sharp. But it will not make it any easier to turn around a broke and battered firm, should he end up owning it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21692901-foxconns-bid-sharp-risky-attempt-reinvent-its-business-model-pointed-questions/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Indian business

Crossing the desert

The climate for Indian corporate “promoters” has become arid

Feb 13th 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition

Subrata Roy smiles on through adversity

FOR businessmen scrambling to raise money in a bid to stave off bankruptcy, conference rooms can feel like little more than gilded prison cells. Few will feel this more acutely than Subrata Roy, the boss of Sahara, an Indian conglomerate: over the past 23 months he has worked out of a conference suite in a suburban Delhi jail. Held on charges of contempt of court relating to the sale of dodgy small-deposit plans to the masses—which the Supreme Court has ordered to be repaid, and whose proceeds he invested in property and other trophy assets—he has struggled to raise 100 billion rupees ($1.5 billion) in bail despite claiming his business is worth several times that.

The ignominy of having to sell assets—Sahara is reportedly trying to flog the Grosvenor House hotel in London, four aircraft and a stake in a Formula One team, among other things—was once unthinkable for a “promoter”, the Indian term for founders and majority owners of businesses. A class unto themselves, the most flamboyant feature on the same glossy pages as Bollywood stars and cricketers in the national team (which Sahara once sponsored). Not all promoters are rogues, but the term is often used somewhat as “oligarch” is in Russia. Though life can hardly be described as tough for these plutocrats, they no longer enjoy impunity.

Many thrived in industries where political connections mattered. They have found the new climate parching. At the top levels of Narendra Modi’s government, in power since May 2014, there are no longer the chummy relations that helped promoters secure precious permits, concessions and tax breaks. “Planes from Mumbai to Delhi used to be full of these guys heading to see ministers, you don’t see that any more,” says an investment banker.

Political connections also meant access to credit. India’s public-sector banks, which make up 70% of the banking system, have made enough dud loans in recent years to prompt some to worry about financial stability. Most of the soured loans were made by state-bank officials to crony-infested industries such as infrastructure, metals and mining.

In most countries, the banks would clear up the mess by seizing a defaulting company’s assets. India’s overburdened legal system and antiquated business legislation make that impractical. Promoters can credibly threaten to scupper a company before the creditors can get their hands on it, perhaps a decade down the line. With no fear of loans being foreclosed, the bigwigs have been able to flaunt their wealth even as their creditors fume.

Worse, bureaucrat-bankers keen to avoid embarrassment have kept throwing good money after bad to avoid fessing up to earlier mistakes. However, all this looks likely to end. Raghuram Rajan, India’s central-bank chief since 2013, is on a mission to clear the banks of their non-performing loans: at the very least, the flow of money to some promoters will be stemmed. A bankruptcy law is snaking its way through the legislature, which would make it easier to remove over-indebted promoters from their businesses.

Mr Rajan has spoken out against “connected wrongdoers” abusing the system. Throwing subtlety to the wind, he recently railed against promoters who “flaunt [their] birthday bashes even while owing the system a lot of money,” as guests were still recovering from the lavish 60th birthday bash thrown by Vijay Mallya, a drinks baron behind the Kingfisher brand (and a partner of Sahara’s in the Formula One team). Lenders to his group have been warning since 2012 that they are facing multi-billion dollar losses.

In part thanks to the new regime, cracks are starting to appear in the promoters’ finances. Ever more are having to put up their personal assets (not just their shares in the companies they control, but also houses and the like) as collateral to raise fresh financing. Such pledges reached a seven-year high in 2015: 46% of promoters’ equity is tied up in this way, estimates Prime Database, a data provider, up from 27% in 2009.

Whether Mr Roy gets to leave his prison conference room soon is in doubt. The reported value of the assets Sahara is flogging is well below the amount he needs to post bail, and they seem to be heavily borrowed-against anyway. The Indian securities regulator has rejected Sahara’s claim that it has made whole the vast majority of its small-scale creditors; it is after 400 billion rupees. On February 1st Mr Roy brought out a book detailing his life philosophy as seen from prison. A further two tomes are planned, suggesting he may have doubts over his judicial prospects.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21692905-climate-indian-corporate-promoters-has-become-arid-crossing-desert/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Turkish wine producers

Sour grapes

The government represses the industry at home while helping it to sell abroad

Feb 13th 2016 | ISTANBUL | From the print edition

Grapes of governmental wrath

THE region around Diyarbakir, in Turkey’s conservative south-east, has a long but faded tradition of wine production. “Suleiman”, an amateur oenologist from the city, dreams of reviving it. His biggest obstacle is not the renewed clashes between security forces and Kurdish insurgents, which are battering the region’s economy; nor even the conservatism of its Muslim majority. It is red tape. “The bureaucracy and the laws are the hardest to live with,” he says, preferring not to give his real name for fear of being denied his alcohol licence.

Turkey, a secular but mainly Muslim country of 75m people, is not a nation of big drinkers. At an average of 1.6 litres a year, consumption per head (excluding bootleg booze) is the second-lowest among the 40 member and partner countries of the OECD. Among these, the only drier place is Indonesia, another secular but Muslim-majority country.

In keeping with its Islamist roots, Turkey’s ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has been doing its best to keep it that way. The party’s leader, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, urges Turks to stop drinking or at least do so only at home. Yesilay (Green Crescent), a temperance movement founded in 1920, cheers him on. Big tax rises since 2004 have more than trebled in real terms the price of raki, an anise-flavoured spirit that was the preferred tipple of Kemal Ataturk, the nation’s founding father. Sales of bootleg alcohol, some of it deadly, are rising. According to the OECD, perhaps 29% of the booze consumed in Turkey is sold illegally.

The tax rises on wine have not been so drastic, but winemakers are suffering from the same strong curbs on marketing as other producers of alcohol. A law pushed through by the AKP in 2013 prohibits any sort of promotion of alcohol, including ads, sponsorship deals, product placement or even wine tastings. “If someone comes to your vineyard, you can’t offer him a glass, because it’s against the law,” says Selim Zafer Ellialti, the boss of Suvla, a winery in the Gallipoli peninsula. “For new wines, it’s almost impossible to create an awareness around your brand.”

As a result, a wine industry that had seemed on the verge of a breakthrough is now plateauing. Production, having more than doubled between 2006 and 2010 to 58m litres, has since stalled, as has domestic consumption. Some firms have given up on winemaking, turning instead to grape juice. Turkey is the world’s sixth-biggest producer of grapes, ahead of Chile and Argentina. Only about 3% of them are used to make wine.

The good news for Turkish wines is that quality has improved markedly in the past decade. Producers, having invested in new technology and outside consultants, have begun to win awards in international competitions. Upstarts have prised a share of the market from the country’s five leading winemakers. “The new boutique companies have pushed the big ones to make better wine,” says Sabiha Apaydin, a sommelier at one of Istanbul’s leading restaurants.

Reined in at home, wine companies are seeking a bigger share of foreign markets. About 30 of them have locked arms as Wines of Turkey, a group that promotes exports. Having slipped from about 3m litres in 2004 to 2.2m litres in 2010, the country’s wine exports revived to 2.6m litres in 2014. Although the government has banned all marketing to domestic customers, it subsidises the promotion of wine to foreigners. The top destinations for Turkish wine include Belgium, Germany and Britain, each of which has sizeable Turkish minorities and numerous Turkish restaurants. Gozdem Gurbuzatik of Kayra, another wine producer, sees big opportunities in America and China too.

Yet for the likes of Suleiman, who has spent years accumulating the paperwork needed to get an alcohol licence, the prospect of running a legitimate, profitable wine business in Turkey remains bleak. “What’s the point of investing if you can’t advertise?” he asks. “It’s a big risk. No wonder people are reluctant to get into this.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21692904-government-represses-industry-home-while-helping-it-sell-abroad-sour-grapes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Drone-racing

Whizz kids

A fledgling sport is ready for lift-off

Feb 13th 2016 | SAN FRANCISCO | From the print edition

SOME sports, such as wrestling and sprinting, claim long histories. They were portrayed in cave paintings thousands of years ago. Others are just lifting off. The racing of drones is, thus far, a niche activity, but several firms are betting on it. “Every person under the age of 13 either has a drone or wants one,” says Nick Horbaczewski of the Drone Racing League (DRL), a startup. “We are going to raise a generation of pilots.” The DRL has gathered in $8m from investors, including Stephen Ross, the owner of the Miami Dolphins, an American-football team, and CAA, a big agency that represents film and sports stars.

Drone-racing began as an amateur sport in Australia only a couple of years ago, and spread with the aid of social media as pilots shared videos of their contests. Racers navigate at speeds of up to 100mph (160kph) through a course of illuminated checkpoints, getting a drone’s-eye view of their aircraft’s position through video goggles.

The sport has had to work out some technological kinks, such as eliminating the “latency” that delays the live video feed to the pilot, which could cause a drone to miss a turn and crash. Races require special drones that are swifter than those mass-produced for consumer use by firms like DJI of China. DRL makes its own.

As drones have become more affordable, the sport has gained enthusiasts. This year perhaps 3m drones will be sold in America, generating around $950m in revenue, according to the Consumer Technology Association, an industry group. Once people buy one they want something more exciting to do than just hovering it over their houses, says Scot Refsland of RotorSports, which organises drone races and is in talks with a broadcast network to air a championship race later this year. Drone races, sometimes called “rodeos”, are becoming more frequent: in January events were staged in Las Vegas and Ontario.

The big money will come in once people get into the habit of watching rodeos on television or over the internet. Optimists believe that drone-racing could follow the trajectory of e-sports, in which increasing numbers of people watch other people play video games. However unlikely it may sound, e-sports have turned into a large business, earning $194m in revenues worldwide in 2014, according to Newzoo, a research firm. Amazon validated the sport’s financial prospects in 2014 when it bought Twitch, a startup that streams people playing video games, for $1.1 billion.

If it succeeds, the DRL will be a prime example of how the money to be made in drones may largely come not from manufacturing them but from services associated with them. It is also possible that drone-racing fails to capture the imagination of enough punters—and ends up like robot combat, which was briefly popular in the 1990s and 2000s on television. Drones may be in the ascendant, but not every sport flies.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21692774-if-video-games-can-be-spectator-sport-why-not-racing-drones-turning-drone-races/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

Diversity fatigue

Making the most of workplace diversity requires hard work as well as good intentions

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



RONALD REAGAN once said that “The nine most terrifying words in the English language are, ‘I’m from the government and I’m here to help’.” Today they are run a close second by 12 words: “I’m from human resources and I’m here to organise a diversity workshop.” Most people pay lip service to diversity in public. But what they think in private can be very different. Some HR consultants have even started to worry about “diversity fatigue”.

The arguments in favour of diversity are powerful. The most obvious is that diversity is simply a fact about the modern world. Women have entered the workforce in huge numbers. Mass immigration has transformed Western societies: even in once-homogeneous countries such as Sweden, foreign-born people make up 14% of the population. Gay men and women increasingly feel no need to stay closeted, in or out of the workplace. Companies that ignore this may starve themselves of talent, as well as be out of touch with their customers. Adding to the evidence for diversity’s benefits, a study published this week by the Peterson Institute for International Economics found that the more female executives firms have, the more profitable they seem to be.

There is also evidence to support the commonsense idea that encountering people with different ideas and different perspectives can boost creativity. Ronald Burt, a sociologist at the University of Chicago, has produced several studies which suggest that people with more diverse sources of information consistently generate better ideas. Sara Ellison of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has shown that mixed-sex teams can produce more creative solutions than those dominated by either men or women. And internal surveys at Google have found that diverse teams are often the most innovative.

Given all these benefits, why the talk of diversity fatigue? David Livermore provides some interesting thoughts on this question in his new book, “Driven by Difference: How Great Companies Fuel Innovation through Diversity”. As president of the Cultural Intelligence Centre, a consulting firm, Mr Livermore is a card-carrying member of the diversity industry. But over the years he has been struck by how many companies complain that they are not getting much return for their investment in diversity. “Tomorrow I have to go to a diversity-training workshop,” he heard one man say to another in the gym. “Oh God!” came the reply. “That’s right up there with getting a root canal.”

Mr Livermore says that one reason for this is that talk of diversity often comes accompanied with a faint air of menace. Managers are dragooned into sitting through lengthy seminars on equal opportunities. They are fearful of saying anything that departs from the “correct” line on any diversity-related matter. And they feel under pressure to hit their recruitment quotas. The more important reason, however, is that proponents of diversity often fail to acknowledge that there can be a trade-off: to get the benefits, employers must be prepared for, and deal with, some problems. Diversity does not produce better results automatically, through a sort of multicultural magic. It does so only if it is managed well.

The biggest challenge is to do with trust. Employees need to trust each other if they are to produce their best work. This is particularly true if that work involves tackling creative projects that have a high risk of failure and a circuitous path to success. But it is easier to establish trust with those you have a lot in common with. Mr Livermore notes that diverse teams have a higher degree of variance in their performance than homogeneous teams. They are more likely to produce truly innovative ideas, but they are also more likely to fail completely. He suggests that managers of diverse teams need to work hard at establishing bonds of trust. They need to set lots of short-term goals so that teams can see the benefits of working together. They also need to recognise that different groups forge trust in different ways. Westerners tend to think that getting straight down to the task at hand is the best way to do this, whereas South Asians believe in establishing rapport over cups of tea first.

A second challenge is to do with culture. Too many companies fail to rethink their management styles as they open their doors to new groups. They issue ambiguous instructions which presume that everyone comes from the same background. For example, one Western company urged its employees to “act like an owner” without realising that, in some cultures, acting like an owner means playing golf all day. They evaluate people on their willingness to speak up without realising that some people—women especially, in many countries—are brought up to hold their tongues and defer to authority. Mr Livermore argues that managers need to work harder at getting members of silent minorities to speak up and, failing that, give them other ways of contributing to the collective effort.

Beyond box-ticking

Your columnist would add a third challenge: distinguishing between genuine cultural diversity and the box-ticking sort. It is easy for companies to think that they have embraced diversity if they appoint the right number of people with the right biological characteristics. That can be hollow if they all come from the same backgrounds—if, say, all the black people a firm promotes to management are Harvard-educated sons of diplomats.

The growing diversity of the workforce should be a cause for celebration. Getting rid of discrimination against minorities represents a triumph for natural justice as well as a chance to make society as a whole stronger. But the celebration needs to be mixed with hard work and clear thinking. Companies will find it hard to make a success of diversity if they refuse to recognise that it brings challenges as well as opportunities. And they will find it impossible to confront these challenges if they dismiss any reasonable question that is raised about diversity policies as if it were a plea to go back to the age when white men ruled the roost.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21692865-making-most-workplace-diversity-requires-hard-work-well-good-intentions-diversity/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Falling bank shares: A tempest of fear

Buttonwood: Slaves of the markets

Gold: A hedge against ignorance

Deutsche Bank’s unappetising cocos: Discomforting brew

Lesbians’ wage premium: Girl power

Sri Lanka’s economy: Taxing times

Free exchange: Optimising romance





Articles Sections Next

Falling bank shares

A tempest of fear

European banks are in the eye of a new financial storm

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



IF THE start of the year has been desperate for the world’s stockmarkets, it has been downright disastrous for shares in banks. Financial stocks are down by 19% in America. The declines have been even steeper elsewhere. Japanese banks’ shares have plunged by 36% since January 1st; Italian banks’ by 31% and Greek banks’ by a horrifying 60% (see chart). The fall in the overall European banking index of 24% has brought it close to the lows it plumbed in the summer of 2012, when the euro zone seemed on the verge of disintegration until Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank (ECB), promised to do “whatever it takes” to save it.



The distress in Europe encompasses big banks as well as smaller ones. It has affected behemoths within the euro area such as Société Générale and Deutsche Bank (see article)—both of which saw their shares fall by 10% in hours this week—as well as giants outside it such as Barclays (based in Britain) and Credit Suisse (Switzerland).

The apparent frailty of European banks is especially disappointing given the efforts made in recent years to make them more robust, both through capital-raising and tougher regulation. Euro-zone banks issued over €250 billion ($280 billion) of new equity between 2007, when the global financial crisis began, and 2014, when the ECB took charge of supervising them. Before taking on the job, it combed through the books of 130 of the euro zone’s most important banks and found only modest shortfalls in capital.

Some of the recent weakness in European banking shares arises from wider worries about the world economy that have also driven down financial stocks elsewhere. A slowdown in global growth is one threat. Another is that the negative interest rates being pursued by central banks to try to prod more life into economies will further sap banks’ profits. A retreat in Japanese bank shares turned into a rout following such a decision in late January. Investors in European banks fret not just about lacklustre growth but also a possible move deeper into negative territory by the ECB in March. On February 11th Sweden’s central bank cut its benchmark rate from -0.35% to -0.5%, prompting shares in Swedish banks to tumble.

But the malaise of European banking stocks has deeper roots. The fundamental problem is both that there are too many banks in Europe and that many are not profitable enough because they have clung to flawed business models. European investment banks lack the deep domestic capital markets that give their American competitors an edge. Deutsche, for instance, has only just resolved to hack back its investment bank in the face of a less hospitable regulatory environment following the financial crisis.

And there are still too many poorly performing smaller banks within national markets. Although this year’s share-price declines have been steepest in Greece, these largely reflect renewed political tensions over implementing the country’s third bail-out. The banks arousing fresh concern are those in Italy, whose troubles go beyond an excess of them. One specific worry is the dire state of the country’s third-biggest (and the world’s oldest) bank, Monte dei Paschi di Siena, which has long been in intensive care and whose share price has fallen by 56% this year. Its woes reflect poor governance, a problem that plagues Italian banks, many of which are part-owned by local, politically connected foundations.

A more general worry is that Italy’s banking sector as a whole is weighed down with bad loans which have built up during recent years. Although Italian GDP has been expanding since the start of 2015, it is still around 9% lower than its pre-crisis peak in early 2008. This has hurt Italian firms—and their pain has been transferred to the banks that lent to them. Gross non-performing loans amount to €360 billion (18% of the total), of which €200 billion are especially troubled.

There is nothing new about Italy’s high level of non-performing loans; if the recovery can be sustained they should eventually start to come down. Moreover, over half of the sourest loans are covered by provisions, which means that the potential bill is more manageable, at around €90 billion rather than €200 billion. What has changed this year is a new European approach to tackling troubled banks, which shifts the burden for bail-outs from taxpayers to creditors who are “bailed in” when big losses arise. These rules, which have come fully into force this year (a few countries applied them in 2015), mean that senior bondholders and depositors with balances above €100,000 can be stung when banks are resolved.

Bank bonds are generally held by institutional investors who can look after themselves, but in Italy around €200 billion are in the hands of retail customers who were lured to invest in them until 2011 by favourable tax treatment. These retail bonds would be vulnerable if banks run short of capital after big write-downs.

This danger was highlighted late last year when four small banks were rescued in a rush to avoid this year’s more stringent bail-in provisions. That process ensnared retail bondholders holding junior debt, who could already be bailed in under the previous rules. One committed suicide. The furore has unnerved Italians. Ignazio Visco, governor of the central bank, has said that a less abrupt transition to the new bail-in regime would have been better.

The strict rules have also curtailed the ability of the Italian government, led by Matteo Renzi, to calm nerves by excising the bad loans from the banking system. Instead of setting up a state-backed “bad bank” to remove them, Mr Renzi has had to adopt a feebler approach in which the government will guarantee the senior tranches of securitised bundles of the bad loans. Investors plainly doubt this scheme will help much, to judge by the performance of Italian bank shares.

Frustration with European constraints on Italy’s attempt to sort out its banks is one reason why Mr Renzi has been making barbed attacks on the German way of running the euro area. Such political tension is adding to jitters about Italian banks. Portuguese banking shares have also tumbled, in part because a new left-of-centre coalition government alarmed international investors by its decision to impose heavy losses on some senior bank bonds late last year. In seeking to transfer the risk of failing banks away from taxpayers to creditors, European policymakers may have thought they were depoliticising the banks. In the euro-zone periphery, however, politics is never peripheral.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21692863-european-banks-are-eye-new-financial-storm-tempest-fear/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

Slaves of the markets

New evidence on what drives central banks to decide to change rates

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



CENTRAL banks are supposed to target inflation and in some cases, economic growth or full employment. As the “lender of last resort”, they also have responsibility for safeguarding the financial system. But do they in fact target asset prices as well?

That has been the suspicion from the late 1980s onwards, when the Federal Reserve began cutting interest rates when equity markets wobbled. This approach became known as the “Greenspan put” (Alan Greenspan was the chairman of the Fed from 1987 to 2006, and the put option is a form of insurance against falling prices). The implicit guarantee from central banks became a bit more explicit in the era of quantitative easing (QE)—the creation of new money to buy assets. Central banks hoped that QE would have a “portfolio rebalancing effect”, with investors being forced out of low-yielding government bonds and into corporate debt and equities.

However, the relationship between market movements and central banks may have an even longer history. That is the implication of new research by Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh and Mike Staunton of the London Business School for the latest Global Investment Returns Yearbook, published by Credit Suisse. They looked at the historical relationship between movements in interest rates and in financial markets, with particular reference to America and Britain.

Unsurprisingly, they found that markets performed much better when rates were falling than when they were rising. Since 1913 (when the Fed was founded) American equities have returned an average of 9.3% a year in real terms during easing cycles, defined as the period between the first cut and the first increase. In contast, real returns during tightening cycles were just 2.3% a year. Government bonds returned 3.6% during easing cycles and 0.3% in tightening ones.

This rule applied in most of the 21 countries covered by the trio’s data, going back to 1900. On average, equities earned 8.4 percentage points more in real terms in the year after a rate cut than in one following an increase. Alternative assets such as houses, art and gold also did better when rates were falling.

That is how the markets reacted to central banks. Perhaps the more interesting finding is how central banks have responded to the markets. The chart shows the changes in volatility for equity and bond markets before and at the time of rate increases and rate cuts. Although stockmarkets (and the British bond market) were a lot more volatile after a rate rise, there was little sign of increased volatility before a rise.

In contrast, both the British and American stockmarkets were almost as volatile before a rate cut as after one. The academics suggest central banks are following a rough rule of thumb. They postpone rate increases when volatility is high, for fear of causing further upset, but respond to high volatility with rate reductions.

Investors may thus have learned that if they throw the equivalent of a toddler’s tantrum, central banks will eventually come to their rescue. Over the long run this might have encouraged risky behaviour of the kind that was common in the run-up to the crisis of 2007-08.

The power of tantrums may still apply. In September the Fed postponed a rate increase in part because markets seemed to point to a slowdown in the global economy. The latest turmoil—the Vix measure of stockmarket volatility has risen from 15 to 26.5 over the past three months—may have induced another bout of caution. Before the start of the year the markets expected several rate increases in 2016; now there is a marginal consensus in favour of unchanged rates. This week’s comments by Janet Yellen, the Fed’s current chairman, to Congress about less supportive financial conditions will bolster that view.

Whether central banks should be so sensitive to the whims of financial markets is another matter. There are wealth effects that reverberate in the broader economy when asset prices fall, although housing (where prices are still rising on both sides of the Atlantic) has more impact than equities. And market turmoil may be an indicator of trouble in the global economy: figures out this week showed sharp falls in British, French, German and Italian industrial production in December. Then again, central banks ought to be able to work out the economic outlook on their own.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21692927-new-evidence-what-drives-central-banks-decide-change-rates-slaves/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Gold

A hedge against ignorance

Investors are cautiously returning to a fickle market

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

Fuelled by economic uncertainty

THE Valentine Day’s special at Sharps Pixley, London’s first high-street bullion showroom, is a £115 ($166) rose dipped in gold. But what that special someone would really want is the £27,000 “kilobar”, smaller than a slab of chocolate but reassuringly weighty in this time of turmoil in financial markets. Both have sold well since the shop opened last month, says Ross Norman, the boss. Yet he is struck by how “apologetic” his British clients are about buying gold. It suggests many are novices, gingerly placing their first bets against the global economy.

They are not alone. From libertarians in America to Indian housewives, gold’s fans have helped push spot prices up sharply this year, defying the rout in global commodity markets (although gold also defied the prior boom in commodities—see chart). In early trading on February 11th gold surged above $1,200 an ounce, its highest level in more than eight months, amid a big sell-off in global stockmarkets. Mr Norman notes that January rallies in the past two years quickly petered out, partly for seasonal reasons: retail buying in the biggest markets, India and China, starts with the Hindu Diwali festival in late autumn and ends at this time of year with Chinese new year. He says the rally is still tentative, though this year “it has a bit more oomph.”



Fear is one source of oomph. One Swiss-based bull likes to call gold “a hedge against ignorance”, noting the myriad question-marks hanging over the global economy. They include the strength of China’s economy, the impact of falling oil prices on emerging-market producers, the debt woes in America’s shale-oil industry and the fragility of global banks. What’s more, the dollar—which rivals gold as a haven—has also weakened recently.

Other factors have been on gold’s side. Its recent rally has coincided with falling oil prices and renewed fears of deflation that have pushed down interest rates. Because gold offers no yield, the lower the returns offered by alternative investments such as bonds, the more attractive it looks. The move by big central banks to impose negative interest rates on commercial-bank deposits makes gold an even more attractive store of value—the shiny equivalent of cash under the mattress.

Supply may also help the bulls’ case. The World Gold Council said on February 11th that the amount of gold mined in the fourth quarter of 2015 was down by 3%, its first quarterly drop since 2008. It expects the trend to continue as cash-strapped mining firms trim investment.

The demand picture is more nuanced. Overall, global demand dipped slightly in 2015. But Indians vastly increased their holdings of gold jewellery in the second half of last year, befitting one of the world’s fastest-growing economies. In China, shoppers bought fewer gold trinkets but more gold coins and bars as investments, perhaps reflecting concerns about their falling currency and stockmarket.

This year the latest data suggest there has been a net inflow of funds into gold-related exchange-traded funds, which are investment vehicles that account for about a tenth of global gold demand, says the World Gold Council’s Juan Carlos Artigas. He expects buying by central banks in the developing world, which surged in the fourth quarter, to continue as they diversify their assets.

Sceptics—among them Goldman Sachs, an investment bank—nonetheless argue that gold will fall for a fourth straight year in 2016, largely because of higher interest rates in America. On February 10th Janet Yellen, chair of the Federal Reserve, offered a downbeat assessment of the American economy in testimony to Congress. Though she still left the door ajar to further rate rises, stockmarkets and the dollar reacted negatively, while gold rallied. The more pressing financial fears become, the higher it is likely to go.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21692942-investors-are-cautiously-returning-fickle-market-hedge-against-ignorance/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Deutsche Bank’s unappetising cocos

Discomforting brew

Investors are reassessing yet another complicated financial instrument

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN governments bailed out banks during the financial crisis, they tended to insist that shareholders suffer big losses. Most bondholders, however, got off scot-free. In theory, bondholders should have lost money too—but working out just how bankrupt the banks were, apportioning the losses and risking contagion among bondholders elsewhere seemed too risky to contemplate as the financial system was seizing up.

Regulators have since pushed banks to fund their activities with less debt and more loss-absorbing capital. The simplest form of capital is equity—the money raised by selling shares or retaining profits. But trimming dividends or increasing the number of shares reduces the value of the existing ones. So bankers and regulators dreamt up a new financial instrument that would act like debt, thus sparing shareholders dilution, unless capital was urgently needed. These instruments are called contingent convertible bonds, or “cocos”, also known as additional Tier-1 securities. In exchange for annual interest of around 6-7%, investors take on the risk that, if the going gets tough, the bank may suspend interest payments, convert the bond into equity or write it off altogether.

Cocos have proved popular, given how low most bond yields are: about €91 billion ($103 billion) of them have been issued since 2013. But this week analysts at CreditSights, a financial-research firm, questioned whether Deutsche Bank would have enough “available distributable items” (ADI, a subset of earnings from which interest on cocos must be paid) to cover the €350m due on its cocos next year. Their price promptly slumped to 70 cents on the euro (see chart). Other European banks’ cocos also suffered, although not quite as badly.

It is not unreasonable for investors to be nervous about Deutsche. It made a record loss last year. Its newish boss, John Cryan, has suspended the dividend for last year and this. Its big investment bank is a perennial underperformer. Many risks still lie ahead, from the costs of restructuring and regulatory infractions to potential losses on loans to energy firms.



Explore our interactive guide to Europe's troubled economies

If all this proves more expensive than imagined, it may exceed ADI, which has already been diminished by the bank’s recent losses. The problem is more acute at Deutsche than at other banks, both because it has performed especially poorly in recent years and because the German definition of ADI is narrower than in most other European countries. (Deutsche insists it will meet the payments with ease.)

The hullabaloo at Deutsche, along with the poor performance of European banks more broadly, seems to have prompted a broader reassessment of the riskiness of cocos, argues James Chappell of Berenberg, a bank. “People have misunderstood them,” he says. On top of everything else, the market for them is relatively illiquid, which makes prices more susceptible to sudden jolts.

The irony is that even those shunning Deutsche’s cocos accept that its cushion of capital is relatively thick, at 11%. The problem is its profits, or rather the lack of them. In other words, its cocos appear to have been poorly designed, at risk of taking money away from investors before the bank truly faces calamity. It would not be the first time a financial innovation did not work as advertised.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21692933-investors-are-reassessing-yet-another-complicated-financial/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lesbians’ wage premium

Girl power

Lesbians tend to earn more than heterosexual women

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



LABOUR markets are hotbeds of inequality. For every dollar a white American man in full-time work earns, the average white woman earns 78 cents and the average Latina only 56 cents. Marriage is a boon for male earnings; motherhood drags female earnings down. Likewise, gay men earn about 5% less than heterosexual ones in Britain and France, and 12-16% less in Canada and America, even after controlling for things like education, skills and experience. Yet one minority appears immune to this scourge: lesbians.

Marieka Klawitter of the University of Washington looked at 29 studies on wages and sexual orientation last year.* On average, they found a 9% earnings premium for lesbians over heterosexual women, compared with a penalty of 11% for gay men relative to straight men. This discrepancy has been borne out by research on America, Britain, Canada, Germany and the Netherlands. Even after adjusting for the fact that lesbians are on average more educated than straight women, and less likely to have children, the gap persists.

Research on this topic should be taken with a pinch of salt. Some studies rely on direct questions about sexual orientation. But around half of the 29 studies surveyed by Ms Klawitter were based on surveys in which respondents were not asked directly whether they were gay. Instead, they were asked who they live with and what their relationship with them is. Both methods tend to find a wage premium. But they may both miss some gay women in a way that distorts the results.

If getting good data is tough, pinning down why there might be a wage premium for lesbians and a penalty for gay men is even tougher. Perhaps lesbians who are “out” are more competitive than their heterosexual peers. After all, studies tend to find that men are more competitive than women, which could explain some of the wage gap between the sexes. But a working paper published last year found that whereas gay men behaved less competitively than straight men (accounting for roughly two-fifths of their earnings penalty), there was no such difference between lesbians and other women.

Lesbians may not need to behave differently to be treated differently. They could face positive discrimination, if employers promote them on the assumption that they will not have children and so devote more time to work than straight colleagues. A study Ms Klawitter published in 2011 found that gay men working in the public sector suffered a smaller penalty than those in the private sector, whereas lesbians enjoyed a premium in the private sector but none in the public sector. One interpretation could be that discrimination of all sorts is more fiercely policed in government offices, dampening prejudice against gay men and in favour of gay women.

Lesbians’ higher earnings could also be a function of the gender of their partner. Men earn more than women, straight or gay; lesbians, deprived of the extra earnings a male partner would bring, may work harder to compensate. At any rate, they work more hours per day and weeks per year than straight women, on average (see chart). Over time this could translate into more experience and better chances of promotion. There is a clue in a paper from Nasser Daneshvary, C. Jeffrey Waddoups and Bradley Wimmer of the University of Nevada, which finds that lesbians who have previously been married to men receive a smaller premium than those who have not.

Finally, it could be that in same-sex couples women do not feel obliged to do as much childcare or housework, giving them more freedom to fulfil their potential in the workplace. Lesbian couples tend to work more equal hours, even when they have children, and several studies find that same-sex households share chores more evenly than heterosexual ones.

Whatever the reason for lesbians’ wage premium, it does not make them a privileged group. There is evidence that they face discrimination in hiring relative to straight women, even though their pay is better. Poverty rates among lesbian couples are 7.9%, compared with 6.6% among heterosexual ones. And for boosting earnings, as in so many realms, nothing beats being a straight, white, married man.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21692938-lesbians-tend-earn-more-heterosexual-women-girl-power/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sri Lanka’s economy

Taxing times

The island turns to the IMF despite strong growth

Feb 13th 2016 | COLOMBO | From the print edition

If only the budget were as finely balanced

SRI LANKA ought to be sitting pretty. Its growth has averaged 6% a year over the past decade. Seven years after a protracted civil war ended, its economy is still reaping a peace dividend. It is also a beneficiary of the collapse in commodity prices, which has trimmed its hefty bill for imports of fuel. Yet last week, after long debate, its leaders requested a loan from the IMF.

If so much is so rosy, why is Sri Lanka going cap in hand to the IMF? The immediate concern is the capital flight that has buffeted emerging markets around the world. Although Sri Lanka’s current-account deficit had been declining steadily over the past few years, the country suffered big capital outflows last year as foreign investors sold down their holdings of government bonds.

The central bank fought against the tide for a while, using up some $2 billion, or more than a fifth, of its foreign-exchange reserves to defend the rupee. After it relented in September, the currency fell to a record low against the dollar and has since weakened further. To hear it from Ravi Karunanayake, Sri Lanka’s finance minister, the country is a victim of the woes that have beset other emerging markets: “If China devalues and India devalues, little Sri Lanka gets caught in between.”

Yet the main source of Sri Lanka’s fragility is its own fiscal mistakes, not external turbulence. A combination of cumbersome debts and a rickety tax system has made it vulnerable to the withdrawal of foreign funding. At nearly three-quarters of GDP, its public debt is large for a developing country. It does not help that a chunk of that debt was borrowed from China under the previous president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, to pay for infrastructure built by Chinese firms, including several expensive but pointless vanity projects. The principal on these loans will not fall due until the early 2020s, but the interest on them is high, adding to Sri Lanka’s already weighty debt-servicing costs.

That points to what many in Colombo see as the root cause of their headache: a threadbare tax system. Revenues amount to a paltry 13% of GDP. Countries with similar levels of income typically take in 20%. The new administration, in power for just over a year, has made things messier. It slashed corporate and income taxes, introducing flat rates of 15%, hoping to lure investors to Sri Lanka. To make up for some of the shortfall, it has relied largely on one-off measures such as an extra levy on a few dozen highly profitable companies. Anushka Wijesinha, chief economist of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, says businesses are not asking for tax breaks but rather for a more predictable tax regime.

The government has also driven up its costs by awarding public servants a big pay rise to make good on an election promise. It had initially aimed to keep the fiscal deficit to 4.4% of GDP last year. Instead it hit 7.2%. Even so, calling on the IMF does not mean that Sri Lanka faces a crisis. Arjuna Mahendran, the governor of the central bank, is careful to point out that Sri Lanka has not missed a debt payment in years and is not about to do so. Instead, the government views the IMF loan as a buffer, which it thinks will help it gain credibility with foreign investors.

Bringing in the IMF is not cost-free, however. It will want to see the government strengthen its fiscal system. That may be the point: a stern external force should help catalyse fiscal reforms. It could also pave the way for an additional loan from the World Bank.

Sri Lanka still has much going for it. It is working to position itself as a trading hub for South Asia. Sitting about midway on shipping lanes between Singapore and Dubai, it offers deepwater ports, easy access to India and some of South Asia’s best highways. Sorting out the infrastructure of its tax system is far less glamorous but just as critical.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21692944-island-turns-imf-despite-strong-growth-taxing-times/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

Optimising romance

To find true love, it helps to understand the economic principles underpinning the search

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



DATING is a treacherous business. There may be plenty of fish in the sea, yet many are unhygienic, self-absorbed, disconcertingly attached to ex-fish, or fans of Donald Trump. Digital dating sites, including a growing array of matchmaking apps, are meant to help. Their design owes more to hard-nosed economics than it does to the mysteries of the heart.

In a sense, searching for a mate is not so different from hunting for a job. Jobs, like prospective partners, have their strengths and weaknesses, which makes finding the right one a matter of complicated trade-offs. Such exchanges are different from other transactions, in that both parties must be enthusiastic about the match for it to happen. A supermarket, in contrast, does not particularly care whose wallet it is draining, nor does the power company agonise about whether a customer is worthy of its watts.

Alvin Roth, who won a Nobel prize in economics for his work on market design, made a career of studying such “matching markets”, where supply and demand are not balanced by price. Instead, people transact based on information. An apple-seller can nudge down his prices until the whole cart is sold. Yet if Apple were looking to hire two workers, it would not set a salary so puny that only two people applied. The quality of new hires often matters at least as much as their salaries.

Mr Roth, who won the prize jointly with Lloyd Shapley in 2012, found that the structure of matching markets made a significant difference in determining who wound up with whom. Systems designed to elicit people’s true preferences generated better matches between hospitals and doctors, for example. But the entire medical profession has an interest in improving matches, and so can set up a national clearing house to do just that. The lovelorn must instead rely on an array of digital matchmakers.

Good matches depend on good information. Even without digital help, people usually have some inkling of how much they have in common. Cosmopolitan strivers move to New York, say, rather than sleepier cities, in part because they will meet other ambitious types with similar interests. Within New York, the places people choose to spend their time—whether Yankee Stadium or a yoga studio—determine which sorts of people they come into contact with. Because it is expensive to live in New York, and to spend time sweating in a yoga studio or swearing in the stands, people in such settings can be reasonably confident those around them are in some sense like-minded.

But one critical bit of information is missing: whether there is mutual interest. The act of asking someone out is fraught. In the non-digital world, approaching a potential partner brings the risk of awkwardness or humiliation. Digital dating reduces this cost dramatically. Apps like Tinder and Happn, for example, reveal that a user likes another only when the feeling is mutual.

The best matching markets are those that are “thick”, with lots of participants. The more people there are seeking digital dates, the greater the chance of finding a good match. Odds improve that another person in the crowd also enjoys Wagner, Thai food, or discussions about the economics of matching markets.

The wealth of information many dating sites request may help to home in on the perfect match, but if the effort involved is enough to deter potential mates from joining in the first place, then it does more harm than good. When Tinder first launched, largely to facilitate casual sex, users assessed one another based only on looks, age and gender. Simplicity worked wonders; there are 26m matches made between Tinder users each day.

The advantages of thick markets are lost, however, if they become too “congested”, with users overwhelmed by the number of participants and unable to locate a good match among them. One response is to specialise. JSwipe, for instance, caters to Jewish singles while Bumble, an app where women must initiate contact, is meant to attract feminists.

But the most popular apps seek to help their users filter possible mates using clever technology. Tinder, for example, only provides users with profiles of fellow Tinderites who are nearby, to make it that much easier to meet in person. It has also introduced a “super like” feature, which can be deployed only once a day, to allow smitten users to signal heightened interest in someone. In addition, last year it started allowing people to list their jobs and education, to help users to sort through the crowds. Users get the benefits both of a big pool of potential partners and various tools to winnow them.

Sext and the city

The emergence of matching apps, for those seeking love or theatre tickets or a lift, has certainly made once-onerous tasks more convenient. They may also contribute to more profound economic change. Dating apps could strengthen the trend toward “assortative mating”, whereby people choose to couple with those of similar income and skills. By one estimate, the trend accounts for about 18% of the rise in income inequality in America between 1960 and 2005. A recent study of online dating in South Korea found that it boosted sorting among couples by education.

Better matching may also mean bigger cities. Metropolitan goliaths have long been melting-pots, within which those early on in their adult lives link up with jobs, friends and mates. Matching apps, romantic or not, make it easier to navigate the urban sprawl and sample all it has to offer. That, in turn, should make the biggest cities relatively more attractive to young people.

Apps cannot yet make break-ups less painful. And love remains mysterious enough that even the most refined algorithms cannot predict mutual attraction with confidence. But they clearly help, judging by their legions of users. After all, it is better to have super-liked and lost than never to have super-liked at all.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21692926-find-true-love-it-helps-understand-economic-principles-underpinning/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Merger and acquisition: Gravitational waves have been detected for the first time

Neanderthals and human disease: A Parthian shot

Livers, bacteria and alcohol: Bugs in the system

Bacterial vision: Go towards the light

Air quality: Something in the air tonight





Articles Sections Next

Merger and acquisition

Gravitational waves have been detected for the first time

Signs of black holes merging arrive a century after Albert Einstein predicted them

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



TWO black holes circle one another. Both are about 100km across. One contains 36 times as much mass as the sun; the other, 29. They are locked in an orbital dance, a kilometre or so apart, that is accelerating rapidly to within a whisker of the speed of light. Their event horizons—the spheres defining their points-of-no-return—touch. There is a violent wobble as, for an instant, quintillions upon quintillions of kilograms redistribute themselves. Then there is calm. In under a second, a larger black hole has been born.

It is, however, a hole that is less than the sum of its parts. Three suns’ worth of mass has been turned into energy, in the form of gravitational waves: travelling ripples that stretch and compress space, and thereby all in their path. During the merger’s final fifth of a second, envisaged in an artist’s impression above, the coalescing holes pumped 50 times more energy into space this way than the whole of the rest of the universe emitted in light, radio waves, X-rays and gamma rays combined.

And then, 1.3 billion years later, in September 2015, on a small planet orbiting an unregarded yellow sun, at facilities known to the planet’s inhabitants as the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), the faintest slice of those waves was caught. That slice, called GW150914 by LIGO’s masters and announced to the world on February 11th, is the first gravitational wave to be detected directly by human scientists. It is a triumph that has been a century in the making, opening a new window onto the universe and giving researchers a means to peer at hitherto inaccessible happenings, perhaps as far back in time as the Big Bang.

Finger on the pulsar

The idea of gravitational waves emerged from the general theory of relativity, Albert Einstein’s fundamental exposition of gravity, unveiled almost exactly 100 years before GW150914’s discovery. Mass, Einstein realised, deforms the space and time around itself. Gravity is the effect of this, the behaviour of objects dutifully moving along the curves of mass-warped spacetime. It is a simple idea, but the equations that give it mathematical heft are damnably hard to solve. Only by making certain approximations can solutions be found. And one such approximation led Einstein to an odd prediction: any accelerating mass should make ripples in spacetime.

Einstein was not happy with this idea. He would, himself, oscillate like a wave on the topic—rescinding and remaking his case, arguing for such waves and then, after redoing the sums, against them. But, while he and others stretched and squeezed the maths, experimentalists set about trying to catch the putative waves in the act of stretching and squeezing matter.

Their problem was that the expected effect was a transient change in dimensions equivalent to perhaps a thousandth of the width of a proton in an apparatus several kilometres across. Indirect proof of gravitational waves’ existence has been found over the years, most notably by measuring radio emissions from pairs of dead stars called pulsars that are orbiting one another, and deducing from this how the distance between them is shrinking as they broadcast gravitational waves into the cosmos. But the waves themselves proved elusive until the construction of LIGO.

As its name states, LIGO is an interferometer. It works by splitting a laser beam in two, sending the halves to and fro along paths identical in length but set at right angles to one another, and then looking for interference patterns when the halves are recombined (see diagram). If the half-beams’ paths are undisturbed, the waves will arrive at the detector in lock-step. But a passing gravitational wave will alternately stretch and compress the half-beams’ paths. Those half-beams, now out of step, will then interfere with each other at the detector in a way that tells of their experience. The shape of the resulting interference pattern contains all manner of information about the wave’s source, including what masses were involved and how far away it was.



To make absolutely certain that what is seen really is a gravitational wave requires taking great care. First, LIGO is actually two facilities, one in Louisiana and the other in Washington state. Only something which is observed almost, but not quite, simultaneously by both could possibly be a gravitational wave. Secondly, nearly everything in the interferometers’ arms is delicately suspended to isolate it as far as possible from distant seismic rumblings and the vibrations of passing traffic.

Moreover, in order to achieve the required sensitivity, each arm of each interferometer is 4km long and the half-beam in it is bounced 100 times between the mirrors at either end of the arm, to amplify any discrepancy when the half-beams are recombined. Even so, between 2002 when LIGO opened and 2010, when it was closed for upgrades, nary a wave was seen.

Holey moly

Those improvements, including doubling the bulk of the devices’ mirrors, suspending them yet more delicately, and increasing the laser power by a factor of 75, have made Advanced LIGO, as the revamped apparatus is known, four times as sensitive as the previous incarnation. That extra sensitivity paid off almost immediately. Indeed, the system’s operators were still kicking its metaphorical tyres and had yet to begin its official first run when GW150914 turned up, first at the Louisiana site, and about a hundredth of a second later in Washington—a difference which places the outburst somewhere in the sky’s southern hemisphere. Since then, the team have been checking their sums and counting their lucky stars. As they outline in Physical Review Letters, the likelihood that the signal was a fluke is infinitesimal.

When one result comes so quickly, others seem sure to follow—particularly as the four months of data the experiment went on to gather as part of the first official run have yet to be analysed fully. A rough estimate suggests one or two other signals as striking as GW150914 may lie within them.

For gravitational astronomy, this is just the beginning. Soon, LIGO will not be alone. By the end of the year VIRGO, a gravitational-wave observatory in Italy, should join it in its search. Another is under construction in Japan and talks are under way to create a fourth, in India. Most ambitiously, a fifth, orbiting, observatory, the Evolved Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, or e-LISA, is on the cards. The first pieces of apparatus designed to test the idea of e-LISA are already in space.

Together, by jointly forming a telescope that will permit astronomers to pinpoint whence the waves come, these devices will open a new vista on the universe. As technology improves, waves of lower frequency—corresponding to events involving larger masses—will become detectable. Eventually, astronomers should be able to peer at the first 380,000 years after the Big Bang, an epoch of history that remains inaccessible to every other kind of telescope yet designed.

The real prize, though, lies in proving Einstein wrong. For all its prescience, the theory of relativity is known to be incomplete because it is inconsistent with the other great 20th-century theory of physics, quantum mechanics. Many physicists suspect that it is in places where conditions are most extreme—the very places which launch gravitational waves—that the first chinks in relativity’s armour will be found, and with them a glimpse of a more all-embracing theory.

Gravitational waves, of which Einstein remained so uncertain, have provided direct evidence for black holes, about which he was long uncomfortable, and may yet yield a peek at the Big Bang, an event he knew his theory was inadequate to describe. They may now lead to his theory’s unseating. If so, its epitaph will be that in predicting gravitational waves, it predicted the means of its own demise.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21692851-gravitational-waves-at-LIGO-century-after-Albert-Einstein-predicted-them/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Neanderthals and human disease

A Parthian shot

Neanderthals’ parting gifts to Homo sapiens were disease-causing genes

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



UNLESS creatures such as yeti and Bigfoot turn out to be real, the only kind of human in the modern world is Homo sapiens. But that is only recently true. For most of Homo sapiens’s 200,000-year history, it shared the planet with several cousins. The most famous were the Neanderthals, who were larger and heavier and who lived in Europe and Central Asia.

Neanderthals died out 40,000 years ago. Whether they were killed off directly by modern humans or were out-competed is a perennial topic of debate. But, either way, there was more to relations between the two species than just inter-hominid rivalry. In the past decade researchers have found that between 1% and 4% of the DNA of modern Europeans and their descendants on other continents is of Neanderthal origin. There must, in other words, have been a certain amount of interbreeding going on back in the day.

What is less clear is the effect today of the DNA so acquired. Neanderthal DNA is not easy to come by (it must be garnered from fossils that have been particularly well preserved), and doing extensive genetic testing on large numbers of modern humans, which is necessary to untangle the influence of even a relatively small chunk of their genomes, is expensive. Nevertheless, as they report in Science, exactly such a comparison has just been made by a team lead by Corinne Simonti of the Vanderbilt Genetics Institute, in Tennessee.

Rather than doing the genetic tests themselves, Dr Simonti and her colleagues used data from the Electronic Medical Records and Genomics Network. This gave them both the medical histories and the genotypes of thousands of people. They picked out 28,416 people of European descent and compared the genomes of these individuals with genetic information recovered from the toe-bone of a Neanderthal woman that was found in a cave in Russia, in 2010. They found 135,000 bits of modern human DNA which they thought were probably of Neanderthal origin.

Previous research had found such Neanderthal DNA to be especially common near parts of the genome associated with illnesses like depression, heart disease and seborrheic keratosis, a complaint in which scaly lumps form on a sufferer’s skin. Because Dr Simonti’s data included people who actually suffer from such conditions, she was able to check those associations. When she did so, she found that particular chunks of Neanderthal DNA were indeed correlated with the presence of all three complaints. And the team found a clutch of other phenomena for which Neanderthal genes seemed to put their carriers at additional risk. These ranged from obesity and blood-clotting disorders to certain types of malnutrition, and even smoking.

At first blush this seems to suggest Neanderthal DNA is a curse. But that is almost certainly not the case. Forty millennia is plenty of time for evolution to get to work. This means that unfavourable traits should have been weeded out, while beneficial ones spread. There is evidence of exactly this. Some parts of the human genome are unusually free from Neanderthal influence, suggesting natural selection has removed harmful genes. Other parts, where Neanderthal DNA presumably offers benefits, are full of the stuff.

And just because something is bad for modern humans does not necessarily mean it was bad for their hunting-and-gathering ancestors. Some genes might put their bearers at risk of obesity in the modern world of fatty, sugary snacks. But in a world where food is scarce (as it presumably was in the northern latitudes where modern humans and Neanderthals mixed), those same genes might help their owners through lean periods.

Neanderthal DNA seems to put modern humans at risk of a specific sort of malnutrition caused by a lack of thiamine, a B vitamin that is vital for carbohydrate metabolism. But, says Dr Simonti, that same genetic variant may also make it easier to digest fats. Millennia ago, when people obtained less of their energy from refined carbohydrates, the trade-off may have been worthwhile. In a world where grain crops have become a staple food, it may not be.

Finally, and most prosaically, Dr Simonti and her colleagues were looking at medical records. These, by definition, will contain information only about diseases. Evolution is often a trade-off, and for Neanderthal DNA to have survived as long as it has, it must offer some advantages to those carrying it. For the time being, exactly what those advantages are is a mystery. But more research will surely illuminate them.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21692847-neanderthals-parting-gifts-homo-sapiens-were-disease-causing-genes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Livers, bacteria and alcohol

Bugs in the system

What really causes hepatic cirrhosis?

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



LIVERS and alcohol do not get on well together. That is well known. But precisely how alcohol destroys the liver of someone who drinks too much has been a mystery. Though alcohol (technically, ethanol—the type of alcohol that has two carbon atoms and is produced by yeast fermentation) wreaks some damage directly, experiments suggest this is by no means the whole explanation. The serious and irreversible harm of cirrhosis seems to have another cause, hitherto unknown. Now, though, perhaps it has been unmasked. For a team of medical researchers led by Bernd Schnabl of the University of California, San Diego suggest the culprit is alcohol’s effect on the gut, and the bacteria therein.

Fortunately for those who like a pint or a dram, the liver is a regenerative marvel. New cells constantly take the places of old ones. Indeed, huge chunks can be cut from the organ, only to grow back within days. This is just as well, for one of the liver’s tasks is to deal with the stream of toxic chemicals people ingest as part of their food and drink. Ethanol is one of these. Though large quantities may induce a build-up of hepatic fat known as steatosis, abstinence will often reverse this. But even the liver can stand only so much. The scarring involved in cirrhosis is a one-way trip that ends in the organ’s failure.

One curiosity is that certain antibiotics seem to ameliorate alcohol’s effect on the liver. The livers of mice given antibiotics which clear their intestines of bacteria before they are dosed with ethanol suffer far less damage than those of similar animals not so dosed. Five years ago that knowledge prompted Dr Schnabl to start looking into the relationship between alcohol and gut bacteria. His latest findings have just been published in Cell Host and Microbe.

Over the course of his research Dr Schnabl found that heavy consumption of alcohol hampers the intestine’s antibacterial defence system. In particular, it suppresses production of two proteins called REG3B lectin and REG3G lectin. These keep the number of bacteria in the gut under control, so their sudden absence leads to a population explosion. And that, Dr Schnabl hypothesised, lets bacteria escape through the intestinal wall to the liver.

To test this idea he designed an experiment. For eight weeks, he and his colleagues fed ethanol both to ordinary mice and to mice genetically engineered to lack the two pertinent lectin molecules. They also engineered some of the rodents’ gut bugs to make the bacteria in question fluoresce. This let them track these bugs, and see if any left the intestines.

They did. As the mice were exposed to more and more alcohol, the glow-in-the-dark bacteria underwent population explosions that let them escape the intestines. Once out, they migrated to the liver, where they triggered strong immune reactions. These drew large numbers of white blood cells into the liver, causing inflammation. The white cells themselves engulf and consume bacteria, but prolonged inflammation also damages host tissue. Both groups of mice were affected, but the effect was more intense in the lectin-deficient animals. In both their livers and their intestines, their bacterial populations were 50% larger than those of the control mice. As a consequence, they ended up with livers that were much more badly damaged.

The researchers then tried things in reverse. They ran the experiment with mice engineered to produce more lectins than normal, and found these animals could endure extensive exposure to alcohol without developing large bacterial populations or showing any signs of liver damage.

All this suggests that tinkering with the gut bacteria of alcoholic people might help. Dr Schnabl has started to look into the matter by studying the bacterial populations of eight alcoholics and comparing them with those of five non-alcoholics. Preliminary results indicate that the findings from mice apply to human beings, too. Finding a way to boost REG3-lectin production in those who drink too much might thus do them a power of good.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21692850-what-really-causes-hepatic-cirrhosis-bugs-system/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bacterial vision

Go towards the light

Some species of bacteria, it turns out, are in and of themselves, eyes

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

The shadows are Synechocystis cells. The arrows indicate the direction of illumination

SCEPTICS of evolution often point to the human eye and ask how such a complex object could have evolved when the imperfection of any part of it would cause the whole thing to be useless. It is a silly argument, confusing imperfection with simplicity. Simpler eyes than a human’s can work perfectly well, even if they do not produce such sophisticated images. And now what is probably the simplest eye imaginable has been described. It consists of a single cell—and a bacterial cell, to boot. But because it is a bacterium, this simplest-possible eye is also an entire organism.

The organism in question is Synechocystis. It belongs to a group called the cyanobacteria which, like plants, can photosynthesise. (Indeed, the photosynthetic elements of plant cells, known as chloroplasts, are thought by most biologists to be the descendants of cyanobacteria that teamed up symbiotically with the first single-celled algae.)

Cyanobacteria have been known for over a century to be phototactic, meaning they can orient in the direction of, and travel towards, light sources. Synechocystis, whose cells are spherical and three microns across, is among these phototactic species. It propels itself across surfaces using protuberances called pili. Nils Schuergers of the University of Freiburg, in Germany, and his colleagues wanted to find out how it knows where to go and, as they write in eLife, they think they have the answer.

Their first thought was that pigmented structures inside Synechocystis cells were acting as shades, meaning the illuminated side of a cell would receive more light than the far side. That would tell the bacterium which direction to travel in. But this turns out not to be the case. In fact, as the picture shows, the side of a cell opposite the light source actually lights up. Like a glass bead, the entire bacterial cell acts as a lens, focusing light on the point on the cell wall farthest from the source. From the image thus formed (though by a mechanism as yet unelucidated) Synechocystis can thus work out which direction the life-sustaining light is coming from, and travel towards it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21692849-some-species-bacteria-it-turns-out-are-and-themselves-eyes-go-towards/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Air quality

Something in the air tonight

Tackling atmospheric pollution is hard. More data will help

Feb 13th 2016 | LOS ANGELES | From the print edition

SINCE the 1940s, southern California has had a reputation for smog. Things are not as bad as once they were but, according to the American Lung Association, a health group, Los Angeles is still the worst city in the United States for levels of ozone, nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide. Gazing down on the city from the Getty Centre, an art museum in the Santa Monica Mountains, haze can blot out the view of the Pacific Ocean. Nor is the state’s bad air restricted to its south. Fresno, in the central valley, comes top of the list in America for year-round particulate pollution. Residents’ hearts and lungs are strained as a consequence.

All of which, combined with California’s reputation as the home of technological innovation, makes the place ideal for developing and testing systems designed to monitor pollution in detail. And that is just what Aclima, a fledgling firm in San Francisco, has been doing over the past few months. It has been trying out arrays of monitoring stations, some of them mobile, that are intended to yield minute-to-minute maps of outdoor air pollution. Such stations will also be able to keep an eye on what is going on inside buildings, including offices.

The stations in Aclima’s arrays are triangular and measure 20cm along a side. Each contains 12 off-the-shelf sensors that detect pollutants such as ozone, carbon monoxide and methane, as well as the small particles of which smog is composed. They also monitor basic data such as temperature and humidity, which affect how pollution forms and lingers. The elements of an array may be fixed and spaced according to what exactly they are trying to measure. Or they can be attached to vehicles, so that entire roads can be sampled routinely.

To this end, Aclima has been collaborating with Google’s Street View system, resulting in maps such as the one below. Davida Herzl, Aclima’s boss, says they have, as expected, revealed pollution highs on days when San Francisco’s transit workers went on strike and the city’s inhabitants were forced to take to their cars. Conversely, “cycle to work” days have done their job by creating pollution lows.



Aclima has already, at Google’s expense, mapped 20,000km (12,000 miles) of roads in the Bay Area this way. It plans to produce a detailed map of the air quality of California’s most populous regions—those around Los Angeles, San Francisco and the Central Valley—sponsored by the Clinton Global Initiative, a large philanthropic organisation, before the year is out. It will then move on to the rest of America and (Ms Herzl hopes) beyond. For such outdoor work, most of its customers are likely to be charitable foundations or governments. But Aclima hopes to make money from the private sector as well, by measuring pollution levels indoors.



INTERACTIVE: From CO2 to GHG, which countries have the highest emissions?

Again, Google has acted as a guinea pig. It has been testing Aclima’s technology in its offices for the past two years, crunching through more than half a billion data points a day on the air quality within them. The result, according to Ms Herzl, is the world’s largest pollution-related database on indoor environments.

Without wind and other weather to move them on, these data show, indoor levels of many nasties can be between two and five times those outside. The Googleplex is in Silicon Valley—a relatively clean part of the state. If such ratios also apply on a smoggy day in LA, watch out.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21692848-tackling-atmospheric-pollution-hard-more-data-will-help-something-air/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




Infectious diseases: Passing through

Marcel Proust as graphic novel: A second bite of the madeleine

The art of the confidence game: Fool me once

Johnson: Double-edged words

Life in the ocean: 50 shades of grey whales

The Holocaust in France: Dear father





Articles Sections Next

Infectious diseases

Passing through

Mankind knows a lot about diseases and how they spread. It still has a lot to learn

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



Pandemic: Tracking Contagions, from Cholera to Ebola and Beyond. By Sonia Shah. Sarah Crichton Books; 288 pages; $26.

ZIKA, the world’s newest pandemic, arrived down a well-trodden path. Between 1940 and 2013, more than 300 contagious diseases, including HIV/AIDS, SARS and antibiotic-resistant tuberculosis, were identified for the first time, appeared in populations that had never seen them or reappeared after having been eliminated (see map). Sonia Shah explains how human missteps can mesh with biological happenstance to turn harmless microbes into global disease monsters.

Ms Shah is an American science journalist and broadcaster who gave a TED talk in 2013, offering three reasons why malaria still had not been eradicated. It has since been viewed more than 1m times. In her new book, “Pandemic”, she combines history with reporting from disease hotspots around the world. She frames the narrative around the journey of cholera, “an old hand at pandemics”, which terrorised London, New York and Paris in the 19th century, to draw out worrying parallels between the mistakes of the past and today’s treatment of pandemic threats.

New pathogens often arise as a result of making the jump from animals to humans, as Ebola is likely to have done from bats in the jungle. The scariest among them learn to spread easily from one human to another, which is luckily still tricky for bugs like H5N1, the avian influenza virus that kills more than half the people it infects. But newcomers may be getting craftier and opportunities are plentiful, as Ms Shah finds out in poultry markets and pig farms in China and state fairs in America. Climate change and felled forests bring together species that have never crossed paths, which lets microbes mutate among them and make their way into humans.



Epidemics stand little chance without crowds and filth. “Pandemic” contains vivid descriptions of the tenements of New York in the 1850s, when nearly six times as many people were packed into one square mile (2.6 sq km) as there are in Manhattan today, and sewage covered the streets, seeping into the drinking water. Slums in developing countries are more crowded now, and with appalling sanitation.

Corrupt politics is often to blame when disease spreads. In the past, quarantines were sometimes shunned for the sake of trade. A convention negotiated in 1903 obliged countries to report disease outbreaks to each other, only to be flouted shortly after by the Italian authorities, who bullied and bribed doctors and journalists to deny a cholera outbreak. Ms Shah lists recent similar cover-ups, including SARS in China in 2002, an antibiotic-resistant bacterium in India in 2010 and MERS, a respiratory virus, in Saudi Arabia in 2012—all of which spread around the world.

Pandemics have shaped human evolution and society, argues Ms Shah. People pick, through smell, mating partners who have the pathogen-recognition genes that others lack, for example. The book brims with anecdotes. In 1892, for one, 28 doctors disputed Robert Koch’s discovery of the cholera bacterium by drinking, publicly, the watery stool of a cholera patient. (Despite the telltale diarrhoea, they still disagreed—because none died.)

Whether the world can forestall the next, unknown pandemic threat is uncertain, although serious efforts are being made. (The book was written before Zika erupted.) Hotspots where new pathogens are most likely to hatch, such as factory farms, urban slums and wild habitats that are rapidly invaded, are being watched. New ways of spotting outbreaks include vigilance about what is trending on social media or selling in pharmacies (thermometers in flu’s off-season can be one alert). But fewer than half the world’s countries have proper surveillance systems—which is why Ebola, and probably Zika too, had a long head-start on epidemic fighters.

The world’s ability to put the lid on pandemics has come a long way since the days when the plague, cholera and smallpox ravaged unchecked. Ms Shah’s book is a superbly written account of how we got here and what might await us.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21692843-mankind-knows-lot-about-diseases-and-how-they-spread-it-still-has-lot/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Marcel Proust as graphic novel

A second bite of the madeleine

How to illustrate Proust

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

Memories are made of this

In Search of Lost Time: Swann’s Way. By Marcel Proust. Adapted and illustrated by Stéphane Heuet. Translated by Arthur Goldhammer. Gallic; 206 pages; £19.99.

MARCEL PROUST is a tough read. His seven-volume “In Search of Lost Time”, published between 1913 and 1927, is known for its long, winding prose and its many ruminations on time and the slipperiness of memory. For those who have never plucked up the courage to give it a go, Stéphane Heuet’s adaptation of the first volume into a graphic novel is welcome.

Mr Heuet’s illustrations are simple, on the whole. The narrator’s face is reduced to a dozen or so lines, the grass a single shade of green. The text is translated from the French by Arthur Goldhammer, a Harvard academic who will be known to many readers for his translation of Thomas Piketty’s “Capital in the Twenty-First Century”. Mr Goldhammer’s text is concise and unfussy. A child could read this book.

Just occasionally, Mr Heuet lets his pen run wild, to dramatic effect. The most famous scene in the original book—when the narrator’s eating of a madeleine cake dipped in tea provokes a rush of memories of his childhood in the village of Combray—is afforded a wonderful two-page spread, with images of waterlilies in a river, his Aunt Léonie sitting up in bed and the waft of the steam from the tea superimposed on top of it all.

Clever the comic may be, but can it match the richness of ideas that Proust achieves in the original text? It is only just over 200 pages long, after all, and the story zips along at quite a pace. On these grounds Mr Heuet’s work has received mixed reviews in France.

Still, even diehard Proustians will enjoy many parts: the face of Charles Swann, a wealthy womaniser, as his opinion of one particular lover gradually slides from indifference to helpless infatuation; or the nervous posture of the young narrator as he tries to befriend Gilberte, Swann’s daughter, in a public garden. Mr Heuet also provides a map of Paris, pinpointing important landmarks—Swann’s residence, the Opéra Garnier and the house of the Verdurins, who host salons for the well-to-do bohemian bourgeoisie.

On top of this, the layout of the pages often makes it difficult to know the order in which the drawings are supposed to be read—from left to right, or up to down? As in the original book, the reader is thus encouraged to view the plot not as something that evolves chronologically, but as an experience of fleeting, sometimes confused images. A graphic novel this may be, but it captures the essence of Proust beautifully.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21692844-how-illustrate-proust-second-bite-madeleine/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The art of the confidence game

Fool me once

Why people are so easily had

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

The Confidence Game: The Psychology of the Con and Why We Fall for It Every Time. By Maria Konnikova. Viking; 321 pages; $28. Canongate; £12.99.



HONOURED for his charitable works, Mervyn Barrett was ready for a change. He decided to run for police commissioner of Lincolnshire, encouraged by a trusted new employee who offered not only to manage his campaign but also to fund it with help from his mother. The man took on everything from pamphlets to social media, and swiftly delivered evidence of Mr Barrett’s rising popularity. So no one raised an eyebrow when he asked for access to Mr Barrett’s private bank account, to cover expenses when his mother was unreachable. Alas, Mr Barrett suddenly had to end his candidacy, having discovered that his so-called campaign manager had drained his account of £84,000 ($135,000), and left bills worth another £16,000.

Humans are a trusting sort. This is largely a good thing, as progress requires co-operation, and co-operation demands trust. Countries with higher levels of trust grow faster and have more stable public institutions. Trusting citizens are healthier, happier and more likely to start their own businesses. People can be bad at spotting deception because, ultimately, very few are downright deceptive. This is great news for humanity. It is also a boon for crooks.

Confidence artists are the “aristocrats of crime”, writes Maria Konnikova in “The Confidence Game”, a fascinating look at the psychology behind every hustle, from Bernie Madoff’s Ponzi scheme to a three-card-monte game. The beauty of a good con is that it relies solely on persuasion: victims give willingly, and many never discover that they have been had.

The stories are juicy. Well before Mr Madoff there was William Franklin Miller, a boyish-looking chap who convinced some friends in 1889 that his “inside information” at the New York Stock Exchange guaranteed a 10% weekly return. The news spread swiftly. By the year’s end Miller had nearly $1.2m in deposits from over 12,000 subscribers. Even as newspapers questioned his good fortune, new investors sent him letters filled with cash. Only after a trial did the extent of his deceit become plain. Miller was no trader, but a man who found that it is not too hard to sell a story that seems too good to be true.

Almost everyone is a sucker for a good yarn. Because stories appeal to emotion rather than reason, a good one can help fill in gaps. Studies show that juries are often more swayed by compelling narratives than by hard evidence. Swindlers know this. Ms Konnikova tells of hucksters masquerading as doctors, royals or moguls, all armed with a gifted imagination, a silver tongue and an ability to size people up. Con artists also know that nearly everyone wants to hear about how they are special, lucky, clever or destined for great things. With a little insight into someone’s hopes and dreams, it is possible to make him or her believe almost anything.

Circumstances matter. People are more inclined to trust someone who seems a bit like them, or to like someone they want to be associated with. The isolated or lonely are especially susceptible, particularly during a difficult transition, such as a job loss, divorce or serious injury. Debt makes people more prone to fraud of any sort, perhaps because a mix of desperation and anxiety encourages wishful thinking.

Cons thrive during wars and political upheavals, as swindlers try to exploit feelings of uncertainty. This helps explain why the “advance of technology heralds a new golden age of the grift,” Ms Konnikova writes, as it has upended everything from dating to shopping. Consumer fraud in America has risen by more than 60% since 2008; online scams have more than doubled. The most common con involves fake weight-loss products, but some ploys are more ambitious. The book includes the sad tale of Paul Frampton, a distinguished physics professor who was convicted of drug smuggling in 2012 after he was caught with a suitcase he believed was for his beloved—a supermodel he had met only online—but which had cocaine stashed in the lining.

Big hustles are relatively rare, but low-level fraud is fairly common: a little more than one in ten Americans has fallen victim to some consumer scheme, according to the Federal Trade Commission. Yet few con artists are ever brought to trial, and many scams go unreported. Some victims are wary of looking like a chump. Those same psychological quirks that make humans so gullible also make many wonderfully adept at dismissing failures. Instead of learning from errors of judgment, many spin new stories about dumb luck, and continue to believe they are special in some way. This self-deception is quite useful. It often makes people happier, more productive, more creative and more empathetic. It also, alas, makes it easier for swindlers to strike again.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21692840-why-people-are-so-easily-had-fool-me-once/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

Double-edged words

The secret meaning of “feisty”

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



WOMEN and men face double-standards. That this should show up in the language is no surprise. Men who put themselves forward at work are “assertive”, women who do the same are more often “pushy” or “bossy”; men are “persistent” whereas women are “nagging”; men are “frustrated”, women “upset”. A man has a lot to say; a woman is “chatty”. A man discusses the doings of his colleagues and rivals; a woman “gossips”.

Readers tempted to doubt can check for themselves. For an impressionistic survey, type “gossip” into Google, click on “images” and see who appears to be doing it; then try the same with “nagging” and “bossy”. For hard data, try Google’s “Ngram” viewer, which shows the frequency of words and phrases among the hundreds of billions of words in the books scanned by Google, spanning centuries. One of the most common words following “gossiping” is “old”. And the most common words to follow “gossiping old” are, in this order: “women”, “woman”, “men”, “lady” and “ladies”.

Some words are trickier than mere double-standards: those using them may think they are paying a kind of compliment, whereas what is heard is something between condescension and insult. A case in point is “feisty”. Those who use it might think that the word connotes “spirited”. It is often heard by women, though, as carrying a whiff of surprise that a woman would show such spirit.

“Nonsense”, some will reply. The Economist has used “feisty” recently to refer to Greece’s leftist government, a South African tabloid, a (male) Argentinian presidential candidate and Singaporean opposition bloggers. But it is also used fairly frequently with female figures. The common thread seems to be a sense of smallness or underdog status: nobody calls a jowly dictator or heavyweight boxer “feisty”. Google’s book data say much the same. “Little” is one of the most common words to follow “feisty”, and the most common words to follow “feisty little” are “girl”, “man”, “thing”, “guy”, “woman” and “lady”. Rounding out the top ten words following “feisty little”, intriguingly, are “Irishman” and “bastard”. This closes the case on whether you should call anyone “feisty”, and especially a woman, if you want to pay a sincere compliment. In fact, because of the word’s feminine associations, it can be especially condescending to a man, belittling and feminising at the same time. For an unmixed compliment, try “passionate” or “outspoken”.

Other words carry a compliment and an unwelcome sideswipe at the same time. Those who are “spry” are not just lively, but “lively for their advanced age”. Those who are “jolly” or “jovial” are more often pot-bellied than stick-thin. “Statuesque” women may or may not appreciate the reminder that they are tall or full-figured. “Bubbly” and “vivacious” go beyond cheerful to imply a lack of seriousness. And if there is a compliment that black Americans resent above all, it is “articulate”, which is heard carrying a note of surprise.

A widespread habit of lightly taking offence can be a burden on everyone. Take the debate over “microaggressions” on American university campuses, defined as the small humiliations minority students endure. These might be described as too small for the speaker to notice, yet too big for the hearer to ignore. On one hand, some insults are clearly real—a student from California being asked where she is “really” from, because of an Asian-American face.

On the other hand, two sociologists, Bradley Campbell and Jason Manning, argued in a paper published in 2014 that a “culture of victimhood” is replacing the “culture of dignity”. Harvard is currently seeking to rename the faculty members who oversee student halls because their traditional title—“house masters”—reminds some of slavery. Steven Pinker, a psychologist and language scholar at Harvard, tweeted drily that: “1) All words have more than one meaning. 2) Mature adults resist taking pointless offence.”

One need not score this debate entirely in favour of the microaggressors or their victims. In any case, it always pays to choose words well. The case against calling an opinionated woman “feisty” need not be made in the newfangled language of microagression; it is often just lazy. Thoughtfully searching for the right word, free of off-notes, does more than avoid offence. It makes speakers and writers scour their minds for original and arresting language—a good thing in itself.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21692842-secret-meaning-feisty-double-edged-words/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Life in the ocean

50 shades of grey whales

Sex in the sea is not easy to get right, and is getting more complicated

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition

Livin’ it up at the Hotel California

Sex in the Sea: Our Intimate Connection with Sex-Changing Fish, Romantic Lobsters, Kinky Squid, and Other Salty Erotica of the Deep. By Marah Hardt. St Martin’s Press; 257 pages. $26.99.

IN THE Olympics of extreme sex, the gold medal, says Marah Hardt, goes to fish and other saltwater species. Sea life depends on sophisticated strategies honed over millennia to meet and mate. The ocean covers 71% of the Earth’s surface, so hooking up in a singles bar spread over 1.3 billion cubic kilometres (0.3 billion cubic miles) is no easy task. Reproduction and survival of the sexiest is what it is about.

Though it finishes on a more sombre note, Ms Hardt’s book, “Sex in the Sea”, starts as a voyeuristic romp (“Oceanic Orgies: Getting It On in Groups” is one chapter title). Cuttlefish are cross-dressers, the male argonaut (a pelagic octopus) has a detachable, projectile penis, dolphins are in flagrante acrobats, and group sex erupts (where else?) on the California coast twice a year when tens of thousands of grunions disport themselves on the beach. Led by the moon and tides, the small fish fling themselves ashore. The female digs a hole in the sand with her tail, backs in, lays eggs, and waits while up to eight males snuggle up and release their sperm. Kama Sutra, meet Jacques Cousteau.

Oceanpornography-cute aside (the last section, is, predictably, “Post Climax”), there is a sober moral to the story. Because of the heavy human footprint, even the cleverest underwater sex strategy struggles to succeed. The sea is becoming unsustainable. A recent World Wildlife Fund report warns that the mammals, birds, reptiles and fish that rely on the sea have been reduced by half in the past 40 years, mostly because of overfishing. According to the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation, consumption per person has nearly doubled from 10kg (22lbs) in the 1960s to more than 19kg in 2012. Other insults include global warming, plastic rubbish (which kills marine mammals by strangulation or ingestion of debris) and acid rain. The undersea reproductive race is sometimes lost before it has begun. “It is tough to perform under pressure,” Ms Hardt says.

Still, she is heartened by the number of countries willing to create protected areas. Last March the British government set aside 834,000 square km (322,000 square miles) of ocean for the Pitcairn Islands Marine Reserve—the largest single marine protected area anywhere. Other moves include implementing no-take zones, developing underwater ecotourism, recycling ocean trash and insisting on sustainable fishing. Even so, some scientists worry that it may be too late. To ensure that undersea sex is not subverted by overfishing and environmental degradation will require global co-operation. Otherwise, we are in for a very sad love story.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21692839-sex-sea-not-easy-get-right-and-getting-more-complicated-50-shades-grey/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Holocaust in France

Dear father

A haunting memoir of a young Holocaust survivor

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



But You Did Not Come Back. By Marceline Loridan-Ivens. Translated by Sandra Smith. Faber; 100 pages; £12.99.

THIS is a small book with a big voice. It took Marceline Loridan-Ivens, a French film-maker, 70 years before she felt able to write it. At the age of 15, in April 1944, she and her father, Solomon Rozenberg, were captured in their garden in Nazi-occupied France and deported: he to Auschwitz, she to Birkenau. She returned; he never did. This is her tender, anguished, remorseful letter of love to him.

The memoir is structured around the author’s failing effort to recall the words her father wrote to her in a letter, smuggled to Ms Loridan-Ivens when they were both held in the extermination camp. At the time, she was assigned to dig trenches into which gassed bodies would be dumped. His words “probably spoke to me of hope and love,” she muses: “but there was no humanity left in me…I served death. I’d been its hauler. Then its pickaxe.”

In tight, unsparing prose, she confronts the delusions her father held, and the lies she told herself. He thought owning a château in France would make him no longer a Jew in French eyes. “You didn’t really die for France,” she says to him. “France sent you to your death.” She pretended to herself for decades that the ditches she had dug were near the kitchens, not the gas chambers. Now, she confesses, wincing, she helped build a railway line that brought children to their death there. One day, an SS officer clubbed to death a young female prisoner when she and the author struggled to carry a crate of potatoes. “I think she was Greek, and I killed her,” she writes. She shut down, to keep going: “You freeze inside so you don’t die.”

In the camp, she fought to stay alive. A free woman, she tried to end her life, twice. Her family, fatherless, fell apart. Her brother and a sister later killed themselves. Ms Loridan-Ivens could not face bringing children of her own into the world. She ended up in a second marriage to a film-maker old enough, she now recognises, to be her father. Punctuated by moments of humanity, affection and even humour, there is a dreadful, cramped feel to this book, as if to reflect both the experience itself, and the author’s recollections of it. It is shot through with bleak restraint. “Surviving makes other people’s tears unbearable,” she observes. Now 87 years old, the author is still haunted by her father’s absence. Had he survived, she writes, “we could have divided our memories in two.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21692841-haunting-memoir-young-holocaust-survivor-dear-father/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Marvin Minsky: Mind and machine





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Marvin Minsky

Mind and machine

Marvin Minsky, pioneer of artificial intelligence, died on January 24th, aged 88

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN he was doing something—simulating on paper how a computer might solve one of Euclid’s theorems, say—Marvin Minsky often found himself improvising a nice little tune. He could only do that, though, if his hands were open. Why was that? Sometimes he could just sit down at the piano and play, out of his head, an original fugue. How? If he merely wanted to rearrange the imposing row of stuffed cows, dinosaurs and Ninja Turtles behind his sofa, his brain would whirr through millions of anecdotes, analogies, histories, possibilities and smidgens of common sense before settling on the line-up he perceived as “best”.

Nothing was so fascinating as human intelligence. Physics, which he excelled at, was quite profound, but intelligence struck him as “hopelessly” so, an immense realm of the imperfectly understood. Neuroscientists scratched at bits of it, psychologists at others, but he had little time for them; as a trained, if easily bored, mathematician, he started from the proposition that logic governed the whole thing. Every thought, hence all intelligence, was the result of cascades of pulses rippling through networks of semi-autonomous agents, the neurons, each connected to countless others. Since men thought like machines, it should be perfectly possible to build, with simulated neurons, a machine that could think like a man.

Other dabblers in artificial intelligence wanted it to do things humans found hard, such as calculus or chess, but Mr Minsky was more interested in apparently going backwards. He dreamed of programming a machine which, in reasoning by analogy and learning from experience, would approximately reach the level of a three-year-old child; for that was much more difficult.

First steps were slow. For his doctorate at Princeton in 1954 he analysed a “learning machine” he had built as an undergraduate to simulate the neural networks of the brain: primitive information in, primitive information out. When he went to MIT to teach in 1958 he set up the Artificial Intelligence Group, later Laboratory, which became the live core of all AI research, though it was still focused on building machines as much as on using computers. (He remained keen on building, especially on the merits of giving children Tinker Toys rather than Lego, which enabled them to build triangles and think flexibly in threes, rather than in Lego’s relentless rectangles.)

Even as computing power increased, though, he could not build networks beyond a few hundred neurons in a single layer: a micro-fraction of the brain’s complexity. And, not least because real neurons were arranged in columns of apparently hierarchical layers, he had to find a way of working top-down as well as bottom-up. He needed to find ways of saying what sort of high-level aims an artificial intelligence might have, and towards what goals it might be programmed. The search for that soon obsessed him.

Disrupting Mozart

He also, almost by the way, did other things, such as inventing a confocal scanning microscope and robotic “seeing hands” for surgery. His own intelligence continually leapt between postulations and speculations, all delivered with an endearing smile: what a thinking machine would have to notice when it drove down the highway, whether robots could be made tiny enough to beat up aphids or dexterous enough to put a pillow in a pillowcase, what would happen if you wrote “Eine Kleine Nachtmusik” to a different rhythm. Students flocked to his evening classes, never quite knowing what mental challenge he would toss out next.

His searching flowed in two main directions, and these were complementary. As he built his thinking machine, he hoped the machine would illuminate how the human brain worked. Mystery annoyed him, but he’d gradually clear it up. Emotions, for example (as he explained in “The Emotion Machine” in 2006), were just as mechanistic as any other action of the brain. They could all be reduced to defence mechanisms, information retrieval, and so on. Even consciousness was the result of “possibly 16” processes like those. As for pleasure, that too was a piece of machinery, and one you had to learn to turn off before you got addicted.

What about his own pleasures? Questioned about his “love” of this or that, he wondered what that meant. Science fiction he enjoyed, because it was full of human transformations. Literary novels, though, were “all the same”. His life was his own ideas and those of intellectual strivers even brighter than he was, from Bronx Science high school onwards. No time, in all that fizzing seriousness, for “social stuff”.

He lived just long enough to see the re-emergence of his theory of neural networks, as the data-crunching capabilities and “deep learning” of modern computers began at last to approximate to the workings of the brain. In the very week he died, a computer beat a human at the ancient, infinitely complicated game of Go. The key to making a machine that could think like a man (or, as he hoped, far better) evidently lay in one of his “third ways”: a combination of the top-down, symbolic approach and the bottom-up simulation of the ever-pulsing neurons. It would still be a devil of a job, though, to make a machine that thought like him.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21692845-marvin-minsky-pioneer-artificial-intelligence-died-january-24th-aged-88-mind-and/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Defence budgets

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21692874/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21692875-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21692876-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21692878-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Defence budgets

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition





Global defence spending as a proportion of GDP rose marginally last year, according to the latest “Military Balance” report published by the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS). Although the ratio of spending to GDP is on a downward trajectory in America, its budget in 2015 was still some $100 billion more than its inflation-adjusted cold war average. Some European states may have increased defence spending in real terms since the onset of the conflict in Ukraine in 2014, but only four out of the 26 European members of NATO met the alliance’s 2%-of-GDP spending objective last year. Saudi Arabia far outstripped that target, spending a staggering 13% of its GDP on defence last year.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21692877-defence-budgets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Feb 13th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21692864-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Fri, 12 Feb 2016]

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



Regulating cannabis: The right way to do drugs





Hong Kong: Wounded society





European banks: Borrowed time





Travel in Africa: Let Africans fly





The Mekong river: Damned if you do





Letters



Arab investment, electricity, restrooms, batteries, citizenship, gas, dedicated subscriber, punk, collaboration: Letters to the editor





Briefing



Legalising cannabis: Reeferegulatory challenge





United States



New Hampshire and beyond: Trumped and Berned





Bernie Sanders’ economic policy: A vote for what?





Trump’s German roots: Kallstadt’s king





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





Libertarians: Live free, or try





Climate change: Supreme emissions





The defence budget: Mr Carter places his bets





Lobsters: Shell shock





Lexington: Rush-ing around





The Americas



Economic data in Argentina: An Augean stable





Bello: A time to heal





How the White House race looks from Cuba: The Havana primaries





Latin American currencies: Border bazaar





Essay



The Mekong: Requiem for a river





Asia



China, North Korea and America: Between Punxsutawney and Pyongyang





Tasmania charts a new course: Water into wine





Tasmania’s forests: Saving the swift parrot





Banyan: Of Yorkies and Great Danes





China



Hong Kong-mainland relations: Over troubled water





The fire-monkey stirs: Street violence and politics





Corruption: Portrait of a purge





Middle East and Africa



Aviation in Africa: Departure delayed





Saving Africa’s rhinos: Pooches v poachers





The veil in west Africa: Banning the burqa





Syria’s war: Assad on the offensive





The Mosul dam: A watery time-bomb





Europe



Corruption in Ukraine: Dear friends





Smoking in France: Between a puff and a Kalashnikov





Spanish politics: Back to the bullring





Germany and refugees: Is the welcome culture legal?





Russians in London: Government in exile





Charlemagne: Special privileges





Britain



Britain’s tax code: Spaghetti junction





The Brexit debate: The budget that didn’t bark





Intelligence oversight: Snoopers scolded





The energy business: Switched off





Problem-solving courts: Smart justice





Sugar taxes: Do as I say, not as I chew





Refugees: Marginal benefits





Bagehot: Britain’s new ambassadors





International



Marine conservation: Rejuvenating reefs





Corals in the South China Sea: A thousand cuts





Business



Railways in America: Doing the locomotion





France’s almighty bosses: In praise of the splits





Twitter: Clunky Dorsey





Corporate governance in Japan: Sharp elbows





Foxconn: Pointed questions





Indian business: Crossing the desert





Turkish wine producers: Sour grapes





Drone-racing: Whizz kids





Schumpeter: Diversity fatigue





Finance and economics



Falling bank shares: A tempest of fear





Buttonwood: Slaves of the markets





Gold: A hedge against ignorance





Deutsche Bank’s unappetising cocos: Discomforting brew





Lesbians’ wage premium: Girl power





Sri Lanka’s economy: Taxing times





Free exchange: Optimising romance





Science and technology



Merger and acquisition: Gravitational waves have been detected for the first time





Neanderthals and human disease: A Parthian shot





Livers, bacteria and alcohol: Bugs in the system





Bacterial vision: Go towards the light





Air quality: Something in the air tonight





Books and arts



Infectious diseases: Passing through





Marcel Proust as graphic novel: A second bite of the madeleine





The art of the confidence game: Fool me once





Johnson: Double-edged words





Life in the ocean: 50 shades of grey whales





The Holocaust in France: Dear father





Obituary



Obituary: Marvin Minsky: Mind and machine





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Defence budgets





Markets





