The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



An international consortium of journalists published an investigation of a huge leak of documents from Mossack Fonseca, a Panamanian law company specialising in offshore shell companies. The documents shone a light on the sometimes embarrassing finances of top government officials around the world. Those caught up included Petro Poroshenko, the president of Ukraine; close associates of Vladimir Putin, Russia’s leader; and Sigmundur David Gunnlaugsson, Iceland’s prime minister, who stepped down after large protests. (See article)

Frontex, the EU’s border agency, began returning migrants from Greece to Turkey under a deal struck last month to control the flow of Middle Eastern asylum-seekers. Only 202 migrants were sent back; further deportations were postponed because of delays in processing asylum applications. But the number of migrants entering Greece has already begun to fall. (See article)

Fighting broke out in Nagorno-Karabakh, a mostly Armenian enclave in Azerbaijan that has been occupied by Armenia since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Azerbaijan said 16 of its soldiers had been killed, while the Armenian side claimed to have lost 20. Tens of thousands were killed in the war over the enclave in 1988-94. The two sides agreed to a ceasefire, but some fear the conflict could spiral into a proxy war between Turkey, which backs Azerbaijan, and Russia, which backs Armenia. (See article)

A court in Northern Ireland, where abortion remains illegal in most cases, handed down a three-month suspended sentence on a woman who used medication bought online to terminate her pregnancy. She could not afford to travel to England, where abortion is legal. It is thought to be the first conviction of its kind in the province.

Meanwhile, in Poland thousands protested against government plans to introduce legislation that would make abortions harder to obtain. Only a few hundred terminations are reported annually, but the abortion rate has been rising in recent years.

Dutch voters rejected the EU’s association agreement with Ukraine in a referendum by 61% to 38%. Without Dutch ratification the treaty cannot fully take force. But the EU and 27 member states that have ratified the treaty will be annoyed by any Dutch effort to renegotiate it.

Justice derailed

A case against the deputy president of Kenya, William Ruto, before the International Criminal Court collapsed because of political meddling and interfering with witnesses. The charges related to violence that followed disputed elections in 2007 in which more than 1,300 people died. (See article)



A motion to impeach Jacob Zuma, the president of South Africa, failed in parliament after members of the ruling African National Congress voted unanimously against it. The vote was held just days after the country’s highest court ruled that Mr Zuma had failed to uphold the constitution by ignoring an order to pay back money that the state had spent on his private home. (See article)

Angola said it would ask the IMF for a loan. The country is Africa’s second-biggest oil producer, and has been hurt by the collapse in oil prices.

A new government, which is meant to bring together factions from both the east and west of Libya, took up office in Tripoli. It faces daunting tasks in a country close to economic collapse and which is fighting a big Islamic State presence at its heart. (See article)

The Wisconsin wobbles

The Democratic and Republican front-runners for their parties’ presidential nominations tripped up in Wisconsin’s primary. Hillary Clinton lost against Bernie Sanders in the midwestern state and, after the worst week of his campaign, Donald Trump was heavily defeated by Ted Cruz. (See article)

In a unanimous decision the Supreme Court ruled that states may account for all residents when drawing up legislative boundaries, a defeat for conservative groups which wanted only eligible voters to be recognised. The case was brought by two Texans who argued that their voting power was diluted by drawing districts that include people who cannot vote. (See article)

Impeachment crazy

A supreme-court judge in Brazil directed the lower house of Congress to consider impeachment charges against Michel Temer, the country’s vice-president. The president, Dilma Rousseff, is already facing impeachment on allegations that she used accounting trickery to hide the size of the budget deficit. Mr Temer stepped down as the leader of the largest party in Congress earlier than planned to defend himself against attacks.

Thousands of Colombians in a score of cities held anti-government demonstrations. Backed by Álvaro Uribe, a conservative former president, the marchers protested against corruption and denounced the government’s peace talks with the FARC guerrilla army, saying they would hand the country over to terrorists.

A worrying uptick



Amnesty International reported that executions carried out by states increased by 50% last year compared with 2014, marking a 26-year high. Twenty-five countries executed prisoners in 2015. Three of them, Iran, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, accounted for 90% of known executions. Amnesty’s figures exclude China, whose death-penalty tally is estimated to be in the thousands. Over 20,000 prisoners remained on death row around the world at the end of 2015. (See article)

China said it would prosecute a former general, Guo Boxiong, who had served as vice-chairman of the armed forces until he retired in 2012. Mr Guo has been under investigation for a year for suspected corruption. He would be the highest-ranking officer to be tried for graft since the Communist Party came to power in 1949.

After the generals blocked her bid to be president, Myanmar’s National Assembly approved of Aung San Suu Kyi becoming “state counsellor”. She will wield more authority than the president—her ally, Htin Kyaw—in the new, more democratic, government. (See article)

In India a court urged that cricket matches in the Indian Premier League should be shifted from the state of Maharashtra because of a severe drought. A judge described the millions of litres of water sloshed over the league’s pitches as “criminal wastage”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21696570-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Pfizer called off its $160 billion merger with Allergan after the US Treasury proposed new rules that would severely curtail the benefits of “inversion” takeovers (where an American company buys a foreign one in order to reduce its corporate-tax bill). Allergan is listed in New York but has its corporate headquarters in lower-taxed Ireland, which is where Pfizer would have based the newly combined company. Such deals have become politically toxic in America, but the White House denied that the new regulations were intended specifically to scupper the Pfizer-Allergan deal. (See article)

The death knell

America’s Justice Department filed a lawsuit to stop the $25 billion merger of Halliburton and Baker Hughes, the world’s second- and third-largest oilfield-services companies, citing antitrust concerns. The merger was announced in November 2014 but opposed by some big oil companies. They worried that diminished competition in oil services would put a further squeeze on profits already hit by the fall in oil prices.

The share prices of big French telecoms companies plunged following the collapse of a proposed €10 billion ($11.4 billion) merger between Orange (formerly France Télécom) and Bouygues. The negotiations failed to resolve differences over the value of the deal and the French government’s 23% stake in Orange.

The Reserve Bank of India cut its benchmark interest rate from 6.75% to 6.5%, the lowest it has been in five years. Inflation, usually a headache for the central bank, has eased.

A new “fiduciary rule” on financial advice was published by the American government. From now on almost anyone giving investment advice will be required to act in the “best interest” of their clients. They previously had to ensure they were giving only “suitable” advice.

Checking out

Anbang, a Chinese insurance company that has been buying hotel assets overseas, dropped its bid for Starwood Hotels, which counts the Sheraton and Westin chains among its brands. Marriott had already struck a deal to take over Starwood before Anbang launched its rival offer.

A flutter of consolidation among America’s smaller airlines looked likely after Alaska Airlines agreed to buy Virgin America in a $4 billion deal. The new carrier will become America’s fifth-largest. Virgin America was started by Richard Branson in 2004. (See article)

Don Blankenship, arguably America’s most powerful coal-industry executive when he was boss of Massey Energy, was sentenced to a year in jail for conspiring to violate safety rules in relation to an explosion at a mine in West Virginia in 2010 that killed 29 men.

Glencore put a dent in its $26 billion debt pile by selling 40% of its agricultural business to Canada’s largest pension fund for $2.5 billion. Earlier this year the Swiss commodities and trading company said it would dispose of assets worth up to $5 billion in 2016 as part of its streamlining efforts.

India’s government welcomed the news that 1 billion people are now enrolled in its biometric-identity scheme, known as Aadhaar. After people register their fingerprints and retinal patterns they are issued with a card that gives access to public benefits. The government claims this is producing savings, but a proposal in Parliament to allow security agencies to tap the data has raised privacy concerns.

San Francisco became the first place in America to compel businesses to provide full pay for new parents who take leave. California provides new mothers and fathers with 55% of their pay for six weeks after the birth of a child, but firms in San Francisco will now be told to top up the remainder.

Where dreams don’t come true

Disney’s succession plan to replace Robert Iger as chief executive when he eventually retires lay in tatters, after Tom Staggs, the chief operating officer and Mr Iger’s heir apparent, abruptly announced his departure. Mr Staggs had been considered a shoo-in for the top job, but was reportedly not happy that the board was also considering names from outside the Disney world for the position.



Demand is high for Tesla Motors’ new Model 3 electric car, according to Elon Musk, the company’s boss. More than 276,000 vehicles had been reserved by customers by April 2nd, just two days after its official launch. With a starting price of $35,000, the Model 3 will compete directly with midsized executive cars. Deliveries will start in late 2017. But reports of problems procuring parts for Tesla’s older Model X prompted some worries that similar hitches could bedevil the Model 3’s success, and put the brakes on Tesla’s soaring share price.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21696564-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21696573-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




Facebook: Imperial ambitions

Libya: Another chance

Peru’s election: A dangerous farce

Leak of the century: The lesson of the Panama papers

Tata Steel: Cast-iron arguments





Articles Sections Next

Facebook

Imperial ambitions

Mark Zuckerberg prepares to fight for dominance of the next era of computing

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



NOT since the era of imperial Rome has the “thumbs-up” sign been such a potent and public symbol of power. A mere 12 years after it was founded, Facebook is a great empire with a vast population, immense wealth, a charismatic leader, and mind-boggling reach and influence. The world’s largest social network has 1.6 billion users, a billion of whom use it every day for an average of over 20 minutes each. In the Western world, Facebook accounts for the largest share of the most popular activity (social networking) on the most widely used computing devices (smartphones); its various apps account for 30% of mobile internet use by Americans. And it is the sixth-most-valuable public company on Earth, worth some $325 billion.

Even so, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s 31-year-old founder and chief executive, has even greater ambitions (see article). He has plans to connect the digitally unconnected in poor countries by beaming internet signals from solar-powered drones, and is making big bets on artificial intelligence (AI), “chatbots” and virtual reality (VR). This bid for dominance will bring him into increasing conflict with the other great empires of the technology world, and Google in particular. The ensuing battle will shape the digital future for everyone.

Empires built on data

Facebook has prospered by building compelling services that attract large audiences, whose attention can then be sold to advertisers. The same is true of Google. The two play different roles in their users’ lives: Google has masses of data about the world, whereas Facebook knows about you and your friends; you go to Google to get things done, but turn to Facebook when you have time to kill. Yet their positions of dominance and their strategies are becoming remarkably similar. Unparalleled troves of data make both firms difficult to challenge and immensely profitable, giving them the wealth to make bold bets and to deal with potential competitors by buying them. And both firms crave more users and more data—which, for all the do-gooding rhetoric, explains why they are both so interested in extending internet access in the developing world, using drones or, in Google’s case, giant balloons.

The task is to harness data to offer new services and make money in new ways. Facebook’s bet on AI is a recognition that “machine learning”—in which software learns by crunching data, rather than having to be explicitly programmed—is a big part of the answer. It already uses AI techniques to identify people in photos, for example, and to decide which status updates and ads to show to each user. Facebook is also pushing into AI-powered digital assistants and chatbot programs which interact with users via short messages. Next week it is expected to open up its Messenger service (which can already be used to do things like order an Uber car), to broaden the range of chatbots. And Facebook’s investment in VR—it bought Oculus, the cheerleader of this emerging field, for $2 billion in 2014—is a bold guess about where computing and communication will go after the smartphone.

But Facebook faces rivals in all these areas. Google is using AI techniques to improve its internet services and guide self-driving cars, and other industry giants are also investing heavily in AI—though with the deepest pockets and the most data to crunch, Facebook and Google can attract the best researchers and most promising startups. Facebook lags behind Amazon, Apple, Google and Microsoft when it comes to voice-driven personal assistants; when it comes to chatbots, it faces competition from Microsoft and a host of startups eager to prove that bots are the new apps (see article). And its push into VR—which Mr Zuckerberg sees as a stepping stone to “augmented reality” (AR), where information is superimposed on the real world—pits it against formidable rivals, too. Microsoft has jumped straight to AR with its HoloLens headset, its most impressive product in years, and Google, already active in VR, has invested in Magic Leap, a little-known AR startup.

The scale of Facebook’s ambition, and the rivalries it faces, reflect a consensus that these technologies will transform how people interact with each other, with data and with their surroundings. AI will help devices and services anticipate your needs (Google’s Inbox app already suggests replies to your e-mails). Conversational interfaces will let you look things up and get things done by chatting to a machine by voice or text. And intelligent services will spread into a plethora of products, such as wearable devices, cars and VR/AR goggles. In a decade’s time computing seems likely to take the form of AR interfaces mediated by AI, using gestures and speech for inputs and the whole world as its display. Information will be painted onto the world around you, making possible new forms of communication, creativity and collaboration.

This is the ambitious vision that Facebook, Google, Microsoft and other technology giants are working towards. But along the way there are certain to be privacy and security concerns. Crunching all that information to provide personalised services looks a lot like surveillance, and will cause a backlash if consumers do not feel they are getting a good deal in return for handing over their personal details (as the advertising industry is discovering to its cost)—or if security is inadequate.

Power from the people

There will also be worries about concentration and monopoly, and the danger of closed ecosystems that make it hard for people to switch between services. Facebook’s plan to offer free access to a limited subset of websites was blocked by India’s telecoms regulator, which argued that it was “risky” to allow one company to act as a gatekeeper. And Germany’s competition authority is investigating the way Facebook handles personal data. As its dominance grows, Facebook can expect to face more such cases, as Microsoft and Google did before it.

Striking a balance between becoming ever more intimately entwined in billions of peoples’ lives, making huge profits as a result and avoiding a backlash will be one of the biggest business challenges of the century. Even in ancient Rome, emperors could find that the crowd suddenly turned against them. So applaud Mr Zuckerberg—and fear for him, too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21696521-mark-zuckerberg-prepares-fight-dominance-next-era-computing-imperial-ambitions/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Libya

Another chance

The new unity government is the best hope for preventing economic collapse and the spread of Islamic State

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



SINCE the overthrow of Muammar Qaddafi nearly five years ago, good news from Libya has been in short supply. But on March 30th some came at last. Fayez al-Serraj, the prime minister of a new Government of National Accord (GNA) nominated by a UN-backed negotiation process, entered Tripoli with six ministerial colleagues. They had travelled by boat from Tunisia after the rival National Salvation Government, supported by mainly Islamist militias, had closed down Tripoli’s airspace. Despite fears that he would be killed on the way to his office, Mr Serraj was warmly received. Within days, key institutions of the state, including the central bank and the national oil company, had pledged loyalty to the GNA.

Mr Serraj will have his work cut out if he is to have any hope of uniting this extraordinarily fractious country. Libya has been in chaos since the revolution of 2011. Things went from bad to worse in 2014, when Islamists responded to electoral defeat by seizing Tripoli and setting up a rival assembly to the internationally recognised parliament, known as the House of Representatives, which was forced to decamp to the eastern city of Tobruk. Under the respective banners of Operation Dawn in the west and Operation Dignity in the east, loose coalitions of militias and remnants of the armed forces have since fought each other sporadically.

For several months, the GNA struggled to get off the ground, but on March 13th it was declared the sole legitimate government of Libya by Western powers impatient to end the deadlock. This was what gave Mr Serraj the confidence to move to Tripoli. The next, far harder step, will be to build on this surprising success.

Mr Serraj’s priority must be to persuade the House of Representatives to recognise his government. Before that can happen, a compromise must be found over the filling of senior military and security posts. The stumbling block is General Khalifa Haftar, who leads the Operation Dignity forces and has the backing of Egypt and the UAE. He wants to be defence minister, but he is a divisive figure. To win the parliament’s support, Mr Serraj must prove that he heeds its concerns about instability in the east. He may need to find a job for General Haftar to show that he is sincere (see article).

Help wanted

Once the legitimacy of his government is established, Mr Serraj needs to tackle two urgent problems, both of which will require the help of the outside world to fix. The first is Libya’s collapsing economy. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, our sister company, it will shrink faster than that of any other country this year. Libya was once prosperous, but nearly a fifth of its people are now thought to suffer from malnutrition. The only thriving business is the smuggling of desperate migrants into Europe from Tripoli.

The second and connected challenge is the growing presence of Islamic State. As IS has been squeezed in Iraq and Syria, many of the Libyans who went to join it have returned, bringing with them hardened foreign fighters and experienced administrators. They have carved out an area extending some 180 miles around Sirte, the coastal town where Qaddafi was born. Attracting some of the most extreme local jihadists, IS now has some 5,000 fighters in Libya and has been launching attacks on the country’s petroleum infrastructure. Output of Libya’s oil industry, which contributes nearly all state revenues, has fallen by 75% since 2011.

America, Italy, France and Britain have a shared interest in helping Libya rid itself of IS and improving general security. To that end, they have drawn up plans for a 6,000-strong international stabilisation force and for a much more vigorous campaign against IS than today’s largely covert one. But they cannot proceed without the invitation of a credible Libyan government. As soon as Mr Serraj asks, they should step in.

Greater domestic security will boost the economy. So, too, would the promise of Western investment to rebuild Libya’s hydrocarbons industry. A commitment by the UN to begin unlocking the assets of Libya’s $67 billion sovereign-wealth fund (frozen since 2011) will also help.

This is a rare chance for a devastated country to escape extremism, violence and economic collapse. It is up to the Libyans to take it. But the West should do more than just watch.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21696526-new-unity-government-best-hope-preventing-economic-collapse-and-spread/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Peru’s election

A dangerous farce

Daft decisions from the electoral authority subvert democracy and undermine the rule of law

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



FOOTBALL fans are familiar with the occasional match in which the referee changes the course of the game by mistakenly sending off players and awarding a dubious penalty or two. Peruvians are discovering, to their bemusement, that the referee can determine who wins in politics, too. On April 10th they will go to the polls to choose a new president. Two names, those of Julio Guzmán and César Acuña, will not be on the ballot, although polls promised them almost a quarter of the vote between them. However, barely a month before the election and after weeks of legal gyrations, the electoral authority disqualified them.

Mr Guzmán, who had a good chance of reaching and winning the probable run-off ballot and thus becoming president, was thrown out because the small party which had adopted him changed its procedure for choosing its candidate without informing the electoral authorities beforehand. Mr Acuña was expelled for handing out a total of around $4,400 during a couple of campaign stops.

“The law is the law,” parroted many of the two men’s rivals and Peru’s media establishment. Fine, except that in this case the law is an ass, is being misapplied and, it seems, is not the same for everyone. The electoral law has been disfigured by frequent amendments and absurd regulatory detail. Nobody in Mr Guzmán’s party complained of a violation of internal democracy. Disqualification is a grossly disproportionate punishment and elevates a minor administrative error above the constitutional right to participate in politics. Mr Acuña fell foul of a provision approved only in mid-January that bars candidates found to have handed out money or gifts.

Then videos emerged of Keiko Fujimori, long the front-runner, at a hip-hop competition organised by her party’s youth group at which the winners were given prizes of about $90 each. Facing the prospect of an election deprived of all credibility, the parrots changed their tune. The law, it seems, is not always the law. An electoral tribunal, in a judgment smuggled out at 12.05am on Good Friday, decided that Ms Fujimori should not be disqualified. It rejected a similar allegation against another candidate. But Ms Fujimori’s campaign was in any event unfairly damaged by the referee’s actions, since she was wrongly blamed for Mr Guzmán’s exclusion.

A warning for Latin America

Since democracy spread across Latin America in the 1980s, no presidential candidate has been banned so close to an election. Some Peruvians spy partisan conspiracy; the charitable view is that it is blind incompetence. Whatever the explanation, the winner of the election will enjoy less than full legitimacy. That is unfortunate: even by Latin American standards, Peruvians are contemptuous of their politicians and dissatisfied with their democracy. If Peru is to remain a Latin American growth star, it needs reforms that only a strong and credible government can provide (see article). The worry is that it will see social conflict and lawlessness instead.

Peru’s electoral farce also holds a wider warning for the region. Faced with weak political parties and cronyism, Latin American countries tend to respond with regulatory overkill. Like the red tape that chokes business, this fails to achieve its aim, because it brings the law into disrepute and leads people to break the rules. Many of the region’s democracies need reforms to restore public trust in politics. The touchstone for these should be: the simpler the better. They should deter wrongdoing, not upend elections because of procedural slip-ups. Above all, if in doubt, don’t ask the lawyers to decide: look to the voters instead.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21696528-daft-decisions-electoral-authority-subvert-democracy-and-undermine-rule-law/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Leak of the century

The lesson of the Panama papers

More should be done to make offshore tax havens less murky

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THREE years ago a watchdog published a series of reports on tax havens based on leaks of confidential documents. Some nervous clients of Mossack Fonseca, a law firm in Panama that specialises in setting up offshore companies, asked if their secrets were safe. The law firm told them not to fret; its data centre was “state of the art” and its encryption algorithm was “world class”. Whoops. This week the same watchdog, the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists (ICIJ), published the first stories based on a trove of leaked data on Mossack Fonseca’s clients (see article).

The leaker (whose identity has not been revealed) provided the ICIJ with 11.5m files covering nearly 40 years. The “Panama papers”, as they have been dubbed, unveil the offshore holdings of 140 politicians and officials, including 12 current and former presidents, monarchs and prime ministers. They show how money was moved around and hidden by at least 33 people and companies blacklisted by the United States for allegedly doing business with rogue states, terrorists or drug barons. The sums involved are huge; so are some of the names.

Friends of Vladimir Putin, the president of Russia, have shuffled $2 billion through a network of banks and offshore firms, the ICIJ claims. The brother-in-law of China’s president, the children of Pakistan’s prime minister and the cousins of Syria’s dictator all did business with Mossack Fonseca. So did the late father of David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister.

The law firm denies wrongdoing, as do many of its clients. And indeed, there are plenty of legitimate reasons for using offshore companies or bank accounts. When two firms set up a cross-border joint venture, for example, they may choose to incorporate it on neutral turf. And the citizens of unstable countries often seek safe places to park their savings. But offshore companies are also used to dodge taxes and hide illicit wealth.

Browsing through the data that the ICIJ has so far disclosed, it is striking how rich the cronies and relatives of some politicians have become. The daughters of Azerbaijan’s president appear secretly to control gold mines. A nephew of South Africa’s president, Jacob Zuma, has done nicely out of oil contracts in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where South Africa has sent more than 1,000 peacekeepers. Ordinary citizens are incensed. Mr Zuma faced impeachment proceedings this week over allegations that he misappropriated public money to build himself a palace and refused to pay it back (see article). Furious protests forced Iceland’s prime minister to resign, after his wife was revealed to have secret offshore investments with claims on the country’s failed banks.

Corruption makes the world poorer and less equal. When politicians steal, they reduce the amount of public cash left over for roads or schools. When they give sweetheart contracts to their chums, they defraud taxpayers and deter honest firms from investing in their country. All this hobbles growth.

Cleaning up tax havens will not end graft. The prime responsibility for this lies with national governments, many of which should do more to make their finances transparent and their safeguards against cronyism stringent. But it would help if kleptocrats were less able to hide their stashes. Hence co-ordinated global efforts are required to crack down on corporate anonymity and to stop the middlemen who make it so easy for crooks to launder their loot.

Dredging the canal of corruption

Many schemes described in the Panama papers involve anonymous shell companies, whose real owners hide behind hired “nominees”. Such vehicles are known as the “getaway cars” for tax dodgers, launderers and crooked officials. It is time to untint their windows by creating central registers of beneficial ownership that are open to tax officials, law-enforcers—and the public. The penalties for lying when registering a firm should be stiff. Britain and a few smaller countries have led the way in this. Others should follow.

Next, regulate the law firms and other intermediaries that set up and husband offshore companies and trusts. They are supposed to know their clients, weeding out the dodgy ones. But too many are paid to act as buffers, offering an extra layer of protection against those who pry. Governments make great efforts to ensure that global banks comply with anti-money-laundering rules, while this shadow financial system is barely policed. That must change. Governments could start by making it a criminal offence to enable tax evasion by others. Mr Cameron will host a global anti-corruption summit next month. The Panama papers give him just the platform he needs to persuade other governments, and his own, to turn their tough talk of recent years into action.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21696532-more-should-be-done-make-offshore-tax-havens-less-murky-lesson-panama-papers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Tata Steel

Cast-iron arguments

How should governments cope with the global glut of steel? Britain is a depressing case study

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



ON THE rich world’s long march away from heavy industry, Britain once again finds itself to the fore. Unless Tata Steel UK is sold in the next few weeks, its Indian owner will close it down. Some 15,000 jobs are at stake—and thousands more in the local economy of the largest works, at Port Talbot, in south Wales. Because the glut is global, Britain is grappling with questions that are bearing down upon steelmakers around the world. Unfortunately, if Britain is any guide, governments are likely to come up with the wrong answers.

Cold-rolled gloom

The world’s steel industry is buckling under low prices (see chart). Global crude steel output was about 1.6 billion tonnes in 2015 (Britain’s share was only 11m tonnes). The OECD puts total overcapacity at a devastating 600m tonnes.

Politicians and campaigners are falling over themselves to say why the business must be saved (see Bagehot). They make three arguments, none of which stands up to scrutiny. Some claim that steel is “strategic”, like banks, which needed saving to prevent an economy-wrecking collapse of the payments and credit system. Others call steel a “foundation industry”—a grandiose way of saying that British manufacturers need a domestic supply. In fact steel is a globally traded commodity. If Britain suffered a geopolitical or economic crisis so severe that imports were blocked, steel would be the least of its problems.

Another argument is that steel is cyclical. If only Tata Steel hung on for other makers to fold first, it would be a decent business. However, those 600m tonnes are grounds for scepticism. So is the fact that Tata’s British steel operations recorded pre-tax losses in 2014-15 of £768m ($1.2 billion) on sales of £4.2 billion. Port Talbot is said to be losing £1m a day. As an investor, Tata is long-term almost to a fault. It paid £6.2 billion for the business in 2007 and has spent £2 billion to cover losses. Yet it reckons its British steel plants are worth next to nothing.

Those who disagree do not have to take Tata’s word for it. The business is for sale and anyone who thinks he can make money should bid. Specialised parts of the business, including its Shotton and Trostre plants, which make coated panels and tin-plated steel respectively, will almost certainly find buyers. One possible bidder thinks he could replace Port Talbot’s blast furnaces with plant that runs on scrap (see article).

But watch out for the small print. Buyers seeking subsidies and tax-breaks will press a third set of arguments—that steel’s failure is the fault of government policy. Electricity prices are higher for Tata in Britain than for steelmakers in the rest of Europe. Yet this is the result of policies judged sensible for Britain as a whole. When objectives conflict, the longer-term, sustainable one should prevail. In any case, electricity is about 6% of costs: the heavy-industry rebate would surely be too small to save Port Talbot. Some want the state to take on the cost of cleaning up sites, but, like debt, environmental liabilities are part of the business. They should stay with it.

Equally misguided is the attempt to urge the government to impose steep tariffs on steel being “dumped”, especially by China. In general, anti-dumping duties are unwise because they penalise consumers and lead to tit-for-tat protection (see Free exchange). When a globally traded commodity is at stake, they are doubly foolish. Tariffs against Chinese commodity steel would be futile—because, in a world market, steel from somewhere else would take its place. A general duty on steel would punish Britain’s most successful manufacturers. It makes no sense to save jobs in an ailing industry like steel by taking them away from a successful one like cars.

The aim of policy should be to protect workers, not jobs. The state could help the salvageable subsidiaries find buyers by socialising Tata’s pension fund, which is almost fully paid up. In the parts that fail, the government should focus on “active” labour-market policies that match people to work using job exchanges and retraining. It should invest in infrastructure to help business in general and offer grants for people who want to move to new jobs. None of this will be easy. But, without a buyer, it is the least bad outcome.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21696527-how-should-governments-cope-global-glut-steel-britain-depressing-case/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




On Harvard, HPV, the budget, America, our covers, Moore's law, Canada, queuing: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

On Harvard, HPV, the budget, America, our covers, Moore's law, Canada, queuing

Letters to the editor

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



Harvard’s endowment

I would like to make some further comments to your article on Harvard University’s endowment (“Yard sale”, March 26th). In addition to funding Harvard College, the university’s endowment supports 12 other Harvard schools, including medicine, law and public health. It also helps fund the sixth-largest art museum in the United States, the largest academic library in the Americas and a large public park (the Arnold Arboretum) in Boston, among many other things.

Moreover, endowments are to be maintained into inflation-adjusted perpetuity, with the principal stewarded and investment returns used to finance current operations. Overspending today would erode its future value, as well as the educational and research activities it can make possible in the years to come.

Harvard College, through the university’s endowment, already supports one of the most robust financial-aid programmes in the nation for low- and middle-income families. Indeed, $1.5 billion has been awarded to undergraduates over the past decade. The proposed free-tuition programme would expand that effort to include wealthy families, transforming an affordability initiative into a subsidy for those who already can afford to pay. This would necessarily come at the expense of other endowment-funded activities, including research into global challenges ranging from climate change to cancer.

JEFF NEAL

Chief university spokesperson

Harvard University

Cambridge, Massachusetts

This is not the first time government has cast covetous eyes on rich college endowments. Henry VIII, after seizing monastic endowments and giving them to his supporters, ordered an inquiry into Oxford and Cambridge college endowments in 1546. Through creative book-keeping the colleges were able to demonstrate that they were operating in the red. Henry responded archly that “he had not in his realm so many persons so honestly maintained in living by so little land and rent”. The colleges responded with obfuscation, Henry died within a year, and Oxford and Cambridge went on to prosper for centuries. I expect American universities hope for the same.

DAMIAN LEADER

McLean, Virginia





HPV vaccines

Your article on vaccines for the human papillomavirus (HPV), a common sexually transmitted infection, contained some minor errors (“The cost of embarrassment”, March 26th). In a fashion virtually identical to Pap smears performed on the uterine cervix, anal Pap smears are now being performed on men at risk for HPV- associated disease. The equivalent data to that derived from decades of Pap smears on women in lowering the incidence of cancer is lacking, but there is every reason to believe this will be an effective screening tool. In addition, some dental practices are now screening patients for tumours of the oral cavity.

There has been a dramatic increase in HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancers. These cancers are more common in men but also occur in women. They occur because of sexual practices, not the sex of one’s partner. In addition it is worth pointing out that, in America at least, anal cancer is actually slightly more common in women than men, again related to sexual practices.

ELLIOT WEISENBERG

Pathologist

Chicago





Not convinced

* A sure sign of a government on the back foot is when its budget defence in Parliament depends on comparisons with the performance or policies of other parties (“The fiddler’s charter”, March 19th). Accordingly, the financial secretary to the Treasury recently answered two out of three questions on the Conservatives’ budget with references to the budget deficit left by the last Labour government, Labour’s anti-business policies and the likely state of Scotland’s economy had the Scottish National Party succeeded in winning independence for Scotland.



Together with a splattering of well-rehearsed supportive comments from other Tories, about the performance of the economy, getting people back to work and so on, it amounted to a poor, negative and unconvincing defence of a budget which the country desperately needed to believe in.



PAUL WENMAN

InvestAssure

Abingdon, Oxford





Blame the constitution

Rather than blaming the Republicans for America’s current political situation (“What now?”, March 19th), we should look to the electoral system. America’s basic law was written in 1787 when democracy was young, there were no political parties and the principal mass medium of communication was the pulpit. Supposedly it provides checks and balances preventing tyranny, but does America, a mature democracy, need that in the 21st century?

Parliamentary systems are better. They produce a collegial leadership where the head of government must maintain the confidence of his cabinet ministers, who themselves are leaders of geographical, ethnic, class and ideological bases. A single constituency system, such as the presidency, gives undue influence to minorities. That is the case in Israel, where the electoral list results in every government depending on the support of religious parties representing perhaps 10% of the population. A successful party in a parliament of several hundred constituencies based on the voter’s residence must campaign to the centre and govern from the centre. This makes consensus and compromise more likely.

JAMES DECANDOLE

Toronto





Cover issues

“The new normal” (March 26th) rightly called on Western politicians to condemn terrorist attacks in Lebanon and Turkey as much as those in their own countries. I look forward to the day when The Economist will feature an attack in a Muslim country on its front cover, just like those published after the Paris and Brussels attacks.

KAMIL ALTINTASOGLU

Wellesley, Massachusetts





Even more Moore's law

* In your recent coverage about “The Future of Computing” (Technology Quarterly, March 12th) the word “security” appears only once, specifically in a reference to the National Security Agency. During the decades in which Moore’s Law approximately held true (in the general sense of computer performance), computer and network security took a very distant second place as design and engineering criteria to the relentless drive toward higher performance, lower power requirements, and lower cost. As companies, governments and individuals evaluate their needs in the post-Moore’s-Law era, one can only hope that security—real security, deep security, designed into hardware, software, and networks from the bottom up—becomes a top priority. One only needs to read the newspapers to see the latest business and government breaches. Will “After Moore’s Law” include the radical redesign of hardware, software, and networks needed to provide greater security for the increasingly computer- and network-dependent world?

C. C. WOOD

Santa Fe Institute

Santa Fe, New Mexico



Canada’s budget facts

Your piece on Canada’s recent federal budget mentions the “discipline” practised by the former Conservative government (“Globalisation with a human face”, March 26th). Nothing could be further from the truth. Under Stephen Harper as prime minister, Canada’s Conservatives added some C$150 billion ($115 billion) to the national debt between 2006 and 2015 because of a consistent string of annual budget deficits. Reducing Canada’s goods and services tax (GST) from 7% to 5% early in the party’s nine-year term exacerbated the problem by taking out C$15 billion a year from the federal treasury.

In fact, Canada’s commodity taxes, specifically the value-added GST, are very low by OECD standards; lowering it further reduced the government’s ability to weather the economic storms of 2007-08.

ROY CULLEN

Liberal member of Parliament, 1996 to 2008

Victoria, Canada





Taking a line

I read your piece on the growing profession of the codista (queuer) in Italy (“Worth their wait in gold”, March 19th). As early as the 18th century, Romans made money by occupying seats in restaurants and theatres for wealthy folk, running errands and standing in line. The practice was so rampant that travellers to Rome reported pubs full of “sitters”, people paid to reserve a seat hours before a wealthy patron would arrive for lunch.

During the high season when thousands of pilgrims visited Rome’s churches, poor Romans were paid to stand in line and await the arrival of rich Germans, Swedes and Britons, so that they “may be spared the indignity of being seen standing in the muddy streets”, according to one book.

MARTIN HIESBOECK

Taipei

* Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21696490-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




The new face of Facebook: How to win friends and influence people





Articles Sections Next

The new face of Facebook

How to win friends and influence people

The social network has turned itself into one of the world’s most influential technology giants, and wants to become ever more powerful

Apr 9th 2016 | SAN FRANCISCO | From the print edition



A HUGE thumbs-up, Facebook’s “like” symbol, greets visitors at the entrance to the company’s headquarters in Menlo Park, in the heart of Silicon Valley. The imposing sign is crafted from that of a former occupant of the attractive corporate campus, Sun Microsystems, a once high-flying startup that crashed before Facebook moved there in 2011. When employees leave they can see Sun’s name and logo still inscribed on the back of the sign. This corporate memento serves as a reminder of how quickly fortunes can change if tech startups take success for granted.

Not long ago sceptics dismissed Facebook itself as a fad. Having watched its early rivals stumble, many doubted the longevity of another social network and underestimated the ingenuity of its 31-year-old boss, Mark Zuckerberg. An ill-managed initial public offering in 2012—the firm’s share price sank on the first day of trading—seemed to confirm those doubts. But those betting against Mr Zuckerberg were wrong.

Facebook is now the sixth-most-valuable public company in the world, with a market value of around $325 billion. Facebook claims nearly 1.6 billion monthly users for its social network (see chart 1). Around 1 billion people, nearly a third of all those on the planet with access to the internet, log on every day.

Facebook takes up 22% of the internet time Americans spend on mobile devices, compared with 11% on Google search and YouTube combined, according to Nielsen, a research firm. As a result it has more data about more users than almost any other company in history. It has used that advantage to become one of the most powerful forces in the advertising business. Its revenues have more than doubled in two years, to $18 billion in 2015.



The firm has maintained its dominance by becoming one of the tech industry’s most active acquirers, buying other services that might have lured users away. Since 2012 it has spent more than $25 billion on businesses including Instagram, a photo-sharing site, WhatsApp, a messaging service, and Oculus, a virtual-reality firm. Americans spend 30% of their mobile time with Facebook and other apps it owns (see chart 2).

Facebook has become more like a holding company for popular communications platforms than a social network. But even that description understates Mr Zuckerberg’s ambitions. He is making big bets on the future of communication, mainly messaging services, artificial intelligence and virtual reality. Speaking to The Economist Mr Zuckerberg says that he sees his company as “a mission-focused technology company”. That puts it in direct competition with other tech-industry titans, especially Google.

Faced with the challenge of how to grow when a huge share of the connected globe already uses his products, Mr Zuckerberg is determined to bring the internet, and so Facebook, to people who are not yet linked up. One scheme involves an unmanned solar-powered plane. Such plans are audacious, sometimes controversial and by no means guaranteed to be successful. But Mr Zuckerberg has a history of pushing beyond what most observers thought possible.

I’m liking it

Facebook has reached its position of influence and power by defying three maxims about the internet: that social networks have short lifespans, that it is impossible to make money from them and that mobile advertising is a grim business.

Facebook goes from strength to strength but only narrowly avoided the fate which befell rival services that seemed destined for dominance. Friendster and MySpace fizzled out. Frequent headlines about executive departures in its early days contributed to the suspicions that Mr Zuckerberg was leading his startup to a similar disaster. In 2006 he came close to selling Facebook to Yahoo for $1 billion, but pulled out when it tried to negotiate the price down. Other firms, including Viacom and Microsoft, have also been suitors.



Mr Zuckerberg, however, always had a long-term plan. He spoke about how the service could become a “utility” and talked about the next ten or even 20 years, causing mirth among industry veterans.

That meant ensuring that Facebook did not meet the same end as Friendster, where frequent outages and long page-load times caused users to abandon it. From the start Facebook invested heavily in technology so the site would not go down. It expanded gradually to universities beyond a select group, then high schools and the rest of the world, but only when it felt it had the server capacity to support new users. The firm’s technology infrastructure “is not visible, but that is probably what we have spent most of our time on,” says Mr Zuckerberg.

Status update

The company’s commercial ambitions and professionalism changed markedly in 2008 when Mr Zuckerberg hired Sheryl Sandberg as chief operating officer. An early employee at Google, she had an important role in building the search engine’s ad business. At Facebook she has plenty to play with. The mass of data it has on users is attractive to advertisers, who can target messages to their desired audiences with greater precision than they can through traditional media, such as television.

Facebook has had to adapt to fast-changing technology and the habits of users to reap the rewards of digital advertising. By 2012, when it had built a robust ad business primarily for desktop computers, users started spending more time on mobile devices. This sparked a crisis at the company around the time of its initial public offering. “We had a problem, which was that we had exactly no revenue on mobile,” says Ms Sandberg. Services developed for use on mobile devices, such as Twitter, a live-blogging platform, were reckoned more likely to succeed.

Twitter squandered its advantage. And mobile has proved an unexpected boon for Facebook, which is better suited to smartphones. Last year its advertising revenues were eight times greater than Twitter’s, largely because it has more users who spend more time generating more data. But it is also a result of Facebook’s more settled management. Since it went public Facebook has kept most of its senior bosses, regarded in Silicon Valley as among the best at getting things done—unlike Twitter, which is plagued by dysfunction and turnover at the top. And this stability allowed Mr Zuckerberg to devote more time and money to working out a suitable format for mobile advertising.

Mobile devices lengthen the amount of time people spend online each day, and give advertisers more information with which to target messages, including where users are and what type of device they own (wealthier ones tend to have iPhones). Facebook’s ads appear in users’ newsfeeds, where news from friends and other content is collected. They look like updates from pals, featuring a glossy photo or video of a product.

Facebook has also reached new users in emerging markets, such as Indonesia, where mobile phones are more common than desktop computers. Around a third of Facebook’s active users are in Asia (excluding China, where the service is blocked). Another third are in America and Europe; and the rest are elsewhere around the world. Of the top ten apps in India, Facebook controls three.

Facebook is in such an exalted position because no other company, with the exception of Google, has as many users, knows as much about their behaviour online and can target them as effectively. In addition to all the personal and geographical information, interests, social connections and photos users share, the social network is able to see where else they go online. Anywhere with a “like” symbol feeds back information, as do sites that allow people to log on with their Facebook credentials.

Advertisers can reach consumers with laserlike precision. An energy-drink company may target ads at parents of teenage athletes; a retailer can market goods to people from specific neighbourhoods who have visited its website. “There are three compulsory elements to online advertising today: you have to have a mobile website, and be involved with Google and Facebook,” says Peter Stabler of Wells Fargo, a bank. As a result Facebook claimed 19% and Google 35% of the $70 billion spent on mobile advertising worldwide in 2015, according to eMarketer, a consulting firm (see chart 3). Twitter and Yahoo had to make do with a meagre 2.5% and 1.5%, respectively.



Facebook is likely to remain on Google’s tail. Its core service continues to grow. Last year it added 200m new users. It has successfully outmanoeuvred regional competitors, such as Orkut, a social network owned by Google that was popular in Brazil. This is partly down to Mr Zuckerberg and his hacker mentality. He believes in rolling out products quickly: “Move fast and break things” is a company motto. Not everything works. Paper, a stand-alone app that aggregated news articles, was a notable flop. And sometimes employees complain about being “Zucked” when he changes his mind.

Mr Zuckerberg’s big acquisitions have helped to defend his firm’s place in the social-network order. The first was Instagram, a budding mobile photo-sharing service, bought for $1 billion in 2012. At the time, that seemed a huge sum for a firm with no revenues and only 13 employees, but now Instagram is regarded as a steal. Facebook started selling ads on Instagram only last year but this year they could bring in over $2 billion in revenues, according to Mark Mahaney of RBC Capital, a bank.

Instagram’s price tag was modest compared with the $22 billion Facebook paid in 2014 for WhatsApp, a profitless messaging service that then had 450m users, many of them in emerging markets. Services like WhatsApp, which let people communicate instantaneously, are potent because they compete with other social networks for time spent online and data collection.

Facebook has, for that reason, separately cultivated its own service, Facebook Messenger, which boasts 900m users. WhatsApp now has 1 billion users and analysts agree that the deal was a smart one. “There were three existential threats to Facebook: WhatsApp, Instagram and Snapchat,” says Jeremy Philips of Spark Capital, a venture-capital firm. “Zuckerberg bought two of them for a little more than 10% of Facebook’s market cap.”

Aside from the blockbuster acquisitions a little-noticed deal has also proved shrewd. Facebook’s bought Onavo, an Israeli startup involved in mobile analytics, for a rumoured $120m in 2013. Onavo helps Facebook track which apps are becoming popular and could be worth purchasing.

Onavo was instrumental in the acquisition of WhatsApp and also helped Facebook spot that Snapchat, a messaging service, was fast becoming popular, especially with teenagers. Facebook reportedly tried to buy Snapchat in 2013 for $3 billion. Today Snapchat, which is still privately owned, is said to be worth $16 billion and probably poses the greatest direct threat to Facebook for teenagers’ time.

Facebook proves that social networks do not always have short lifespans, but there remains the persistent concern—present in many real-life social networks too—that someone newer and cooler is going to come along. And Facebook will not be able to buy every rival.

Mr Zuckerberg insists his firm is not going to waste cash and time on an acquisition unless it has the potential to grow into a truly fearsome competitor. “A lot of companies will try to acquire the number two or three product and assume that they can make it good. We are not interested in that,” he insists. It will probably leave alone sites like Pinterest, where people post photos of things they like. “If you look at everything we are doing through the lens of this intense mission focus and this underlying focus on building technology platforms, everything we do will make sense,” Mr Zuckerberg explains.

Facebook’s plan is to embed itself deeper into people’s daily lives. That will make it harder for users to leave or switch to competitors. In the past Facebook has tried, in partnership with software developers, to become a “platform” on top of which other firms can build content and apps. However, with the exception of gaming, this plan has failed, in part because the scheme was mismanaged but also because a social network is not a natural means of interacting with companies and services.

Facebook is pushing Messenger and WhatsApp, to become services through which people can buy things and privately communicate with businesses. For example, KLM, a Dutch airline, is giving flyers access to boarding passes and flight information through Messenger, and letting them chat with customer-service representatives. Already people can hail an Uber car through Messenger instead of going to the taxi firm’s own app.

Sign in with Facebook

The strategy of turning a messaging app into a platform has been a success for WeChat, a Chinese messaging app which enables users to do everything from wiring money to ordering food for delivery. Messaging services are sure to play a larger role as the mobile internet evolves beyond apps (see article). This will make Facebook even more powerful, because it can connect what people share with their friends in a public forum (a social network) with private transactions and communications (messaging services), giving it even deeper insight into people’s behaviour on the web.

Facebook has already become a sort of “universal passport” on the internet, allowing people to log on to other websites using their Facebook credentials. Its messaging strategy is a more concerted push in the direction of becoming an authenticator of people’s digital lives. The more it knows about users and the more users that go through it, the greater its power as a single port of call online, and the less likely it is to be dislodged by competitors.

Messenger is also experimenting with a personal-assistant service, called M, which is operated through a combination of human errand-runners and artificial intelligence (AI). It can answer people’s questions and complete assignments, such as recommending and buying gifts.

Several other firms are betting that people will use the internet differently in the future too. Google Now and Microsoft’s Cortana also offer help from a smart “secretary”, which employs clever algorithms to anticipate people’s needs and tell them what they want. Such a shift will intensify the relationship between tech firms and their users.

Facebook does not make money from WhatsApp or Messenger, and is unlikely to introduce advertising on them, but it could start to take a cut of transactions that are completed on these services or charge businesses for finding customers. Facebook’s strategy, which many startups embrace, is first to build up usage and then design a business model later. By one estimate the combined revenue of Messenger and WhatsApp could be $10 billion by 2020.

One question is how big the messaging business will become. Another is what other ventures will widen Facebook’s net. The social network is full of posts by amateurs (otherwise known as your friends). Investing in professionally made content might lure ever more users. The firm is already spending more money on video.

Another possibility might be to acquire Pandora, a popular music-streaming firm. Although Facebook never buys media companies and, rather than making its own content, has preferred producing it in partnerships with established firms in the industry, the idea might not be so far-fetched. Mr Zuckerberg’s first startup, developed when he was at boarding school, was a music-recommendation service.

Facebook owes much of its past popularity and profitability to clever predictions about what people want to see: photos and videos, relevant posts about their friends, adverts that are not too annoying. All of this is possible in part because of AI. Facebook’s success in the future will depend on its offering even more useful services. With that in mind it is investing heavily in AI.

Facebook does not have the field to itself. Google is acquiring AI startups and talent. In 2014 Facebook tried to buy DeepMind, a startup in “deep learning” which lets computers work out, by repeatedly processing complicated statistics, how to extract general rules from masses of data. It was outbid by Google, which reportedly paid $600m for the firm. Facebook then set up its own AI lab. So far it has helped Facebook to target ads better and to filter spam, which means fewer human workers are required for those tasks.

The lab has already paid its way for the next ten years, says Michael Schroepfer, the firm’s chief technology officer. Though AI has mundane applications like spam filtering, it could also lead to more ambitious and profitable breakthroughs that Facebook is keeping under wraps for now.

Facebook is investing in other areas where fast-developing technology is opening new opportunities. In 2014 it bought Oculus VR, which makes virtual-reality headsets, for around $2 billion. In partnership with Samsung, it has released a headset costing just $99 and recently started selling the Oculus Rift, an expensive version for gamers. VR’s prospective audience may not extend much beyond a niche. But the acquisition of Oculus keeps it out of the hands of competitors and is a relatively cheap gamble in case VR suddenly becomes popular.

Oculus will also help Facebook develop its expertise in augmented reality (AR). Unlike VR, which requires a headset and provides an all-encompassing experience, AR displays digital information against the backdrop of the real world. Despite the failure of Google Glass, people may eventually wear glasses which let them glance at relevant information, if they become smaller and sleeker. “You have to build the BlackBerry before you can build the iPhone,” explains Mr Zuckerberg. Facebook has lots of competitors in AR, including Microsoft, which is building its HoloLens glasses, and Magic Leap, a secretive startup in which Alphabet, Google’s parent company, has an investment.

Friending the world

Facebook’s most audacious and controversial scheme yet is to take a role connecting the world’s poor to the internet and to its social network. It has joined forces with mobile-phone operators in emerging markets to make a lighter version of Facebook that is accessible without incurring data charges. Now it is thinking in even grander terms, beaming down the internet from the sky.

This smacks to some of calculated corporate self-interest dressed up as humanitarian rhetoric. Facebook’s critics are fearful that it might control poor people’s use of the internet, giving access only to a few sites including Facebook but not introducing them to an “open” web. In February it suffered a setback when attempts to connect Indians to a free version of Facebook was struck down by the country’s telecoms regulator. It said that the scheme violated net-neutrality rules, which call for equal treatment of all web traffic.

Mr Zuckerberg sees such efforts as a logical next step in Facebook’s mission to “make the world more open and connected”. He has hired aerospace engineers from NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory and its Ames Research Centre. They have designed Aquila, an unmanned plane with the wingspan of a passenger jet but the weight of a car. Powered partly by solar panels that enable it to fly for months at high altitudes, the plane will transmit data using laser beams to towers and dishes in far-flung places.



A fierce rivalry on Earth—over users’ time, advertisers’ dollars and the best engineering talent—is now a battle in the sky. Alphabet is also working on a plan to bring the internet to people in poor countries using hot-air balloons and drones.

Schemes to bring connectivity to the unconnected highlight one of Facebook’s biggest challenges: as so many people already use its services, how can it attract more of them? China, a vast market, is out of reach, because its government refuses to let in Western internet firms. Nonetheless, Mr Zuckerberg is ready if China opens up. He has learned Mandarin and serves on an advisory board of Tsinghua University in Beijing. His smiling profile picture on Facebook was taken in China and recently he posted a photo of a smog-shrouded jog through Tiananmen Square in Beijing.

Mr Zuckerberg’s personality suggests that he will not stop looking for a way to keep his company growing. He has an intensity and inquisitiveness reminiscent of Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, who started selling books online as a gateway to selling everything. His long-term approach to building his business should continue to serve him well.

Mr Zuckerberg does not appear to be motivated by wealth. Last year he and his wife pledged to give away most of their fortune to causes they care about, some of which align with Facebook’s interests, such as “connecting people and building strong communities”. Although he has a reputation as a computer hacker who does not play by even Silicon Valley’s relaxed set of rules (an image that “The Social Network”, a Hollywood film which dramatises the early days of Facebook, did little to dispel), Mr Zuckerberg has grown up.

As Facebook expands, however, it will face two tough issues that come with its particular type of triumph: market dominance and privacy. Microsoft and Google have shown that success can bring regulatory scrutiny. Already watchdogs around the world, and especially in Europe, are keeping an eye on Facebook. They may intervene if the firm continues to buy budding rivals. Given this closer scrutiny, it seems probable that Facebook would face objections were it to try again to purchase a large competitor, such as WhatsApp.

Privacy issues, too, will loom large. As Facebook pushes into messaging and other services, it will collect even larger amounts of data about users’ activities. Already the European Union, which takes a sterner view about privacy than America’s government, is looking at how Facebook uses and stores that information. In March Germany’s competition authority launched an inquiry into Facebook’s dominance and its notoriously complicated terms and conditions, which most users dismiss with a rapid click of agreement.

Facebook has a history of hastily changing its privacy policy and the information it shares in public. In 2007 it revealed people’s activities on external websites without their consent (showing, for example, the purchases they made on other sites), causing an outcry. Such occurrences have damaged the firm’s reputation for protecting users.

Facebook’s brand ranks below that of other technology companies according to the Reputation Institute, a think-tank, in large part because of its perceived lack of trustworthiness. Chris Cox, Facebook’s chief product officer, says the main misperception about the company is that it sells people’s data. In reality, it matches advertisements to users while keeping that information to itself. But users remain wary that Facebook’s interests are not the same as their own.

Likeability is not always necessary for firms to thrive. Ask any big oil company. But the big thumbs-up at Facebook’s gateway is a reminder that for a service bringing friends together and with ambitions to control the digital connective tissue between them, it is critical. This is not the youthful Mr Zuckerberg’s first big test, but it may be the defining challenge of Facebook’s adulthood.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21696507-social-network-has-turned-itself-one-worlds-most-influential-technology-giants/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




Wisconsin and after: Donald downed?

Open conventions: A user’s manual

Wisconsin’s Democratic primaries: Sewer socialism’s heir

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

Hawaiian agriculture: Paradise sprayed

Atlantic City: Out of luck

Catching halibut: Wiki-fishing

Lexington: The primaries puzzle





Articles Sections Next

Wisconsin and after

Donald downed?

Defeat for Donald Trump in Wisconsin is a bad blow, but far from fatal

Apr 9th 2016 | MILWAUKEE | From the print edition



A STATE synonymous with cheese, niceness and the troglodyte habits of its early European settlers, Wisconsin is being additionally celebrated, by wishful Republicans, as Donald Trump’s Waterloo. The blowhard tycoon was trounced there on April 5th, losing to Ted Cruz, his last serious rival, by a 13-point margin. He even lost in Waterloo, Wisconsin, the sort of languishing factory-town whose inhabitants had helped him win 20 of the previous 32 Republican primary contests. Across the state’s south-east, which Mr Cruz swept, Republicans emerged from polling booths, on an icy day, to say they wanted “anyone but Trump”. According to exit polls, six in ten said the prospect of a Trump presidency made them “scared” or “concerned”.

The Democratic front-runner, Hillary Clinton, also suffered in the Badger State. She lost to Bernie Sanders by 13.5 percentage points, extending his run of victories to six of the past seven states. Yet the former secretary of state has a dual consolation which Mr Trump lacks. Packed with white progressives, Wisconsin’s Democratic electorate always looked unusually likely to favour Mr Sanders (see article). More important, because the Democrats pony up all their delegates in proportion to vote-share, his victory has only slightly reduced Mrs Clinton’s massive delegate-lead. Provided Mr Sanders does not win the biggest remaining primaries, starting with New York on April 19th, by almost unimaginably big margins, she has little to fear, except further embarrassment.

Wisconsin Republicans, similarly, always looked a tad more conservative and well-educated than Mr Trump would have wanted; his blend of nativist bile and egotistical bunkum go down best with the lightly educated, unideological and aggrieved. Yet he recently led in some opinion polls in the state. His defeat, with 35% of the vote to Mr Cruz’s 48%, was due to a consolidation of the anti-Trump vote in favour of Mr Cruz, which was in turn partly due to the recent winnowing of the Republican field—and also to Mr Trump.

The tycoon’s habitual offensiveness and displays of flabbergasting ignorance have set a high bar for gaffes; this is a candidate who entered the race calling Mexicans rapists and promising to reverse globalisation. Even so, his pre-Wisconsin performance seems to have given some potential supporters pause. He advocated banning abortions and punishing any woman who had one, which alarmed even ardent pro-life Republicans. On second thought, he then said abortion should remain legal, which alarmed them doubly. He advised South Korea and Japan to get nuclear weapons. He predicted a “very massive recession”, unless he becomes president, in which case, he said, he would eradicate America’s $19 trillion debt in eight years (without raising taxes).



It was pathetic; Mr Trump’s efforts to undo the damage were beyond parody. Aware that he has a bit of a problem with women, seven out of ten of whom dislike him, the Republican front-runner invited a lachrymose former Miss Wisconsin and his wife, Melania, to read out praise poems to him at his pre-vote rally in Milwaukee. At least the row of college dudes seated in front of your correspondent—wearing T-shirts showing Mrs Clinton’s face and the slogan “Trump that bitch”—loved it; most said they were for John Kasich, an also-ran in Wisconsin.

It is, as always with Mr Trump, easy to exaggerate the negative effect of such absurdities. He won 35% of Wisconsin’s Republicans, representing an undeterrably Trumpian core vote that is present in almost every state. Its Wisconsin members were easily found and unabashed. “He says all the damn wrong things, but I feel in my heart he’s the right guy to make a change,” said Carol, a former machinist, laid off after 20 years’ graft, outside a polling station in the Milwaukee suburb of New Berlin. “There’s no jobs—they’ve all been shipped to China—nothing’s left for the kids,” she said, hugging a leaflet entitled “How to get Social Security online” against the chill. She didn’t give two hoots what Mr Trump said about abortion; he actually did as well with women in Wisconsin as with men. He failed there because, only partly as a result of his blunders, he could not prevent almost all the votes formerly dedicated to Marco Rubio, Jeb Bush and other former candidates going to Mr Cruz. “I don’t like Cruz at all,” said John, a machinist in Jefferson, southern Wisconsin, though he had just voted for the Texan. “But Trump brings hatred.”

Wisconsin was the first primary wholly conducted in a three-man field, an ill marker for Mr Trump. Yet he leads Mr Cruz by 237 delegates, and in several forthcoming states his core vote looks big enough to stretch the gulf. He leads the polls in his native New York and Pennsylvania, which have 166 delegates on offer between them, by double-digit margins. His setback, in short, does not look Napoleonic. Yet it has made it even harder than it already was for Mr Trump, a weak front-runner by historical standards, to bag the 1,237 delegates he needs for victory. That raises the prospect of America’s first truly contested party convention in six decades, in Cleveland in July—and, if Wisconsin is a guide, of much intrigue, with the Republican top brass already lining up to nobble Mr Trump.

That was obvious in Wisconsin, where the state’s Republican establishment—represented by Scott Walker, a failed presidential candidate but popular governor—was organised and unanimously for Mr Cruz. It was also apparent in the lavish spending of anti-Trump groups, such as Our Principles PAC, which splurged $2m in attack ads—outspending Mr Trump 4:1—in the run-up to the primary. Most worryingly for Mr Trump, it is evident in a brewing shadow war over the selection of the delegates who will be charged with naming the Republican nominee in Cleveland.

In normal times this scarcely matters, because most delegates are bound to vote according to their state primary results in the first case. In the event of a contested convention it would matter a lot, however, because most delegates are unbound in subsequent votes. That Mr Cruz’s supporters, who typically include a sort of small-fry ideologue influential in the Republican grassroots, are quietly easing their own onto state-delegate slates could therefore be hugely significant. Mr Trump, by contrast, appears to have only belatedly awoken to the issue; his campaign has laid off staff in many states and in any event starts with a disadvantage, because of its relative reliance on independent voters. It is indeed hard to imagine how a gaggle of self-styled outsiders, united by Mr Trump’s personality cult, can compete in a game of Republican Party politics. Already, a whiff of sour grapes pervades their efforts. Asked whether Mr Cruz was beating Mr Trump in the battle for delegates, Diana Orrock, the tycoon’s only declared supporter on the Republican National Committee, said, “You hear stories about delegates being offered monetary prizes for their loyalties. Of course, they have yet to be confirmed.”

A contested convention would be messy; but Republicans have no other way to avert the calamity Mr Trump would mean for their party. Were he its candidate in November, 29% of Republican voters in Wisconsin said they would vote for Mrs Clinton or a third-party candidate, or not vote. If Mr Cruz were the candidate, that disaffected portion would fall—but only to 25%, making him a poor saviour. Hope, for Republicans, comes in small doses.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21696565-defeat-donald-trump-wisconsin-bad-blow-far-fatal-donald-downed/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Open conventions

A user’s manual

The thing of which political journalists dream looks increasingly likely

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



AS A matter of logic, the front-runners seeking the Republican presidential nomination should have welcomed a petition calling for guns to be allowed at the party’s national convention, to be held in Cleveland, Ohio from July 18th-21st, which drew more than 50,000 signatures. After all, Donald Trump says that the terror attacks in Paris would have been “much different” if more French citizens had been armed, while Senator Ted Cruz of Texas has denounced “gun-free zones” that turn the unarmed into targets for “lunatics”. Oddly, both men deferred to the Secret Service, which said no guns. Others sighed with relief, for this year’s Republican National Convention may be a brawl.

That marks a break with recent history. The main task of a national convention is to pick a presidential candidate, a choice made by delegates representing different states and territories. This year there will be 2,472 delegates—local worthies selected at state conventions or by party committees. Most delegates are “bound” in the first ballot, meaning they are allocated to a candidate by the results of a primary, caucus or convention back home. At every national convention since 1980 the winner was known before the first ballot, because a candidate arrived with a majority of delegates bound to him, turning the convention into a coronation. This year, if no candidate has secured 1,237 delegates then the voting could go on and on (see chart).

Trump backers insist that—should the businessman fall short of a majority but reach Cleveland with more delegates than any rival—there would be outrage if party “kingmakers” try to “steal” his nomination. Mr Trump himself has speculated about “riots”. The political context may be on Mr Trump’s side: this is, after all, an election cycle dominated by rows between the angry grassroots and a weak party elite.

The lessons from history are less clear. The party has held ten contested conventions. Only three nominated the candidate who initially boasted the most delegates. From the 19th century until the 1970s, Republican nominees were chosen after back-room deals between party barons and political machines, occasionally triggering fist-fights and furniture-smashing on the convention floor. Often the most important battles took place at state conventions and then in committee meetings in the days just before the convention, at which voting rules were set and the credentials of delegates loyal to one faction or other could be summarily revoked. The convention of 1880 went to 36 ballots, leaving all early favourites by the wayside.

Even today, convention rules are less like laws than the weapons with which political battles are fought. A rule of 2012, put in place by Mitt Romney’s allies to squash an insurrection by fans of Ron Paul, a libertarian, states that the presidential nomination is reserved for candidates who have won a majority of delegates in eight states. That bylaw, Rule 40, could stymie John Kasich and would prevent grandees from drafting Paul Ryan, say, as a last-minute nominee—unless the 2016 rules committee revokes it (a decision a majority of delegates would have to endorse).

John Hudak of Brookings, a think-tank, suggests that the real difference between 1880 and 2016 is that modern parties cannot build, fund and run a presidential campaign in the three and a bit months between the Republican convention and election day. That favours today’s two front-runners, Mr Cruz of Texas and Mr Trump. Both men are flawed national candidates, but both have established campaign machines. This year, convention delegates may face only bad options.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21696560-thing-which-political-journalists-dream-looks-increasingly-likely-users-manual/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Wisconsin’s Democratic primaries

Sewer socialism’s heir

The cradle of progressive politics is enamoured with Bernie Sanders

Apr 9th 2016 | MILWAUKEE | From the print edition

Let’s talk plumbing

“WE HAVE a history of progressive politics,” says a voter in Wisconsin’s primary elections. He is leaving the Frank Zeidler municipal building, named after Milwaukee’s three-term Socialist mayor, who stepped down in 1960. The voter, an employee at the state Department of Transport, opted for Bernie Sanders, whose environmental policies he especially likes. Even if Mr Sanders does not become the nominee, he argues, his ideas will have gained prominence. Next time round an even stronger candidate espousing his ideas could win.

Almost everyone leaving the Zeidler building on a chilly April 5th had voted for Mr Sanders, who went on to win the primary with 56.5% of the vote compared with 43.1% for Hillary Clinton. “This is one of the most Democratic wards in a very Democratic city,” said Katie Parch, who also voted for the senator from Vermont.

Surrounded by staunchly Republican suburbs, Milwaukee was the cradle of the American socialist movement. Founded by mostly German immigrants, this was sometimes referred to as “sewer socialism” because of its proponents’ habit of boasting about the city’s excellent sewer system and their fixation with cleaning up political life. In the early 20th century, socialists competed in the city with progressives. Robert La Follette carried Wisconsin for the Progressive Party when he ran for president in 1924, on a Sanders-ish platform of pacifism and trustbusting.

To many Wisconsin progressives, especially students, Mr Sanders seems to be the rightful heir of this legacy. He denounces inequality, wants free public college education and free health insurance for all, promises to introduce a $15 minimum wage nationwide and to spend $1 trillion on the country’s crumbling infrastructure. “One-tenth of 1% own as much as the bottom 90%,” he boomed to boos from the audience at a rally at the Wisconsin Convention Centre on April 4th. The Waltons of Walmart, he continued, own as much as the bottom 40% of the population. (The Waltons are a favourite whipping boy at his rallies, because they pay their workers’ “starvation wages” that require many of them to rely on state assistance.)

The self-proclaimed democratic socialist never bothers much to explain how he would pay for his promises. But this did not seem to matter to many of his fans, who came out in force for a rally on an evening when the opening game of the local baseball team, a Donald Trump pageant at the nearby Milwaukee Theatre and the Tripoli Shine Circus competed for attention.

Does Mr Sanders still have a chance of winning the Democratic presidential nomination? He has triumphed in six of the past seven primaries and caucuses and raised $15m more than Mrs Clinton in March. Yet she leads with 1,748 delegates (out of 2,383 needed) compared with 1,058 for Mr Sanders. Punters on Predictwise, a prediction market, give Mrs Clinton an 89% chance of clinching the nomination. To catch up, Mr Sanders would need to win big in the New York primary on April 19th, when 291 delegates are up for grabs (an unlikely victory, but not impossible), as well as in Connecticut, Maryland and Pennsylvania the next week.

Even if he loses those contests, Mr Sanders vows to campaign all the way to the convention. That leaves Mrs Clinton grappling with a much stronger and better-funded rival than she anticipated. And to the delight of many Milwaukeeans, it increases the chances of social-democratic ideas taking root in a country notoriously hostile to them.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21696566-cradle-progressive-politics-enamoured-bernie-sanders-sewer-socialisms-heir/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The campaigns

Heard on the trail

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



It’s who you know

“I have actually—believe it or not, I have a lot of friends that are Muslim...In most cases, they’re very rich Muslims, OK?...They’ll come in. And you’ll have exceptions.”

Donald Trump will let his rich Muslim friends into America. MSNBC

Modest mouse

“My life has been about victories. I’ve won a lot. I win a lot. I win—when I do something, I win. And even in sports, I always won. I was always a good athlete. And I always won. In golf, I’ve won many club championships. Many, many club championships.”

Trump just can’t stop bragging. Washington Post

Superego?

“Really, I feel like we are watching an id—an id with hair.”

Hillary Clinton on Mr Trump. New York Post

Not a native New Yorker

“Look, look, the pizza came scalding hot, OK? And so I use a little fork.”

John Kasich defends his shocking (in New York) deployment of cutlery on his pizza. He put it away after his first bite, telling a reporter: “I’ve been eating pizza since before you were born!” ABC

Easy rider

“The bikers love Trump. I’m not a huge biker, I have to be honest with you, OK? I always liked the limo better.”

Donald Trump campaigning in Wisconsin, home of Harley-Davidson.

Full disclosure

“Mid-century modern home with a true park-like setting. Smoking and animals okay…Close to Cuyahoga Valley National Park, Montrose shopping.”

Serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer’s childhood home in Akron, Ohio is available for rent during the Republican convention. Cultofweird.com

White privilege

“As long as you come here legally and get a proper job…we need immigrants. Who’s going to vacuum our living rooms and clean up after us? Americans don’t like to do that.”

Ivana, the first Mrs Trump, needs domestic help. New York Post

Mad hatter

“There is an ironclad rule of politics, which is: No funny hats…And any hat is, by definition, defined as a funny hat.”

Ted Cruz refused to wear a cheesehead hat while campaigning in Wisconsin. That didn’t prevent him being photographed behind a giant cheese-hatted mouse.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21696576-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Hawaiian agriculture

Paradise sprayed

Poisonous debates rage around pesticides and those using them

Apr 9th 2016 | HONOLULU | From the print edition



IN 1893 the overthrow of Hawaii’s last monarch, Queen Liliuokalani, involved powerful plantation owners backed by American forces. When sugar and pineapple operations eventually declined, agricultural biotechnology firms set up during the 1960s: Monsanto, BASF, Syngenta, Dow AgroSciences and DuPont-Pioneer, which all remain in place. But big agricultural interests still seem to inspire little trust in the state. An argument over pesticide use has settled like a fine mist over the operations of these companies.

Over half a billion pounds (600,000kg) of pesticides are used in America each year; the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulates their distribution, sale and application. Much of its oversight is delegated to state departments of agriculture. The EPA distinguishes between “general use” pesticides, for all and sundry, and “restricted use pesticides” (RUPs) for application only by those qualified to do so. These types are among the most regulated and most toxic.

In Hawaii 1.3m pounds of active ingredients contained within RUPs were sold in 2013. Hungry termites meant 36% of the stuff was used for urban and structural purposes; 32% went on agricultural ones. But patchier data since make it difficult to ascertain what exactly is sprayed where in Hawaii, and by whom. Groups on different sides of the debate try to fill in the gaps. According to calculations by the Centre for Food Safety, an advocacy outfit, 17 times more restricted-use insecticides, which target bugs, are unleashed per acre on maize crops on the island of Kauai than are used on America’s mainland.

Hawaii is far better known for its surfers than its farmers. Yet the land devoted to seed crops increased tenfold between 1982 and 2011 (biochemical firms own about 25,000 of the 1.4m acres used for farming in the state). The tropical climate allows three harvests a year, meaning biotech wizards can produce new inbred seeds in about half the time it would otherwise take, according to Shay Sunderland, who works at Monsanto’s Kunia site on the island of Oahu. Parent inbred seeds from Hawaii are then used to produce hybrid plants from Brazil to Pakistan.

Critics say pesticides used in this process harm the health of Hawaiians and their children. Some oppose genetically modified crops altogether. State legislation to introduce buffer zones around recently sprayed fields failed to pass last year. But since 2013 several Hawaiian counties have passed ordinances, now tied up in the courts, to regulate application more closely or banish hybrid operations altogether. More than $2m was spent on television advertising—from a group backed by firms including Monsanto and Syngenta—ahead of a vote in Maui County alone.

Agricultural firms say the furore is unfair for several reasons. Less than a third of their land is in use at any one time. Second, pesticides add greatly to their input costs, so wanton use of them is out of the question. Third, they operate under more intense scrutiny than other RUP-spreaders such as gardeners and groundsmen. On 16 occasions between 2006 and 2014 a school was evacuated because of pesticide drift. In more than half these cases the nasties were sprayed by householders, according to Hawaii’s Department of Agriculture. Its head, Scott Enright, says biotech companies apply pesticides in the state “better than anybody ever has”.

The debate has inspired a smattering of local research, but little across Hawaii. A recent draft report from a group appointed to look into pesticide use on Kauai concluded that such chemicals are not harming residents or their surroundings. It also revealed the scarcity of relevant data to study. There is “very little robust environmental testing” and there are “no data from human samples”—blood, urine or tissue—to indicate levels of exposure to pesticides on the island. The authors also note that some local doctors contest the patchy records on birth defects provided by Hawaii’s Department of Health.

Biotechnology companies in Hawaii release increasing amounts of information to the public about their spraying activities. Mr Enright is keen to take one voluntary local reporting scheme statewide. More detailed knowledge of the geographical co-ordinates and a survey of firms’ field-base maps could help determine more exactly how much of a restricted-use pesticide is being sprayed in one place at one time. Such information from seed companies, and the many others spraying away, would calm controversy; more accurate exposure testing and fairer regulation could follow. The current dearth of data sows only seeds of discontent.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21696575-poisonous-debates-rage-around-pesticides-and-those-using-them-paradise-sprayed/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Atlantic City

Out of luck

The gambling mecca is on the verge of running out of cash

Apr 9th 2016 | ATLANTIC CITY | From the print edition



BOARDWALK is the most expensive street in Monopoly, the board game inspired by Atlantic City’s streets. But it has been hard to shift property in Atlantic City, including on the Boardwalk. Developers are waiting for things to turn round before building on an empty plot on the spot where the Playboy Hotel and Casino once stood. That could take some time: bankruptcy for the once-grand seaside resort seems a strong possibility. Don Guardian, the mayor, has said that without state help City Hall will have to give IOU slips to police and firefighters in place of wages. The city council has found a way to keep paying, for now. But by mid-May Atlantic City will not be able to “pass Go”, let alone “Collect $200”.

Thanks to New Jersey’s aggressive supervision of municipal finances, there has been no default or bankruptcy in the state for nearly 80 years. But no town has had so much go wrong so quickly as Atlantic City. In 2014 four of its 12 casinos closed and gaming revenue, which the state relies on, plummeted. Nearly 8,000 jobs were lost in a city with already high unemployment. Punters were still gambling, just not in New Jersey. When gambling laws were relaxed in nearby states, Atlantic City lost its monopoly (see map).

Atlantic City relies on property taxes for most of its revenue. Real-estate agents are not selling, but are staying busy by reassessing property values. The value of taxable property has fallen by 64%, from $20.5 billion in 2010 to $7.3 billion in 2015. The city owes several casinos tax refunds: Borgata alone is owed $170m. Atlantic City’s jobless rate of 7.7% is far higher than that of the state or the rest of the country. The city, which has a population of 40,000 people, had a deficit of $120m last year, or $3,000 per person. One in three residents lives below the poverty line.



Chris Christie, New Jersey’s governor, has made Atlantic City’s recovery a recurring project. Within weeks of his inauguration he set up a commission to look at gambling. He created a state-supervised tourism district in 2011. He approved multiple loans and held summits. In early 2015 he appointed an emergency management team. Mr Christie had hoped the team, which for a time included Kevyn Orr, previously Detroit’s emergency manager, would shuffle the deck. But despite the mayor adhering to the emergency manager’s recommendations, including workforce cuts, Mr Christie has twice vetoed an aid package, including a bill allowing casinos to make fixed payments in lieu of property taxes. This would have given the city more certainty. Mr Christie now says he will not give any more money without a full state takeover.

The Republican mayor, Mr Guardian, and the Democratic state assembly speaker, Vincent Prieto, both say no dice. A takeover could allow the state to end collective-bargaining agreements, among other things. The stakes increased on April 4th, when the state sued Atlantic City for $34m in property-tax revenue owed to its schools. On the same day Moody’s, a credit-ratings agency, downgraded the city’s already junky rating to reflect a greater likelihood of default within the year. In November New Jerseyans will vote in a referendum to allow gambling in the northern part of the state, near New York city. If passed, this would likely do more damage to city finances.

Over the horizon lie some reasons for optimism about Atlantic City. The eight remaining casinos have seen their revenues jump. The city, long a one-industry place, is beginning to spread its bets. A new conference centre is booked until 2019. Stockton University is opening a new campus there. The Boardwalk, running along a fine sandy beach, still has plenty of appeal. Maybe, as Bruce Springsteen (New Jersey’s most famous poet) once sang of Atlantic City, everything that dies someday comes back.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21696561-gambling-mecca-verge-running-out-cash-out-luck/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Catching halibut

Wiki-fishing

How Alaska’s smaller boats compete with vast trawlers

Apr 9th 2016 | JUNEAU | From the print edition

Knowledge worker in action

STEPHEN RHOADS, a commercial longline fisherman in Alaska’s verdant south-east panhandle, fishes by two rules. One is: stay married. Mr Rhoads has seen countless marriages of fellow fishermen sink under the weight of so many days at sea. The second rule is: use fewer hooks. Mr Rhoads works the Pacific halibut fishery, which opened for business on March 19th, using baited hooks strung off lines as long as three miles. Using as few hooks as possible and carefully targeting the desired species, Mr Rhoads explains, helps keep fish stocks healthy and smaller businesses afloat. To do so, he relies on a crowdsourced compendium of fishermen’s tales.

A war between small family fishing operations and Seattle-based companies pushed Alaska to statehood in 1959. The state’s $6 billion commercial fishing industry still suffers from a David-and-Goliath complex. Over the years, Alaskan halibut fishermen have faced big reductions in their harvest limits while factory trawlers dump millions of pounds of dead halibut overboard as by-catch. Quotas are becoming consolidated into fewer hands, and fishing permits are leaving Alaska’s small coastal communities and heading out of state. The average age of a fisherman in Alaska is 50, an increase of a decade since 1980.

Mr Rhoads is a member of a network started by the Alaska Longline Fishermen’s Association (ALFA), which aims to do something about this and to reduce by-catch of sensitive species such as rockfish at the same time. Network fishermen, who numbered only 20 at the project’s start, agreed to share data on where and what they were catching in order to create maps that highlighted areas of high by-catch. Within two years they had reduced accidental rockfish harvest by as much as 20%.

The rockfish mapping project expanded to create detailed maps of the sea floor, pooling data gathered by transducers fixed to the bottoms of boats. By combining thousands of data points as vessels traverse the fishing grounds, these “wikimaps”—created and updated through crowdsourcing—show gravel beds where bottom-dwelling halibut are likely to linger, craggy terrain where rockfish tend to lurk, and outcrops that could snag gear.

Public charts are imprecise, and equipment with the capability to sense this level of detail could cost a fisherman more than $70,000. Skippers join ALFA for as little as $250, invest a couple of thousand dollars in computers and software and enter into an agreement to turn over fishing data and not to share the information outside the network, which now includes 85 fishermen.

Skippers say the project makes them more efficient, better able to find the sort of fish they want and avoid squandering time on lost or tangled gear. It also means fewer hooks in the water and fewer hours at sea to catch the same amount of fish. A healthy fleet benefits welders and boatwrights in turn. “If the entire fleet comes up from Seattle,” says Mr Rhoads, “we become just a trailer park and a bar.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21696559-how-alaskas-smaller-boats-compete-vast-trawlers-wiki-fishing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

The primaries puzzle

Today’s partisan activists are hopelessly ill-equipped to pick presidential winners

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THE constitutional powers of a defeated presidential candidate are, to use a technical term, zilch. That being so, it is striking that many partisans sound complacent when asked to explain how their favourite politician might win the general election this November. George Stone, a retired snuff salesman from Colfax, Wisconsin, spoke for many Republicans when he told Lexington recently why the conservative whom he favours, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, has no need to tack to the political centre. Look at Ronald Reagan, he was unabashedly of the right and he won, Mr Stone averred: “If you explain conservatism to most people, they understand that they are a conservative.”

Fans of Donald Trump have spent months echoing the businessman’s claim to enjoy an unrivalled following among fed-up conservatives, independents and Democrats, so that if nominated he would—in his self-assessment—have “more crossover votes than anybody that’s ever run for office”. Ardent admirers of Bernie Sanders, the Vermont senator and populist who has forced Hillary Clinton to fight hard for the Democratic presidential nomination, strike a slightly more defensive note. Asked whether the country is ready for a president who wants to make America more like leftish bits of Europe, Sanders-backers say things like: “We are expanding the zone of what is considered possible” (to quote a Sanders precinct captain in Grinnell, Iowa). If they sense that blithe confidence is not doing the trick, Sanders-supporters often cite opinion polls that find most Americans favouring policies advocated by their hero, such as a higher minimum wage.

In part, the complacency of many partisans is a by-product of ideological zeal. A 2014 survey by the Pew Research Centre found that the share of Americans who are consistently conservative or consistently liberal has doubled over the past two decades. Levels of ideological purity are highest among the politically active, such as the 30m or so Americans who voted in presidential primary contests in 2012 (out of an eligible electorate of some 200m).

In part, though, partisans sound confused because the business of picking a presidential candidate is so unlike any other task they face. In modern general elections, more than nine out of ten incumbent members of Congress are re-elected, most of them easily. In dozens of states, one or other party has a near-lock on many elected offices, from governor to county clerk. When primary contests are held to pick candidates for such safe billets, activists need not worry about broad appeal—their rational instinct is to please themselves and folk like themselves.

Presidential contests are different. In recent elections neither diehard Republican nor Democratic partisans have had the numbers to carry a president to victory on their own. That confronts partisans picking a candidate in a presidential primary with a rare challenge. If they care about electability (and not all do), they must try to guess who may appeal to folk unlike themselves, including some who—gasp—routinely vote for the other side.

If cross-party mind-reading was a chore in the past, it confronts many partisans in 2016 with a nearly impossible conundrum: like asking vegans to order for the steak-lovers at the next table. For partisans are not just more disciplined today. Levels of antipathy between the parties have grown still more dramatically. Pew polling finds that roughly two-fifths of Democrats and Republicans now have a “very unfavourable” view of the other party, with many calling it a threat to the nation’s well-being.

Both Republicans and Democrats have made divisions worse. A dismaying number of political disagreements are presented as zero-sum battles, in which one economic class, demographic group or race is accused of harming the interests of another. To take one current example on the right, a spate of “bathroom bills” have been proposed in conservative states, most recently in North Carolina, by which mostly Republican politicians seek to defeat laws or ordinances shielding gay and transgender people from discrimination by claiming (with scant evidence) that sexual predators would use them to enter women’s lavatories or girls’ changing-rooms at schools: an example of a moral dispute being twisted into a row about physical danger. On the left Mr Sanders does not just worry about inequality or think it preferable for big banks to take fewer risks: he growls that the rich are corrupting democracy and that “the business model of Wall Street is fraud.”

No narrow paths to the White House

The zero-sum atmosphere affects views of government itself. The American Values Survey, taken by the Public Religion Research Institute last year, found roughly three-quarters of Republicans believing that the federal government looks out for the interests of blacks, Hispanics, gays and women. But only half of Republicans or fewer think that the government looks out for Christians or middle-class people. Democrats, meanwhile, overwhelmingly think that the federal government looks out for the rich and big business. There are warnings here for both parties.

Democrats, and especially Sanders-backers, should beware citing polls that back this or that government intervention. Distrust between groups means that it is not that useful to say that most Americans support policy X or Y. The real question to ask voters is: Do you think this policy helps or hurts “people like you”? The query reliably exposes deep gulfs between different races, generations and parties. Mrs Clinton, for her part, has called for more empathy across party lines. In March she urged Democrats not to dismiss Mr Trump’s followers as mere bigots, but to imagine themselves, “just for a minute”, in the minds of Americans who feel their best days, and the country’s, are behind them. Expect no cheers from Republicans, who are united only in their certainty that Mrs Clinton is a phoney and a crook. Whatever her motives for feeling the pain of Trump voters, Mrs Clinton’s instincts are correct. The presidency is an office that must be won with a broad coalition. Narrow tribalism will not do it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21696572-todays-partisan-activists-are-hopelessly-ill-equipped-pick-presidential-winners/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Peru’s election: Choosing a new broom

West Indian cricket: The Windies won

Bello: When a “coup” is not a coup





Articles Sections Next

Peru’s election

Choosing a new broom

A Latin American success story is threatened by political weakness

Apr 9th 2016 | LIMA | From the print edition



THE Mall del Sur, a new $200m shopping centre at the gateway to Lima’s sprawling southern shantytowns, is crowded on Good Friday morning, even though its two anchor department stores are not yet operating. Among the sightseers are Henry Salgado and Olga Falcón. He is a theatre photographer; she ran a small catering business that folded. They plan to vote for Keiko Fujimori in Peru’s election on April 10th.

The two friends, both aged 42, remember the 1990s, when Ms Fujimori’s father, Alberto Fujimori, ruling as an autocrat, vanquished the Shining Path terrorist group and hyperinflation. He set Peru on a path of 25 years of rapid economic growth before his regime collapsed amid systematic corruption and electoral fraud. “It’s true that he got corrupt at the end,” admits Mr Salgado. “But all this began then,” he says, referring to the mall. Ms Falcón worked in a hotel in Spain for ten years. Now she sees opportunities in Peru.

The country has enjoyed a remarkable growth spurt. Income per person rose at an annual average rate of 3% between 1990 and 2013, compared with 1.7% for Latin America as a whole, according to the World Bank. In 2001, 54.7% of Peruvians were poor; by 2014 that figure had fallen to 22.7%, according to the UN.

In this century, the economy was boosted by high prices for Peru’s minerals. It has also been underpinned by a political consensus in favour of a market economy run by technocrats. That consensus survived the election in 2011 of Ollanta Humala, a former army officer, who initially ran on a leftist platform. Almost uniquely in South America, Peru saved part of the gains from the commodity upswing: Luis Carranza, a former finance minister, points out that net public debt fell from 37% of GDP in 2000 to just 3.6% in 2014.

Now the mining boom is over and growth per person has dropped, to less than 2% last year. Much of that comes from the opening of big new copper mines. With metals prices much lower, their impact on the domestic economy is limited: private-sector formal jobs are expanding at only 1% a year.

The task facing the new government is to sustain growth and social progress in a less favourable climate. That means tackling the many inefficiencies that hold Peru back. The conduct of the election may make the next president’s job harder. The electoral tribunal has undermined the legitimacy of the eventual winner by disqualifying one of the strongest candidates (see chart).



After initial stumbles, Mr Humala’s government started to correct some of the economy’s underlying problems. It is trying to support diversification with technology centres, industrial parks and the cutting of some needless regulation. It has stepped up (still low) spending on health and education and subjected teachers to evaluation. It has begun a reform of the civil service and has expanded and professionalised social programmes.

Still pending are some politically contentious or complex reforms. Top of the list is the labour market: the law bars employers from sacking most workers, thus deterring hiring and condemning 70% of Peruvians to ill-paid, insecure jobs in the informal sector. Alonso Segura, the finance minister, says that devolution needs to be rethought. Regional and local governments now get more than half the resources for public investment but are often slow to spend the money. He adds that a bigger effort is needed to cut red tape.

Public investment should be steered away from big-budget projects, such as a gas pipeline to the Chilean border, and towards improving transport and internet connections and public services, argues Alberto Rodríguez of the World Bank. There are no direct flights between Arequipa, the second city, and Trujillo, the third. Lima, the capital, has become an inefficient monster. Mr Humala did nothing to gain consent for several big mining projects stalled by local opposition. Another challenge involves water: more than 60% of the population lives on the Pacific coast, which is a desert.

Crime has become rampant on Mr Humala’s watch, unimpeded by a corrupt police force and by seven interior ministers in five years. His lack of political skill meant that he lost control of Congress. And corruption allegations swirl around his ambitious wife, Nadine Heredia (who denies wrongdoing). Under the constitution, Mr Humala cannot run again. His approval rating is around 15%.

Fujimori v anti-Fujimori

That opprobrium highlights Peru’s biggest weakness: the near-total absence of genuine political parties, which is both a symptom and a cause of the cynicism Peruvians express towards their leaders. It is also a big factor in the unpredictability of the country’s elections, exacerbated this year by the arbitrary and nitpicking application of the law by Peru’s electoral authority.

After a campaign marred by the disqualification of Julio Guzmán, a centrist development consultant, and another candidate, the opinion polls suggest that Ms Fujimori will take a strong lead into a run-off ballot on June 5th. She promises continuity in economic policy but has been cagey about reforms.

Her likeliest rival is Verónika Mendoza for the left-wing Broad Front, who wants “profound changes” in economic policy and a new constitution. Aged 35 and a congresswoman, she was close both to Hugo Chávez’s regime in Venezuela and to Ms Heredia before breaking with the Humala government. A relaxed and articulate campaigner who speaks fluent Quechua, the main Amerindian language, she is the clearest beneficiary of the exclusion of Mr Guzmán. The polls suggest she is poised to overtake Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, a former economy minister. He is honest, liberal and has the best-qualified team of advisers. But he has handicaps: he is 77, and a former investment banker who struggles to connect with ordinary Peruvians.



Two issues have dominated the campaign. The first is anger at the political establishment. That is why Mr Guzmán surged past Mr Kuczynski in the polls and support for Alan García and Alejandro Toledo, both former presidents, plummeted. The desire for change is now benefiting Ms Mendoza and, to a lesser extent, Alfredo Barnechea, a journalist and consultant campaigning as a European-style social democrat.

Second, there is the battle between Ms Fujimori and “anti-Fujimorismo”, the issue that will dominate the run-off ballot. Her father continues to be revered by around 20% of Peruvians. Many poor people recall fondly that he travelled around the country opening schools and health clinics. But a larger number of Peruvians abhor him for having shut down Congress in a “self-coup” in 1992, for his human-rights abuses and for the unprecedented corruption of his regime, for which he is serving jail sentences.

Ms Fujimori, aged 40 and educated in the United States, lost narrowly to Mr Humala in 2011. Since then she has expanded her political base and edged towards the centre. She has dumped some of her father’s aides and admits that he made “several political mistakes”. According to Martín Tanaka, a political scientist at Lima’s Catholic University, “she promises efficiency and order, and is a symbol [of Fujimorismo] with a friendlier and more reasonable face” than her father. In any event, her party, Popular Force, looks likely to win almost half the seats in Congress.

But will all this be enough for Ms Fujimori to win the presidency? She is in a much stronger position than five years ago. Her rival, Ms Mendoza, shows no desire to make the move from left to centre that brought Mr Humala victory, although she says she would not copy chavista Venezuela. Should Mr Kuczynski make it onto the June ballot, he would have a better chance of uniting the anti-Fujimori vote.

It is symptomatic of Peru’s political weakness that its most powerful ideological current is a purely negative one. Ms Fujimori’s critics worry that her victory would retroactively legitimise her father’s abuses against democracy. Around 30,000 joined a protest march on April 5th to mark the anniversary of Mr Fujimori’s shutdown of Congress. “I think she’s a democrat,” Mr Tanaka says of Ms Fujimori, “but it’s true that she leads a movement where many are not convinced democrats.” In a campaign debate on April 3rd Ms Fujimori unveiled and signed a one-page document in which she promised “unrestricted respect for democracy and human rights”, and declared she would never seek to change the constitution to stay in power or repeat the “self-coup”.

Unless Mr Kuczynski clings on to second place, Peru faces a battle between the heir to its most controversial president of the 20th century and a neo-chavista. And it will elect its first woman president. Whether it will get the reformist government it needs to sustain its progress is less clear.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21696541-latin-american-success-story-threatened-political-weakness-choosing-new-broom/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

West Indian cricket

The Windies won

Why The Economist failed to predict a stunning victory

Apr 9th 2016 | KOLKATA | From the print edition



WRITING about West Indian cricket last year, The Economist tried to explain “why a dazzling team has faded”. On April 3rd in Kolkata, the West Indian men’s and women’s teams both dazzled by winning the Twenty20 (T20) championships. We feel nearly as sheepish as the bookmakers who put the odds of that happening at 150 to one.

Caribbean players excel at T20 cricket, a three-hour version of the game in which each side bowls 20 overs (six ball-tosses towards the batsman). When they come together every few years for international T20 tournaments they do well; the men won a world championship in 2012. Where they fall short is in one-day international (ODI) and five-day Test matches. In fact, those failures are one reason for the West Indies’ T20 success.

Unlike richer, better-managed rivals, the West Indies Cricket Board (WICB) does not have the money to lure the best cricketers away from high-paying T20 leagues to play international games. Caribbean men have thus become T20 specialists. Five of the men’s team that beat England in the final in Kolkata now only play T20 cricket; none of the English players does. The West Indians overpowered them with skills honed in T20 leagues: big hitting (Carlos Brathwaite stunned England by hitting four consecutive sixes in the final over) and bowling techniques crafted to avoid such disasters. Luck helped: Darren Sammy, the men’s captain, won all six coin tosses, allowing his side to bat second, so it knew just how many runs it would need to win.

Despite the West Indians’ T20 success, the men rank eighth among Test cricketing nations and failed to qualify for the Champions Trophy, a tournament for the top ODI nations, to be held next year.

Even as they celebrated, the victors grumbled. Mr Sammy said his teammates felt “disrespected” by the WICB, with which they have been feuding over pay and selection criteria. Stafanie Taylor, the women’s captain, pleaded for “some infrastructure”, without which the team would “deteriorate”. After their triumph, the West Indies men will return to nomadic T20 careers, flitting from league to league throughout the year. The champions may never play together again, Mr Sammy said.

The WICB’s president, Dave Cameron, promises to find ways to allow the men to play international matches in all three forms of cricket. The International Cricket Council is trying to reduce scheduling clashes between club and international games. Its chairman, Shashank Manohar, wants to reverse a decision in 2014 that awarded more revenue to Australia, England and India at the expense of smaller teams, like the West Indies. If that happens, the Windies may yet dazzle again.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21696549-why-economist-failed-predict-stunning-victory-windies-won/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

When a “coup” is not a coup

How should presidential systems deal with political breakdown?

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



IN DAILY verbal broadsides, Brazil’s president, Dilma Rousseff, and her political allies claim that the attempt to impeach her is a “coup d’état”. It is an emotive statement that moves people beyond her governing Workers’ Party (PT) and beyond Brazil. Her supporters held rallies on March 31st, the same day that in 1964 Brazil’s army took power in the last actual military coup the country suffered. “We are here in unyielding defence of democracy,” Chico Buarque, a singer and writer, told the crowd in Rio de Janeiro.

Ms Rousseff argues that she has not committed a “crime of responsibility” and that her impeachment is therefore illegal. There is no evidence that she is personally corrupt. Unlike her lead accuser, Eduardo Cunha, the Speaker of Congress’s lower house, neither she nor her family have Swiss bank accounts or Panamanian offshore companies. Many of her would-be impeachers are accused of taking bribes in the scandal centred on Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company. The administrative crime of which she is accused—a piece of fiscal trickery—is a technicality, her defenders say.

Behind her impeachment they see the same de facto powers—the media, private business, prosecutors and judges—which, they claim, brought down democracy in 1964. Military juntas may be a thing of the past in Latin America, but Ms Rousseff’s allies point to a pattern of “soft coups” that ousted presidents of the left, in Honduras in 2009 and in Paraguay in 2012.

Denouncing supposed coups has become part of the left’s propaganda kit. Nicolás Maduro’s government in Venezuela constantly spies them, the latest in the form of a law granting amnesty to political prisoners. Last year Evo Morales, Bolivia’s president, warned of a “judicial coup” against Argentina’s then-president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, because a judge proposed to investigate her.

Those who cry wolf about coups take a selective view of democracy. Mr Morales seems to think that all courts should be an appendage of the executive, as they are under his government. Mr Maduro, who was elected in 2013 with 7.6m votes (50.6% of the total), denies all legitimacy to the National Assembly, which was won by the opposition last December with 7.7m votes (56% of the total). This is the perversion, not the defence, of democracy.

A coup involves the seizure of power through the unconstitutional use or threat of force by a small group. That is not the case in Brazil. Whatever their occasional slips, the corruption probe is run by independent prosecutors and judges. The constitution allows for impeachment, but only by a two-thirds majority in Congress.

Supporters of its use against Ms Rousseff argue that it is a political as well as legal matter—that is why the Senate, and not the supreme court, tries the case. They say that from 2003 PT governments installed an organised scheme of graft in Petrobras which funnelled money to the party and its allies with the aim of securing a permanent hold on power. Her fiscal misdemeanours qualify as a crime under the impeachment law. They are right that impeaching Ms Rousseff would be a constitutional act with a legal basis, albeit a flimsy one. In opinion polls, two-thirds of respondents are in favour. But that doesn’t make it wise: it would divide Brazil and risk poisoning its politics for years.

The drama the country must deal with is what to do when a government ceases to function. Ms Rousseff began her second term in January 2015 with the economy collapsing, along with her popular and political support. Each week brings fresh claims of corruption. The president does not govern in any meaningful sense of the term. The country cannot withstand almost three more years of this.

In parliamentary systems, the government normally falls under these circumstances. In presidential systems, such breakdowns are traumatic. Fortunately, the days when they triggered real coups in Latin America are past. But the underlying problem remains. Ms Rousseff has set her face against resigning, or seeking a government of national unity. Anyway, her vice-president signed some of the questioned fiscal measures and may now be impeached, too. If that happens, the best way out would be a fresh election.

The electoral tribunal may call one: it is looking at claims that money from Petrobras bribes financed Ms Rousseff’s campaign; her campaign guru has been arrested on those grounds (he denies wrongdoing). But Brazil also needs a new Congress, given its tainting by corruption. An early general election requires a swift constitutional amendment. Next time they take to the streets, it is what Brazilians should call for. That would be a better way to defend democracy.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21696550-how-should-presidential-systems-deal-political-breakdown-when-coup-not-coup/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Coping with senility in Japan: Grey zone

State elections in India: Back at the spinning wheel

Patriotism in India: Oh mother

Legislative elections in South Korea: No walk in the Park

Timor-Leste and Australia: Line in the sand

Banyan: Of blowhards and bombs





Articles Sections Next

Coping with senility in Japan

Grey zone

As cases of dementia rise, Japan gropes for new ways to deal with them

Apr 9th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



OVER the months Yuichi Okano realised that his elderly mother was losing her mind. She stopped bathing and started to smell. At night she chatted to her late husband. She would head out of the front door and disappear, with Mr Okano left to pound the streets of Nagasaki, plotting her meandering course with the help of neighbours. What he feared most was not noticing her sitting outside in the dark as he parked the family car.

Last year over 10,000 dementia sufferers went missing in Japan. Many turned up dead, or not at all. Some walked into the paths of trains, for which their families may suffer a posthumous indignity: a bill for the cost of the accident. One man who lost his father this way recalls staring in disbelief at a carefully itemised invoice from the railway company for ¥7.2m ($65,215). Late settlements accrue interest.

Japan is one of the planet’s oldest societies, pipped only by tiny Monaco for the proportion of elderly in the population. Lengthening life expectancy is a boon for millions of Japanese retirees leading full lives. But it also means a sharp increase in the numbers suffering from dementia. Who, asks Florian Coulmas, an expert on Japanese ageing, should accept responsibility for people unable to articulate their own interests or care for themselves?

Over 5m elderly Japanese suffer from dementia. By 2025 some 7m will need care, the health ministry predicts. Most live at home, putting a strain on relatives. A new survey says three-quarters of people looking after elderly family members are at their wits’ end, and many have considered suicide, or worse: last year police recorded 44 cases of murder or attempted murder in such homes.

Japan has made strides in coping with the problems of a population with ever fewer young people. The retirement age has been pushed back, and it is not unusual for 70-year-olds to be driving taxis, working as watchmen on building sites and serving in supermarkets. Many elderly say they are keen to keep on working for as long as they are fit. As for dealing with senility, some approaches have been innovative. Convenience stores, everywhere in Japan, offer themselves as safe havens for wandering pensioners. Phone and car companies have made products with simpler, more intuitive functions.

Policy and spending lag, however. Public funding for long-term care for the elderly was the equivalent of just 1.2% of GDP in 2010 versus 3.7% in the Netherlands, according to the most recent OECD comparison. One reason is that relatives are still the main caregivers in Japan, says Miharu Nakanishi of the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science. Family members often quit work and burn through savings to look after senile parents.

More professional care would make a big difference, but there is an acute shortage of nurses. Nursing is poorly paid, and staff turnover is high. Despite much fanfare a decade ago about the government bringing in nurses from the Philippines and Indonesia, only a trickle have come. Visas are extremely hard to obtain. Among other things, foreign care workers must pass absurdly tough language tests.



Beds, too, are in increasingly short supply. One report claims that by 2025 about 130,000 elderly with dementia in Tokyo alone will need beds in care homes but not be able to find one. A think-tank, the Japan Policy Council, recently floated a desperate solution: moving the elderly out of the capital to pep up declining rural communities. The plan was endorsed by the government, but raised eyebrows. The minister in charge of rural revitalisation, Shigeru Ishiba, had to deny that the government was bringing back ubasute, the mythical ancient custom of dumping grandma on a mountain to die. He also insisted that no one would be forced to move.

Forget me not

To date over 200 local authorities have expressed interest in hosting what are being called continual care retirement communities. A few are already up and running. But if such facilities are to be greatly expanded, it is unclear who will pay for places, whether families or the state.

Undaunted, the prime minister, Shinzo Abe, promises that Japan will become an example to the world in dealing with senility. Among his promises is better funding for research into Alzheimer’s disease and more money to train 60,000 doctors in its early diagnosis. But much more should be done, including lowering the immigration barriers that keep out foreign care workers (which Mr Abe shows little sign of doing). Ms Nakanishi says the entire national strategy for dealing with dementia is fragmented. Above all, she says, the government has failed properly to consult with those who actually take care of the elderly.

Still, attitudes in Japan are changing. In a landmark ruling in March the Supreme Court threw out an attempt by Japan Railways to claim for the costs of an accident involving the death of an elderly man. The 91-year-old sufferer from dementia had slipped out of the door and stumbled onto the tracks after his wife dozed off. The company argued that the man’s son and wife were responsible because they “did not fulfil their obligation” to monitor him. What many do not realise, says the son, is how expensive and exhausting it is to look after parents who have become children. The state is going to have to find better ways to help.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21696538-cases-dementia-rise-japan-gropes-new-ways-deal-them-grey-zone/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

State elections in India

Back at the spinning wheel

Elections in four Indian states raise dust but may not change much

Apr 9th 2016 | DELHI | From the print edition



THE wheel at the centre of India’s flag is an appropriate symbol. In the world’s largest democracy politics ceaselessly turns yet seldom moves, and then rather slowly. Take West Bengal, the most populous of the four Indian states (plus a tiny union territory) that are holding local elections over the next six weeks.

Many of the state’s 92m residents think that the local ruling party, the Trinamool Congress (TMC), has brought scant improvement since taking power in 2011. Fresh scandals include the capture on video of party officials taking bribes, and the deadly collapse of a hideous, costly and long-delayed flyover in the state capital, Kolkata. Yet the TMC’s dispensing of gifts, such as a claimed 2.5m bicycles, and its system of patronage and persuasion backed by street toughs, appears likely to win the party another five years in office.

Together with those in West Bengal, elections in Assam, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and the union territory of Puducherry will see more than 160m people invited to cast their vote, a fifth of India’s overall electorate. Yet in all but one of these contests polls suggest that the outcomes, which are to be announced together on May 19th, will follow predictable patterns.

In the prospering southern state of Tamil Nadu the dominant local party also looks set to shrug off corruption charges and return to office. Like West Bengal’s TMC under Mamata Banerjee, the AIADMK is run with tight discipline by a veteran female politician, Jayaram Jayalalitha, a former film star who has served five times as the state’s chief minister.

Neighbouring Kerala appears likely to opt for a different sort of continuity. Since the late 1970s power in the state has alternated between two enduring coalitions. Barring upsets, polls suggest that the pattern will be repeated, with the communist-led Left Democratic Front likely to oust the United Democratic Front led by the Congress party, the once-formidable national electoral vehicle of the Gandhi dynasty. Congress’s great rival, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), in office nationally under the prime minister, Narendra Modi, has sought to make inroads in Kerala. But though its Hindu-nationalist rhetoric has won converts, its effectiveness is limited in a state in which nearly half the voters are either Muslim or Christian.

The state of Assam in the north-east also has large minority populations. Yet a history of animosity between native Assamese and incomers, particularly recent Muslim migrants from Bangladesh, provides more fertile soil for communal grudges. Congress’s incumbent local leader, Tarun Gogoi, who has served as Assam’s chief minister since 2001, is 81 years old. Despite his personal popularity, many are ready for a change.

Mr Modi’s party strategists have exploited these weaknesses with skill and determination, helped by the defection of one of Mr Gogoi’s most promising lieutenants. Top BJP ministers and officials, including Mr Modi, have assiduously courted the state. On the campaign trail Amit Shah, the party’s grizzled president and a man viewed as a Hindu-nationalist hardliner, has frequently brandished the sectarian card. At a rally in November he accused Congress, absurdly, of harbouring a “secret plan” to surrender Assam to Bangladesh.

Mr Shah’s language has softened lately. He now merely pledges that a BJP-led state government would seal the border with Muslim-majority Bangladesh “so not even birds can fly across”. Yet repeated insinuations of a looming Muslim menace, including from Congress pandering to its supposed “Muslim vote bank”, have been effective. Some pollsters are predicting a big win in Assam for the BJP.

Victory there would be extremely welcome to Mr Modi. Since the BJP’s crushing defeat of Congress in the national elections of May 2014, the party’s fortunes have been mixed. Last year it lost badly to local parties in both the capital, Delhi, and in Bihar, India’s third-most-populous state.

Those setbacks put paid to hopes of the BJP making inroads in Parliament’s upper house, the Rajya Sabha; its rotating membership is indirectly elected, apportioned according to parties’ success in state elections. Congress and other opposition parties have used the upper house to thwart legislation passed by the lower house, where the BJP holds a big majority.

The BJP hopes to capture Assam, make inroads in states in this round, and then do even better in next year’s election in Uttar Pradesh, the most populous state with over 210m people. Yet even then the upper house’s brake on the wheel of change will not be released. The BJP and its allies hold just 64 of the Rajya Sabha’s 245 seats. Under India’s constitution seats change hands at a stately pace, with one-third of the membership retiring every two years. In other words, by the time Mr Modi’s first term runs out in 2019 he will, in the best of circumstances, be running in place.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21696548-elections-four-indian-states-raise-dust-may-not-change-much-back-spinning-wheel/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Patriotism in India

Oh mother

A nationalist slogan sends sectarian sparks

Apr 9th 2016 | DELHI | From the print edition

Bharat Mata channels Britannia

IT SOUNDS innocuous enough for any Indian to wish victory to Bharat Mata, or Mother India. And the slogan bharat mata ki jai, which means much the same thing, is being chanted at rallies across the election-fevered state of Assam. Yet in a giant country of multiple creeds and tongues, and even more opinions, simple words carry complex and even dangerous meanings.

To the one in five Indians who are not Hindu the slogan sounds perilously close to the religious chant, jai mata di, which honours a Hindu mother goddess. The association is especially tricky for Muslims, whose monotheism abhors the attribution of godly power to any but one supreme being. It does not help matters that during India’s independence struggle against Britain, patriots seeking symbols for Indian nationhood tried to elevate Bharat Mata into a pukka Hindu deity.

The effort, which was strongly influenced by Western fabrications such as Britannia and America’s Statue of Liberty, did not take off. Bharat Mata’s iconography remained vague. Did she have four arms or ten? Was she accompanied by a lion, or a map of India? And which map at that? Yet several temples were dedicated to the would-be goddess, including one in the holy city of Varanasi opened in 1936 by Mahatma Gandhi himself. A handful across India draw a trickle of worshippers today.

Accustomed to India’s garish and usually cheerful religious diversity, many Muslims would ordinarily be inclined to ignore a recent fatwa issued by a Deobandi seminary, one of India’s stricter seats of Islamic teaching, which condemned the contentious words as a sin. The trouble is that harder-line Hindus, emboldened by the strength of the ruling (and Hindu-nationalist) Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) have taken to wielding the slogan as a test of patriotism.

Some private schools now require applicants to wish victory to Mother India. The BJP chief minister of Maharashtra says that anyone who avoids the words “has no place in India”. Baba Ramdev, a yoga leader, upped the ante further by asserting that were it not for India’s constitution he would have “beheaded hundreds of thousands” for refusing to repeat the chant. Mother India will need to get her squabbling children in line before someone gets hurt.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21696537-nationalist-slogan-sends-sectarian-sparks-oh-mother/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Legislative elections in South Korea

No walk in the Park

South Koreans are fed up with politicians squabbling

Apr 9th 2016 | SEOUL | From the print edition

Waffles in the wind

FEW will be sorry to see the back of South Korea’s current National Assembly when its four-year term ends in late May—least of all Park Geun-hye, the country’s conservative president. Legislative gridlock has hobbled her administration since she came to office in 2013. The current crop of lawmakers has passed less than a third of all bills introduced into the assembly. In February the main opposition Minju party led an eight-day filibuster (the world’s longest) to stall a vote on a controversial surveillance bill.

Three-fifths of MPs must agree to bills being introduced before they vote on them. The ruling Saenuri party holds only a slim majority. That is why it is so eager to boost its share to 180 of the 300 seats up for grabs in legislative elections on April 13th. Then it could revise the “three-fifths” law which has caused it such headaches.

As her supporters see it, Ms Park could then at last get on with her job in the 20-odd months that remain to her in office. But there is a problem. In opinion polls Saenuri’s popularity is slipping, from 44% in mid-March to 35% last week. Shin Yul of Myongji University in Seoul predicts that the party will take fewer than 140 seats—in other words, it will lose its majority. That would guarantee a lame-duck end to Ms Park’s already underwhelming presidency.

Voters are exasperated with internal party feuds over the nomination of candidates. Last month the Saenuri party denied candidacy to a host of MPs critical of Ms Park. The party’s chairman, Kim Moo-sung, a hopeful for the presidency in 2017, refused to confirm some of the replacement nominations. Some of the snubbed MPs chose to run independently; Ms Park’s office attracted derision when it demanded that they return their official portraits of the president.

Most voters say they know little about the candidates or their policies, some of which are pure waffle. Saenuri plans to “multiply fairness and divide care”. A campaign song for Minju, belted from the loudspeakers of roaming election vans, promises “More, More, More”.

Voting has long been determined not just by ideology but also by geography. The south-west region of Jeolla is the power base of the leftish Minju party. Gyeongsang in the south-east is Saenuri’s traditional stronghold: a region that has nurtured industrialists and military dictators, among them Ms Park’s late father, Park Chung-hee.

But now old loyalties are fading. In Jeolla opinion polls show the Minju party eight percentage points behind the People’s Party, a splinter group set up by Ahn Cheol-soo, a former software entrepreneur and presidential candidate. In the city of Daegu, Ms Park’s power base, the Minju candidate is about ten points up on his Saenuri rival.

Ko Ho-cheol, a 61-year-old retiree living in Seoul, has supported the conservatives since his 20s. But for the first time, his vote will go to the Minju party, because the candidate running in Mr Ko’s district, Park Ju-min, is part of a well-known collective of liberal lawyers that holds unscrupulous officials to account. Mr Park, the lawyer, will also get the protest vote of Suh Ji-ye, a 25-year-old jobseeker. The opposition is barely more capable, she says, but at least it will be a change from the conservatives, who have been in power since 2008.

Youth unemployment hit a high of 12.5% in February, well above that for all South Koreans, at 4.9%. Yet parties have been busier wooing the ballot-casting over-60s, promising them jobs, housing and senior centres. Elderly poverty, acute in South Korea, deserves attention. But so does the creeping dejection of its young. Mature political debate would help.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21696545-south-koreans-are-fed-up-politicians-squabbling-no-walk-park/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Timor-Leste and Australia

Line in the sand

Trying to squeeze money from the last drop of oil

Apr 9th 2016 | DILI AND SYDNEY | From the print edition

A strong central tendency around the median line

THOUSANDS of people recently rallied in front of the Australian embassy in Dili, the seaside capital of Timor-Leste, in probably the biggest demonstration since the tiny country’s birth 14 years ago. The protesters were angry at Australia’s refusal to negotiate a permanent boundary in the Timor Sea, beneath which lie untold quantities of oil and gas. Timor-Leste claims that the refusal is costing it billions of dollars and is a slight to its sovereignty.

Australia maintains that revenue-sharing agreements the two countries signed years ago remain in force. One of them postpones discussion of permanent maritime boundaries until 2057, though recent statements by Australia’s opposition Labor Party in favour of negotiations have given Timorese hope. Yet a successful resolution to this dispute will merely postpone the most critical question facing Timor-Leste: what to do when the oil runs out. Nine-tenths of state revenues come from oil and gas. Only a handful of fragile states, among them South Sudan and Libya, depend more on hydrocarbons.



Timorese long saw Australia as their friend. It won goodwill when it led an international force into East Timor (as Timor-Leste was more often known) in 1999 to protect its people from Indonesia, from which Timorese voters had just voted for independence. (Indonesia had invaded and annexed the former Portuguese colony in 1975.) The goodwill dissipated over three treaties Australia then struck with Timor-Leste. On the face of it they look generous. The Timor Sea treaty of 2002 established a “joint petroleum development area” (see map), giving 90% of the area’s oil revenues to Timor-Leste and the rest to Australia. A second treaty covered Greater Sunrise, a lucrative gasfield, most of which lies outside the area, beneath waters Australia still claims as its “exclusive seabed jurisdiction”. A third treaty in 2006 agreed to split the Greater Sunrise revenue evenly between Timor-Leste and Australia.

Yet many in Timor-Leste say that without an agreement over the two countries’ maritime boundary, the treaties are unfair. Although Australia agreed a seabed boundary with Indonesia in 1972, it has never negotiated one with Timor-Leste. Under international law, Timorese argue, such a boundary should run halfway between the two countries. That would leave the Greater Sunrise field completely inside Timor-Leste’s 200-nautical-mile exclusive economic zone.

Australia’s behaviour has been high-handed at times. In 2002 it withdrew from the mechanism for adjudicating maritime boundary disputes under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). During talks on the third treaty, Australia is alleged to have bugged government offices in Dili. This has left Timor-Leste feeling bullied into accepting an unfair deal. It is, says Tomas Freitas of MKOTT, an activist group, why so many demonstrators went to the Australian embassy on March 23rd.

But it may also have been a sense that Australia is now more susceptible to pressure. Woodside Petroleum, the Australian firm which heads the Greater Sunrise development consortium, says that future investment depends on “government alignment” between the two countries. The implication is that the dispute must be settled before it will spend big money on exploration. A recent Australian defence white paper cites a strong, secure Timor-Leste as one of the country’s top strategic interests—and a boundary agreement would undoubtedly make it more secure. The foreign-affairs spokesman for Australia’s Labor party, Tanya Plibersek, promises to start “good-faith” negotiations over the maritime boundary if her party wins a general election expected in July. She also says Australia should accept international adjudication under UNCLOS, if ever such negotiations failed.

Yet even the most favourable outcome would be less than Timor-Leste hopes for. For instance, the government wants a pipeline from the Greater Sunrise field to run ashore at Tasi Mane, a planned refinery project on the south coast. But that would mean laying it across the Timor trough, which is 3.3 kilometres (2 miles) deep. Woodside and its partners prefer floating terminals nearer the field, which would be more profitable for Timor-Leste.

With Greater Sunrise, Timor-Leste can keep pumping oil and gas until around 2031, though other fields will be exhausted in four years or so. The question looms: what happens after the oil money runs out? Timor-Leste was careful during the boom years earlier this century to put lots of petrodollars into a sovereign-wealth fund. But the fund is dwindling and may be gone entirely by 2025, claims a local NGO, Lao Hamutuk. More than half of Timor-Leste’s population of 1.2m is under 17; all will one day need jobs. Yet in a dirt-poor country that relies too much on subsistence farming, too little is being done to plan for a post-oil economy.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21696544-trying-squeeze-money-last-drop-oil-line-sand/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

Of blowhards and bombs

Donald Trump and Kim Jong Un seem to want to make nuclear proliferation more likely

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



MORALLY, Donald Trump is not like Kim Jong Un. He does not send children to gulags. But the bombastic tycoon and the bellicose tyrant do have some things in common: a habit of self-adulation, an original take on reality, a preference for high walls around their countries. They have also, between them, stirred up the debate about nuclear proliferation in North-East Asia.

When North Korea first acquired the bomb ten years ago, many feared that its neighbours would soon follow suit. South Korea, Japan and Taiwan are all technologically adept and have reason to feel threatened. Yet none has gone nuclear. And their restraint is likely to continue even though Mr Kim has tested what he claims was a hydrogen bomb and Mr Trump has suggested that Japan and South Korea should build their own bombs to relieve America of the burden of defending them.

In a recent book, “Asia’s Latent Nuclear Powers”, Mark Fitzpatrick of the International Institute for Strategic Studies argues that, of the three countries, South Korea is the most likely to acquire nuclear weapons—though that is still not likely at all. Polls show that nearly two-thirds of South Koreans back a nuclear capability. Some politicians agree. One is Chung Mong-joon, from the dynasty behind the giant Hyundai conglomerate and a presidential candidate in 2012. After the latest nuclear test he called for South Korea to quit the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and pursue the bomb as the only way of forcing the North into nuclear negotiations. That, he wrote on his blog, was a “cold-war lesson”.

More than two decades of browbeating, bribing and cajoling North Korea have been fruitless. And, South Korean pro-nuclear types point out, India and Pakistan have been declared nuclear powers since 1998 without going to war or becoming international pariahs. Yet the dangers to South Korea of going nuclear seem far to outweigh the benefits. With America fiercely opposed, it would threaten the alliance on which the South’s security depends. The country would be vulnerable to economic sanctions. Others, such as Japan, might want to go nuclear as well. And North Korea might react violently to signs that the South was building its own bomb, which some experts think would take 18 months. Some argue for nuclear weapons more for effect than as a practical policy—to prod America into reaffirming its “nuclear umbrella” and to make China put real pressure on North Korea.

Some are also motivated by a sense that South Korea has been harshly constrained under the NPT regime compared with Japan, the only one of 185 non-nuclear-armed parties to the NPT with complete fuel-cycle technologies, including both uranium enrichment and plutonium reprocessing. So Mr Fitzpatrick suggests that Japan may have the shortest “breakout” time to build a bomb, albeit longer than the common Western estimate of six months. Some Japanese hawks do advocate Japan’s going nuclear. On April 1st the cabinet reconfirmed that this would not violate Japan’s constitution. Seeing such hints, and suspicious of moves by Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, to ease legal constraints on Japan’s armed forces, some in South Korea and China fear that Japan may soon abandon its anti-nuclear principles.

It won’t. Like South Korea, Japan has too much to lose. And unlike South Korea, its voters would also strongly disapprove. The country of Hiroshima and Nagasaki does not want to become a nuclear power. At the fourth Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, DC on April 1st, it was praised as one of America’s closest allies in the effort to minimise the use of sensitive nuclear materials. Thanks partly to the shortness of its breakout time, Japan would not be the first nuclear domino.

Nor, probably, would Taiwan, though it faces an even more explicit threat, since China claims the right to use force to “reunify” the island with the mainland in certain circumstances—such as its declaring formal independence. China’s military build-up in recent years calls into question Taiwan’s ability to defend itself by conventional means. And, unlike Japan and South Korea, Taiwan has no clear guarantee that America would come to its defence. Rather, the Taiwan Relations Act of 1979 leaves America’s security commitment vague. But even under the traditionally pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party of the incoming president, Tsai Ing-wen, Taiwan is not likely to pursue nuclear weapons. It would be suicidal.

The reason South Korea, Japan and Taiwan remain “latent” nuclear powers is that in the past they have all pursued the necessary technologies, but then renounced them. Nobosuke Kishi, Mr Abe’s grandfather and his political hero, who was prime minister in 1957-60, believed that Japan needed the bomb. Under Park Chung-hee, South Korea’s president in 1963-79, and father of the incumbent, Park Geun-hye, South Korea had a clandestine nuclear programme. So did Taiwan under Chiang Ching-kuo.

The Trump doctrine

The factors that made nuclear programmes seem vital then have lessons for today. In Guam in 1969 President Richard Nixon announced a policy of shifting the burden of defending America’s allies to the allies themselves. Campaigning for the presidency in 1976, Jimmy Carter pledged to withdraw American troops from South Korea. America’s switch of diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing in 1979 alarmed Taiwan and other allies.

All three gave up their nuclear dabbling because they were subsequently reassured about America’s commitment to their security. Whatever happens in November’s presidential election, Mr Trump has undermined that confidence by showing that an American politician can win a ton of votes by telling foreigners to get stuffed. This reinforces China’s argument that, whereas it is in Asia by geography, America is there by choice, and might one day leave; and it encourages calls in American-allied democracies for their own nuclear deterrent. Like Mr Kim, his fellow playboy-with-a-rich-dad, Mr Trump makes Asia more dangerous.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21696523-donald-trump-and-kim-jong-un-seem-want-make-nuclear-proliferation-more-likely-blowhards-and/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Catholics: Party and pontiff

House churches: Underground, overground





Articles Sections Next

Catholics

Party and pontiff

Two articles examine China’s often troubled relationship with Christianity. The first looks at signs of a rapprochement with the Vatican

Apr 9th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



IN LATE September Pope Francis and President Xi Jinping happened to visit America at the same time. The coincidence was unremarkable. Both men were there for the annual session of the UN General Assembly in New York. But it afforded Chinese officials a glimpse into something they may not have fully understood: the international stature and popular appeal of the pope. American media covered his every move—each appearance before an adoring crowd, and each ride he took in his humble little Fiat—while paying much less attention to Mr Xi (whose crowds included far fewer supporters and many more protesters than the pope’s).

Chinese officials were “shocked and flabbergasted” by the difference in the responses to the two leaders’ visits, says a Vatican analyst in Beijing. “They thought Xi Jinping was the emperor, the most important guy, and then along came this man in white to overshadow him.” Some observers believe that officials’ awakening to the pope’s popularity may help encourage them to improve relations with the Vatican after decades of diplomatic estrangement. China craves the admiration of great powers. The Vatican may be puny in size, but in soft power it is hard to match.

Relations were already warming up before the two men went to America. In August China’s Catholic church appointed a bishop for the first time in three years. The consecration of Joseph Zhang Yinlin, in the central province of Henan, was striking: it had been approved not only by China’s state-linked church, but also by the Vatican. Also noteworthy was China’s decision in July to allow a bishop who had been appointed in secret by the Vatican to begin working openly. These developments suggested that the two sides were trying to work out ways of co-ordinating their efforts again in the naming of bishops. In 2011 and 2012 the Vatican had excommunicated two who had been appointed by China’s church without papal approval. Another bishop, Thaddeus Ma Daqin, had the backing of both sides when he was appointed in 2012. But Bishop Ma’s renunciation of the Chinese church at his consecration ceremony had caused co-operation to break down.

New leaders, new hopes

Since then, much has changed both in the Vatican and in China. At the end of 2012 Mr Xi took over as China’s leader. In an attempt to strengthen the Communist Party’s grip, he launched a sweeping crackdown on civil society. In May last year he said religion must be free of foreign influence—tricky if your faith was founded by, say, a Jew, an Arab or an Indian. Still, Mr Xi has appeared open to improving relations with the Vatican. And Pope Francis, who took over the Catholic church in 2013, also seems to want better ties.

In 2014 China allowed the pope to fly through its airspace as he returned to Rome after a visit to South Korea (in 1995 it had denied similar permission to Pope John Paul II). From his plane the pope sent a message to Mr Xi, invoking “divine blessings of peace and well-being” upon China. This year (in an interview with Francesco Sisci, a Beijing-based journalist) the pope spoke of China’s “great culture” and “inexhaustible wisdom”. In February Global Times, a party-controlled newspaper, said hopes of a thaw had “gained momentum”, and that an official Chinese delegation had paid a rare visit to the Vatican in January (it is popular with Chinese tourists, pictured).

But if a permanent thaw does occur, two groups of Catholics will have cause to worry. The first are those underground Catholics who do not want anything to do with the state-backed Catholic church, even if their boycott of it incurs the pope’s displeasure. Some already privately grumble that recent signs of warming between the Vatican and China amount to a betrayal by the Vatican of those Catholics who have endured considerable hardship, including imprisonment, as a result of their support for the pope. Several underground Catholics are in jail.

The other group is the hundreds of thousands of Catholics in Taiwan. The Vatican is one of only 22 states that have full diplomatic relations with the island, and the only one in Europe. In terms of global status, the Vatican is by far the most important of Taiwan’s friends. China says it will not establish formal relations with the Vatican unless the pope severs diplomatic ties with Taiwan. In 2008 China tried to make up with the island by suspending its efforts to poach Taiwan’s allies. But it discarded that truce last month when it agreed to establish relations with Gambia. Catholics in Taiwan are praying that the Vatican is not the next in China’s sights.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21696511-two-articles-examine-chinas-often-troubled-relationship-christianity-first-looks-signs/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

House churches

Underground, overground

Despite harassment by police, China’s house-church movement is growing

Apr 9th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition

The faithful party

FOR the past couple of years, China’s tens of millions of Christians, most of whom are Protestants, have been watching events in the coastal province of Zhejiang with anxiety. The authorities there have been waging a relentless campaign to remove the large crosses that adorn the roofs of many churches; hundreds have been taken down, to the horror of their congregations. In January this took a turn for the worse with the arrest of Gu Yuese, the outspoken pastor of the country’s largest church, a colossal edifice in the provincial capital, Hangzhou, that seats 5,000 people—about 50% more than St Paul’s Cathedral in London. Many feared that the detention of Mr Gu, who had been criticising the removal of crosses, might signal the start of a fiercer, nationwide, crackdown.

To their relief, Mr Gu was released a few days ago. It was also a surprise. Only in February the pastor of another state-approved church in Zhejiang had been jailed for 14 years and his wife for 12 years after they protested against the removal of crosses. Mr Gu may owe his freedom to his church’s high profile in such a large and important city, rather than to any change of heart by Zhejiang’s authorities. Christians in the province, which has a high concentration of them, are not yet rejoicing.

But there is little sign that Zhejiang’s clampdown on the public flaunting of Christian faith, of which the crosses are seen as an example, is encouraging officials elsewhere to adopt a similar approach. Indeed in some areas, including Beijing, “house churches”, as those without official approval are often called (even though they sometimes meet in offices), have been operating ever more openly.

That is not to say that most Chinese Christians enjoy religious freedom. Far from it. Police in some areas continue to harass and detain members of house churches. But in many places, house churches are flourishing, and often make little if any effort to hide their activities from the government. Officials appear to turn a blind eye. President Xi Jinping is waging a fierce campaign against dissent, rounding up hundreds of civil-rights activists and tightening controls on the media. He appears less keen, however, to take on the country’s fast-growing Christian community, as long as its members do not openly defy the Communist Party.

In central Beijing, one house church meets in the basement of an apartment building. Its rented rooms include a high-ceilinged hall; another is used as a nursery. Underground it may be, but it is far from clandestine. A large red cross in a ground-level window advertises its presence. Posters of Bible verses inside the building are visible from the outside. “We are not exactly lying low,” says one church leader. “We sing hymns so loudly that people in the community get curious and come down to see what’s going on. Anyone is welcome.”

Under their noses a believer may be

Many are drawn to house churches because they resent the control exerted by the party over officially approved ones. The appointment of pastors has to be vetted by the government. They cannot preach to people under 18. They cannot declare allegiance to any particular branch of Protestantism. As one young man puts it: “The Chinese government is not my boss. God is my only leader.” But most house churches take precautions. When talking to foreign journalists, their leaders often ask not to be named. Some say they avoid preaching about issues relating to politics and social problems. To avoid drawing unwanted attention from officials (and getting too cramped) they try not to let their congregations grow larger than a few hundred members. Those that do often split up into separate churches.

In Beijing, members of unregistered churches are usually younger than 40. Brent Fulton of ChinaSource, a Christian NGO in America, says that many of the house churches that operate more openly were started in the 2000s by young people who had been members of informal Bible-study groups while they were at university. Such believers tend to see their faith as involving more than just private prayer, he says. Some are involved in charity work. A few even try to recruit new members through social media and websites, despite a ban on proselytising.

The government is expected soon to convene a policy-setting meeting on religion, its first in a decade. Observers are unsure whether this will result in a tightening of regulations on house churches, or possibly even a relaxation. Unusually, some senior officials have made contact with house-church leaders in recent months to discuss their work. This has given optimists some hope.

In the meantime, house churches continue to grow. In Beijing, one of the most prominent of them, called Zion Church (pictured), is so big that the house-church label seems wildly inappropriate. When it was founded in 2007 the congregation met in a small office in a commercial building. Since 2013 it has been using an entire floor of it. Some 1,500 people attend services each weekend. Hundreds of others are members of five associated churches scattered across the city. The main venue has a large auditorium with rows of plush blue chairs, children’s play areas and numerous meeting rooms of various sizes. It even has a coffee shop and gift store.

“In the end, it doesn’t matter if there is more persecution or less,” says Jin Mingri, Zion’s founding pastor. “When times are good, there are more followers, and when times are bad, there are different opportunities for the church and the fellowship grows as well.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21696534-despite-harassment-police-chinas-house-church-movement-growing-underground-overground/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Kenya and international justice: Obstruction of justice

Libya’s civil war: Unity, up to a point

The West Bank: Deadly DIY

Djibouti: The superpowers’ playground

South Africa: Moment of truth





Articles Sections Next

Kenya and international justice

Obstruction of justice

The collapse of the case against William Ruto is terrible news

Apr 9th 2016 | Nairobi | From the print edition

Not a stain on his character

STREET parties are only rarely inspired by international legal judgments. However, Eldoret, the hometown of William Ruto, Kenya’s deputy president, bopped after charges against him and against a local radio journalist were dropped by the International Criminal Court (ICC) on April 5th. Drunken revellers crowded the cameras as TV anchors tried to explain the news. The party was led by the local MP and the county’s governor, who apparently asked the police to tolerate the raucousness. But while the decision is a boon to Mr Ruto and his constituents, it is a serious blow to the ICC.

The case against Mr Ruto began in 2010, when allegations against him and Uhuru Kenyatta, now Kenya’s president, were referred to the ICC by Kofi Annan, the UN’s former secretary-general. The two were accused of orchestrating violence which killed at least 1,300 people after disputed elections in 2007. The charges against Mr Kenyatta were dropped in December 2014 but those against Mr Ruto continued, threatening the coalition that brought the pair to power in 2013. Now that the charges have been dropped, it will be much easier to reconstitute that alliance for the presidential elections due in August 2017.

In a statement, Mr Kenyatta said the decision “brings to a close what has been a nightmare for my nation”. After a “painful journey”, the court “reaffirms my strong conviction from the beginning about the innocence of my deputy president”. That sentiment was firm across the Kenyan establishment. Even Raila Odinga, the opposition leader, congratulated Mr Ruto on the decision of the court, before calling for the government to pay compensation to the victims of violence.

The case had certainly poisoned relations with the West. Mr Kenyatta accused the court of being a tool of neocolonial persecution. But his claims that his government had co-operated and that the decision proved Mr Ruto’s innocence were disingenuous. Mr Ruto was not acquitted. Rather, the case was dropped for lack of evidence. The presiding judge, Chile Eboe-Osuji, said that he had wanted to declare a mistrial “due to the troubling incidence of witness interference and intolerable political meddling”. Several witnesses had recanted their testimony; others simply went missing. The prosecution’s case was torpedoed when the court decided in February that recorded interviews of witnesses who subsequently recanted could not be used as evidence. In theory, prosecutors could try again in the future.

With elections coming next year, many Kenyans are worried that violence will flare up again. Mr Ruto’s and Mr Kenyatta’s alliance works well because they bring two of Kenya’s largest ethnic groups together: the Kikuyu, Mr Kenyatta’s tribe, which has dominated Kenyan politics most of the time since independence, and the Kalenjin, Mr Ruto’s group, who are populous in the Rift Valley. But other tribes, in particular the Luo, Mr Odinga’s lot, feel left out of government.

For the ICC, the decision is a disaster; one ICC insider immediately denounced Kenya’s government for having done more to obstruct justice , and to vilify the court, than any other. The court has long annoyed African politicians, some of whom accuse it of disproportionately targeting their continent. Nine out of ten sets of cases where there are indictees are African, though most were referred to the court by African governments themselves. The failure to convict Mr Ruto suggests that the court can easily be frustrated if governments do not want to co-operate. In June, South Africa declined to arrest Omar al-Bashir, Sudan’s president, who was on South African soil and is wanted for war crimes and genocide.

For the moment, several trials continue, but most involve former politicians, not current ones. One example is the trial of Laurent Gbagbo, the ex-president of Ivory Coast, who started—and lost—a short war to stay in power when he lost an election in 2010. African despots who have lost power may still have reason to fear the ICC. But for those who stay in, the court now looks much less threatening.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21696459-collapse-case-against-william-ruto-will-hurt-international-criminal/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Libya’s civil war

Unity, up to a point

The arrival of a new government brings hope to war-ravaged Libya

Apr 9th 2016 | CAIRO | From the print edition



MIRED in war, threatened by jihadists and short of cash—it is a wonder that anyone wants to rule Libya. Yet until recently the country had four competing governments. Rival administrations based in Tripoli, the capital in the west, and Beida, in the east, have spent the past two years fighting over a disputed election, among other things. That has allowed Islamic State (IS), the third contender, to grab roughly 180 miles (290km) of coastline around Sirte, in between them.

The jihadists’ advance hastened the creation last year of a fourth outfit, the Government of National Accord (GNA). It is the result of a UN-sponsored deal signed in Skhirat, Morocco, on December 17th by politicians from both sides of the country. But they did not have the backing of the warring parties. So despite Western support, when leaders of the new body left Tunisia for Tripoli on March 30th, they travelled by boat—for fear of being shot down.

The surprisingly smooth arrival of the prime minister, Fayez al-Serraj (pictured), and six others from the GNA’s nine-member presidency council has provided Libya with a glimmer of hope. Mr Serraj, a businessman with little political experience, has received pledges of support from several militias and municipalities. He now controls the state’s only functioning institutions: the national oil firm, Libya’s sovereign-wealth fund and its central bank, which welcomed the “start of a new era”.

The situation, though, is by no means settled, even in the west of the country. There is confusion about whether the old Tripoli government is standing down in favour of the new one. Mr Serraj and his colleagues are hunkered down at a heavily-guarded naval base while talks continue. Loyalties tend to be fickle. Even the militias supporting the GNA are doing so out of self-interest, says Anas El Gomati of the Sadeq Institute, a Libyan think-tank. The GNA can pay salaries and negotiate oil deals, so “it is the new game in town,” says Mr Gomati.

Gluing a nation together again

Under the Skhirat agreement, members of the old Islamist-tinged parliament in Tripoli join a new advisory body called the State Council. But some feel the deal, which was not formally approved, lacks legitimacy. That view is shared in the east, where the internationally recognised House of Representatives (HOR), slated to become Libya’s legislature, has failed to secure the required supermajority in favour of the agreement.

European sanctions on foot-dragging leaders in the east and west are meant to speed the process, but they do not cover Khalifa Haftar, the Libyan army general who is waging a brutal campaign against “terrorists”—many of whom happen to be his opponents. Supported by foreign powers, such as Egypt and the UAE, General Haftar looms over the eastern government. Article 8 of the Skhirat agreement brings the army under the control of the new government: hated in Tripoli, General Haftar is likely to be sacked. So the HOR insists that the article be removed.

Some suggest a compromise whereby eastern Libya is given a measure of autonomy and its own regional army led by General Haftar, under a central command. But that might alienate the GNA’s supporters in Tripoli. And the general still seems to harbour national ambitions. One of his commanders promised this week to “clear out” Sirte—and then Tripoli and Misrata, home to dozens of militias.

The lack of unity is complicating efforts to defeat IS, which has some 5,000 fighters in Libya. Western powers hope the Skhirat agreement may eventually bring the country’s armed groups under a single command that could work with their forces. For now, though, the West is lining up friendly militias to battle the jihadists, while occasionally striking them from the air. This risks exacerbating divisions in the country. Everyone wants to be the peshmerga of Libya, says Mattia Toaldo of the European Council on Foreign Relations, a think-tank, referring to American-backed Kurdish fighters in Iraq. “The problem is that having several peshmerga means not having a unified country.”

Mr Serraj vows to confront IS, but is prioritising the reeling economy. Banks, short of cash, have limited withdrawals, or closed. So within days of arriving in Tripoli the prime minister froze state bank accounts for everything except salaries. Most Libyans now shun the banks and rely on the black market to trade currency. Militia commanders drive around in cars full of cash to pay fighters. High inflation and a weak dinar—Libya must import many staples—mean that even when cash is available, it doesn’t go far.

On its current trajectory, Libya would run out of money by 2019, says the International Monetary Fund. Output of oil, which accounts for almost all of government revenues, has fallen from 1.6m barrels per day at the start of 2011 to less than a quarter of that. There is hope that the GNA can increase the flow. It has received support from Ibrahim al-Jathran, leader of the semi-official Petroleum Facilities Guard (PFG), which had been aligned with the eastern government. Mr Jathran has promised to reopen installations that his forces blockaded because of disputes.

But the challenges posed by renewed oil sales suggest that the path ahead will be hard for the GNA. General Haftar could still make a play for the facilities in the east. In the west, militias from Zintan are blocking the main pipeline. IS continues to attack oilfields with little regard for who is guarding them. And the price of oil has crashed anyway. Still, for some the glass is half-full. “I’m not expecting 100%,” says Abdlrauf Beitelmal, the mayor of Tripoli. “Anything above 50% is good enough.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21696514-arrival-new-government-brings-hope-war-ravaged-libya-unity-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The West Bank

Deadly DIY

Angry Palestinians are turning to home-made guns

Apr 9th 2016 | NABLUS | From the print edition

Here are some they made earlier

AS ARMS deals go, it was not the slickest. On an industrial street near the kasbah in the West Bank city of Nablus, a balding middle-aged man described his services. He couldn’t supply an AK-47 or a Tavor, the standard-issue Israeli assault rifle—those are too hard to find. In fact, he had no guns at all. But he insisted that he had the next-best thing: a friend with a lathe.

Palestinians have carried out near-daily attacks against Israelis since October, killing 34 people and wounding hundreds more. At first, the knife was the weapon of choice: only 10% of last year’s attacks involved guns. Since January, though, that percentage has steadily risen, and they are now used in 25-30% of cases.

Yet guns are actually quite hard to find in the occupied West Bank. Palestinian civilians are not allowed to own them, and the Israeli army carries out regular raids, seizing everything from shotguns to antiquated hunting rifles. The American-trained Palestinian security forces keep tight control of their own arsenals. Israeli officers say there is no evidence of their guns being diverted to militants, a common problem during the second intifada, which lasted from 2000 to 2005.

Modern firearms are beyond the reach of most Palestinians, especially the unorganised young people who are involved in what many call the third intifada. An M-16 assault rifle can cost $15,000 in the occupied territories, twice the average annual salary. One man from the Hebron area, who used to run guns for a militia linked to the ruling Fatah party, left the business a few years ago and now works in tourism. “I need to make a living,” he shrugs.

So the attackers are buying home-made guns. Many of these are based on the Carl Gustav—the “Carlo,” as it is known locally—a simple submachinegun developed in Sweden in the 1940s. The makeshift variety first appeared in Israel about 15 years ago, as a common fixture in the criminal underworld. They are assembled in garages and workshops using car parts, broken bits of other weapons and scrap metal. A simple “Carlo” costs as little as $500. One version, used in February to kill an Israeli policewoman outside Jerusalem’s old city, had a barrel made from a water pipe.

The rise of homemade guns suggests something good: that co-ordination between Israeli and Palestinian security forces is still working well, despite the unrest. Well-armed militias like the Fatah-linked Tanzim have stayed out of the violence, under orders from the Palestinian leadership. But it also means that the attackers are getting better organised. The first stabbings were carried out by individuals who acted on impulse, grabbing a knife or even a screwdriver from the kitchen drawer. Today they increasingly work in pairs or small groups, motivated by revenge: more than 120 Palestinian attackers have been killed in the act, and their deaths fuel further violence. Israel’s generals believe that boosting the West Bank’s stagnant economy is the best way to curb the violence. But this is one growth industry they’d rather snuff out.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21696515-angry-palestinians-are-turning-home-made-guns-deadly-diy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Djibouti

The superpowers’ playground

Everyone wants a piece of Djibouti. It’s all about the bases

Apr 9th 2016 | DJIBOUTI | From the print edition



AT 2pm in the tiny African state of Djibouti everything stops. As the sun burns high in the sky people retreat to their homes, save for a few men lying in the shade of colonial-era walkways, chewing qat leaves that bring on a hazy high. In the soporific heat you would be forgiven for thinking that time had forgotten the New Jersey-sized nation. Yet its quiet stability within the volatile Horn of Africa has made the country of just 875,000 people a hub for the world’s superpowers.

The stars and stripes flutters alongside the runway where military and passenger planes touch down: Camp Lemmonier, America’s only permanent military base in Africa, hosts 4,500 troops and contractors who conduct missions against al-Qaeda in Yemen and al-Shabab in Somalia. The outpost, leased for $60m a year, shares an airstrip with the international airport, although its drones now fly from a desert airfield eight miles away after one crashed in a residential area in 2011.

Djibouti also hosts France’s largest military presence abroad (it still has an agreement to defend its former colony); Japan’s only foreign base anywhere; and Spanish and German soldiers from the EU’s anti-piracy force, who are billeted at the fancy Kempinski and Sheraton hotels. The Saudis and Indians are also rumoured to be interested in establishing outposts, as are the Russians.

Meanwhile, China is building its first overseas base anywhere in the world in Djibouti, for which it will pay a more modest $20m in rent annually. It is supposedly nothing more than a logistics hub for anti-piracy operations and evacuating citizens from hotspots like Yemen, just 20 miles away across the Bab el-Mandib strait. Some Western officials fear that China may have bigger plans, however. It might in the future be awkward to have countries that do not always see eye-to-eye running military operations out of the same crowded space.

The tiny desert state wants to be more than a superpowers’ playground, though; it has ambitions to become a Dubai or Singapore at the gateway of the Red Sea and Indian Ocean. “We don’t have anything else but location,” says Robleh Djama Ali, the head of business development at the Djibouti Ports and Free Zone Authority. The country’s lack of natural resources may be coincidental, but its fortuitous geography, wedged between Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia, is no accident. France wanted a port to rival Aden, Britain’s colony on the other side of the Red Sea. It has been desirable more recently too. The terrorist attacks of September 11th, 2001 brought the American military. Somali pirates brought EU soldiers. The Ethiopia-Eritrea war from 1998 to 2000 robbed Ethiopia of access to its smaller neighbour’s ports. Now 90% of Ethiopia’s imports come through Djibouti, accounting for 90% of its ports’ traffic.

Ethiopia’s double-digit growth over the past decade has rubbed off on Djibouti. Around $9.5 billion of energy and infrastructure projects are under way, including four more ports, two new international airports and two pipelines, and a railway to Ethiopia (the last, ministers promise, is due to open within weeks). Another $9.7 billion of proposals are as yet unfunded. To put this in perspective, Djibouti’s GDP was just $1.6 billion in 2014.

China is the biggest investor, much of it via soft loans. Officials won’t say exactly how much they are in hock to the Chinese, but both the IMF and African Development Bank have warned about its public debt, which is projected to balloon from 60.5% of GDP in 2014 to 80% in 2017. The finance minister, Ilyas Moussa Dawaleh, isn’t concerned: “what we are getting from China is much more important than any other long-standing partner,” he says.

The boom has not benefited everyone. The ports account for a whopping 70% of GDP, but only provide a few thousand jobs. The UN puts unemployment at 60%, though Mr Dawaleh claims it is half that (Djibouti’s data are dodgy). Illiteracy runs at about 45%. The lack of employment is offset by traditional support systems; one worker can support an entire extended family. So the government can buy the loyalty of, say, 30 people by hiring a single bureaucrat.

Dissent still simmers. Opposition figures claim police killed 19 people at a religious celebration in December 2015 (the government says only seven died). A corruption case brought by the government against Abdourahman Boreh, a wealthy businessman who was President Ismael Omar Guelleh’s right-hand man until he questioned his plan to run for a third term in 2011, was thrown out by a British High Court at the start of March. The country is voting on April 8th, but the re-election of Mr Guelleh for his fourth presidential term is a foregone conclusion; the opposition, an unwieldy coalition of seven parties, is fielding two rival candidates.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21696512-everyone-wants-piece-djibouti-its-all-about-bases-superpowers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

South Africa

Moment of truth

Jacob Zuma has survived a ruling that he broke the law, but his grip on the ANCis slipping

Apr 9th 2016 | JOHANNESBURG | From the print edition

It’s hard to embarrass President Zuma

“ARE we ready?” asked Jacob Zuma, shuffling awkwardly as he prepared to address the nation. South Africans had paused their Friday nights and gathered around televisions to watch the president’s prime-time broadcast, called barely an hour earlier. There was a momentous air to it all: the last time a presidential address had been called on such short notice it was to announce the death of Nelson Mandela.

The latest call, on April 1st, came after a spate of scandals. A day earlier, South Africa’s highest court had found that Mr Zuma had breached the constitution by disregarding an order to repay public money he had spent on his private mansion, Nkandla. (He claimed that a new swimming pool was a security feature, and therefore a legitimate expense.) Many hoped he was about to announce his resignation.

But despite looking tired and cowed, Mr Zuma fought on. He apologised, not for failing in his sworn duty to uphold the constitution, but for the “frustration and confusion” around the powers of the public protector, an anti-corruption ombudsman who had ordered him to repay the money. His dissimulation fooled neither the public nor the upper echelons of his own party, among which discontent is rumbling.

Given the dominance of the African National Congress (ANC), which has governed South Africa since the first democratic elections in 1994 and took 62% of the vote in 2014, Mr Zuma’s future depends on the party. Mr Zuma understands this only too well: he got the top job after the ANC tossed out his predecessor, Thabo Mbeki.

For now, Mr Zuma remains in charge. The party batted back an impeachment vote introduced into parliament by the opposition with not a single ANC MP dissenting. The party’s unwavering defence of the president was partly motivated by a desire not to hand the opposition Democratic Alliance (DA) a victory.

It also reflected a desire for self-preservation: MPs are nominated by their party rather than being elected directly. (Each party wins seats in parliament in proportion to its share of the national vote.) Having run the ANC’s intelligence operation when it was in exile, Mr Zuma knows which of his colleagues’ closets are filled with skeletons, so MPs fear him. Even so, as his popularity with voters withers, his grip over the party is slipping.

The ANC is like an elephant, the party’s secretary-general Gwede Mantashe once said: a lumbering beast, it is slow to change direction. Yet close watchers of the party say that a “turning process” against Mr Zuma is under way. It began in December after he fired a well-regarded finance minister, replaced him with a political neophyte, and then, under pressure from his party and the markets, reversed course a few days later. It has gained pace with recent allegations that a wealthy Indian family close to the president had been meddling in cabinet appointments, including offering the finance minister’s job to his deputy, Mcebisi Jonas (who said no).

More serious still was the Constitutional Court ruling, which has prompted some ANC bigwigs who worry about the rule of law to turn against Mr Zuma. What is more, a court will soon decide whether to reinstate some of the 783 charges of corruption, fraud, money-laundering and tax evasion against Mr Zuma that were dropped shortly before he came to power in 2009.

Trevor Manuel, a successful former finance minister, has joined the calls for Mr Zuma to resign. He says the president committed “a violation of the key oath of office of the head of state”. A union representing 16,000 soldiers demanded that Mr Zuma be removed and urged its members to join “mass action campaigns” against him. The South African Communist Party, allied with the ANC, refrained from criticising Mr Zuma directly, but said that the court judgment “should be a clear warning signal to the ANC”.

With pressure mounting on Mr Zuma, some fear the struggle may turn nasty. The DA accuses the government of settling political scores with a special anti-corruption police unit, known as the Hawks, whose commander was appointed by Mr Zuma in 2015 not long after a High Court judge ruled that he (the commander) was “dishonest”. Thuli Madonsela, the public protector, says she is under investigation by the unit. So too is Pravin Gordhan, the finance minister. More worrying still was a robbery at the offices of the Helen Suzman Foundation, a liberal think-tank that often criticises the government. Earlier this month it asked the courts to suspend the boss of the Hawks, Berning Ntlemeza. Days later, armed robbers broke in and stole documents, computers and hard drives.

The Constitutional Court verdict was a reminder that even presidents are supposed to obey the law. The ANC, by sticking with a leader who appears not to believe this, is making a mockery of the democracy that it and others fought so hard to establish.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21696518-jacob-zuma-has-survived-ruling-he-broke-law-his-grip-ancis/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




French student politics: I dreamed a dream

Greece’s migrant deal: Back where they came from

Iceland’s prime minister: Big fish

Nagorno-Karabakh’s war: A frozen conflict explodes

Russia’s dairy embargo: War and cheese

Charlemagne: The politics of memory





Articles Sections Next

French student politics

I dreamed a dream

Students are protesting against labour reforms that would benefit young people

Apr 9th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



A WARM spring morning, and the atmosphere is more rock concert than revolution. Chicken kebabs are sizzling on pavement stalls. Giggling teenage girls in skinny jeans are dancing to a rap number on the back of a open-back truck. They and their high-school classmates have skipped school to go on a manif, or demo, in protest at the French Socialist government’s liberalising labour bill. “It is festive,” agrees Florian Mazet, a final-year lycée pupil, over the pounding beat from the truck’s amplifier: “We don’t want to be confrontational, but if we have to, we are ready for it.”

April 5th was the fourth of a series of one-day protests in which high-school pupils and university students joined unionists on the streets. This time some 34 lycées were shut, mostly due to blockades by pupils. The turnout was down on the previous week, but violence was up. After clashes with troublemakers in Paris, the police set off tear gas and detained 148 people. French students are campaigning not against harder exams or higher university fees, but against a draft law that would ease the negotiation of longer working hours and limit payouts for unfair dismissals. “Insecure youth is angry!” read one home-made placard.

The heart of the complaint is that a Socialist government, meant to be the guardian of workers’ rights, is pandering to corporate bosses by dismantling them. Worse, goes the charge, it is making the disingenuous claim that this will help employers create jobs. “Who could possibly believe that making redundancies easier will create jobs?” reads a union flyer handed out at the rally. “Thomas Piketty agrees,” says one student triumphantly, referring to an article in Le Monde, a newspaper, in which the best-selling French economist argued that reducing redundancy costs will not curb unemployment.

Yet Mr Piketty was not the only rock-star French economist to opine on the labour reforms. In his own piece in Le Monde, Jean Tirole, a Nobel prize-winner, argued the opposite: that the insecurity of the young is precisely the fault of over-protected “insider” jobs. Because businesses fear being burdened with such employees, 90% of new hires are now for temporary jobs, and young people can be stuck with short-term contracts for years. The new labour law, argued Mr Tirole, should lead to more permanent hires and curb youth insecurity.

François Hollande, who campaigned to put youth at the centre of his presidency, has simply failed to make this case convincingly. He is already enfeebled, having been forced by a political outcry to shelve a proposal to strip nationality from French-born dual citizens convicted of terrorism. Now, protests against the labour bill have prompted the government to water down some provisions. Manuel Valls, the prime minister, has met with student leaders to hear their complaints.

Only about 8.5% of France’s 2.4m students take part in elections to university union bodies, and the National Union of French Students (UNEF), the country’s biggest, has just 19,000 members. Yet their capacity to frame national debates and influence policy far exceeds this strength. One reason is that when la jeunesse gets involved in protests, the authorities get nervous. High-school pupils, who in France have their own unions, are particularly unpredictable. The revolutionary imagery of 1968 (though rarely its existentialist wit) still informs today’s chants and slogans. Protests can rapidly become violent, especially in the face of high-handed policing.

Do you hear the people sing

Equally important, student unions are an incubator of the next generation of political leaders. Many Socialist politicians began their careers at UNEF, including both Mr Valls and Mr Hollande. Jean-Christophe Cambadélis, the current Socialist Party head, was a UNEF leader. And universities seem remarkably tolerant of student politics intruding on studies. Today’s UNEF leader, William Martinet, is 27 years old and graduated only last year.

“It’s a great training school,” says Bruno Julliard, who led UNEF a decade ago and is now one of Paris’s 21 deputy mayors. Ten years ago, he made his name by leading a massive student protest against a previous liberalising labour bill. The centre-right government at the time was forced to back down, and folk memories of that struggle linger. Student protests are a “sign of democratic vitality”, says Mr Julliard: “The French like their rebellious side, so they are looked upon kindly. Through young people, we express the ideals of the country.” Mr Hollande’s failure today is an inability to explain how, even with liberal policies, such ideals can still be upheld.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21696509-students-are-protesting-against-labour-reforms-would-benefit-young-people-i-dreamed-dream/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Greece’s migrant deal

Back where they came from

An EU agreement with Turkey starts shipping migrants out of Greece

Apr 9th 2016 | ATHENS AND DIKILI | From the print edition



THE police had prepared for violence, but in the end the deportees went quietly. A group of 202 migrants, the first to be sent back from Greece under the European Union’s new agreement with Turkey, left the islands of Lesbos and Chios on April 4th aboard vessels chartered by Frontex, the EU border agency. Most were Pakistanis and Afghans; a few came from Bangladesh, Ivory Coast and Congo. They came ashore in the Turkish town of Dikili, where Turkish officials covered the ship’s bow with tarpaulins to prevent journalists from seeing inside. From there they were bused to a camp near the Bulgarian border, over 250 miles away, to await deportation to their home countries.

As the ferries docked, a few demonstrators stood atop a breakwater holding signs welcoming the refugees. Locals in the neighbouring square were less cordial. “We don’t want them here,” said Yemil Gunes, a pensioner. His friend Emin added: “They’ll take all the university graduates and dump the uneducated on us,” referring to the EU’s pledge to accept one Syrian refugee from a camp in Turkey for every Syrian returned from Greece.

The EU hopes the threat of deportation will deter migrants from entering Greece. It may be working. Arrivals in Greece have dropped sharply since the EU deal with Turkey took effect on March 20th. Turkey is cracking down, too: according to Efkan Ala, the interior minister, Turkish police arrested 351 people-smugglers and intercepted over 64,000 illegal migrants in the first three months of this year. As those sent back from Greece arrived in Dikili, 55 Pakistani men intercepted at sea huddled at a nearby dock, waiting to be transferred to a police station. Asked if he would try again, one said “Never.”

In the coastal city of Izmir, a hub of the smuggling trade, the neighbourhood of Basmane—once overflowing with refugees—now looks deserted. Waseem Qahwaji, a refugee from Damascus, said it no longer made economic sense to attempt the crossing. “It costs between $1,000 and $1,500 to go to Greece, but you lose all that money if you’re sent back,” he said.

While deterrence may be starting to work, the EU’s plan to return a stream of migrants to Turkey is not. None of those sent back to Dikili had applied for asylum in Greece. Those who do apply cannot be deported until their claims are reviewed. Further returns are on hold while officials round up other migrants who have neglected to file asylum claims, among the 6,000 detained on the Greek islands. Detainees are rushing to apply. “The word’s out: request asylum here on arrival and it will take weeks and even months before your case is decided,” says a Greek official.



Greece’s understaffed asylum service heard only about 1,000 cases last year. More people are being hired, but it will still take months to speed up the process, says Maria Stavropoulou, the director. The EU has promised to send 400 asylum experts; only 30 have arrived. The plan also envisions sending back rejected asylum seekers who are waiting for an appeal hearing. Human-rights organisations say that is illegal, as are other aspects of the deal. EU officials deny this.

Even if new migrants stop coming, Greece must care for the more than 50,000 who have been trapped on the mainland by the closures of borders along the route to Germany. Many are in camps built by the Greek army, and tensions run high. Afghans fight with Syrians, who are seen as having a better chance of getting to northern Europe. About 10,000 people have refused to leave a squalid camp at the shuttered border with Macedonia, hoping it may re-open. Another 4,000 are squatting at the port of Piraeus in Athens. Many are waiting for smuggling routes to Europe to open up. “We hear about going through Albania…I’m waiting to get some firm offers,” says Ali Hussain, a student from Kabul living in a tent on the quayside.

Greece’s cash-strapped government is waiting, too—for more than €380m ($433m) of EU emergency funding. The migrants impose a huge burden on an almost bankrupt country that faces spending caps after its bail-out by the EU and IMF. The government thinks many asylum-seekers could still be in Greece in three years. Moving them requires the EU to implement its relocation plan, which has been hobbled by the refusal of some member states to accept any asylum-seekers.

Greek finance officials once hoped to use the refugee crisis to win concessions on fiscal targets from the country’s creditors. That looks less likely than ever. This week Alexis Tsipras, the prime minister, accused the IMF of trying to push Greece towards default, after a whistle-blowing website published transcripts of an internal IMF phone conversation. Christine Lagarde, the IMF’s managing director, reacted furiously.

Relations between Athens and Brussels remain fraught. But the EU will have to deliver more help for its migrant plan to work. It must also come through on its promises to Turkey, including €6 billion in aid and the scheme to accept Syrian refugees. The EU’s tough new return policy has already slowed the flow of migrants. But the rest of its deal with Turkey could easily fall apart.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21696543-eu-agreement-turkey-starts-shipping-migrants-out-greece-back-where-they-came/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Iceland’s prime minister

Big fish

A reformer is entangled by an investigation of offshore shell companies

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Bit cold for a banana republic

WHEN Sigmundur David Gunnlaugsson was elected as Iceland’s youngest-ever prime minister in 2013, he rode to power on a wave of fury over the elite’s mismanagement of the financial system. Bad decisions had made the country exceptionally vulnerable to the global financial crisis; when it arrived in 2007-09, GDP fell by 9%. David Gunnlaugsson campaigned against foreign creditors and vowed to write off part of Icelanders’ mortgage debts. But after the publication by a journalistic consortium of the “Panama papers” (see article), popular anger was directed at the prime minister.

The leak revealed that in 2007 David Gunnlaugsson and his wife set up a company in the British Virgin Islands to hold proceeds from his wife’s inheritance, including bonds issued by three of Iceland’s banks (whose failure triggered the collapse). David Gunnlaugsson sold out to his wife for $1 in 2009, when he became an MP. But he never declared the existence of the company, and critics charged that since the banks have claims on Iceland’s government, his wife’s bonds constituted a conflict of interest. The next day around 10,000 protestors gathered outside parliament; many chanted that Iceland was turning into a banana republic and wielded that fruit. Soon afterwards, David Gunnlaugsson said that he would hand over powers to his deputy, Sigurdur Ingi Johannsson.

David Gunnlaugsson has done much to make Iceland’s financial system work better. Its pre-crisis economy was plagued by incompetence and corruption. Thanks to feeble supervision, in the 2000s the three biggest banks, Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki, amassed assets 14 times larger than Iceland’s GDP. Households merrily borrowed abroad too. When short-term financing for banks dried up in 2008 and capital rushed out of the country, the currency tanked and inflation soared.

In contrast to his predecessors, David Gunnlaugsson tightened banking regulation. Last year the government pushed through reforms that will force the creditors of Iceland’s failed banks to suffer even heavier consequences from their poor decisions. Before they are allowed to transfer Icelandic krona-denominated assets out of the country, they must pay a hefty fee. This raises government revenue: in 2015 the budget moved into the black for the first time since 2007. It also helps to prevent uncontrolled sales that would make the krona crash again. The capital strength of Iceland’s big banks, meanwhile, is rising. Non-performing loans are dropping.

During David Gunnlaugsson’s term, Iceland has begun to return to financial normality. In October the country repaid, ahead of schedule, its debts to the IMF, which had given it a big bail-out in 2008. Capital controls, a crisis measure which made it hard for Icelanders to get foreign currency, are slowly being removed.

After trundling along for a few years, growth accelerated rapidly in 2015. It is also expected to be strong this year. Happily, this strong performance is not dependent on fancy finance; banking now accounts for 6.7% of GDP, down from more than 12% at the height of the bubble. The number of tourists has doubled since 2007, thanks in part to a weak krona. Iceland is again embracing the reliable industries that long sustained it: the fish-processing industry has grown by 40% in the past decade. Real wages are around their pre-crisis level. Inequality and poverty have fallen.

This should have bolstered David Gunnlaugsson’s popularity. But even before the “Panama papers” scandal, it was waning. The Pirate Party, a radical group formed in 2012 which campaigns for softer drugs laws and more electronic privacy, has steadily risen in the polls. Part of its appeal is that it is anti-establishment; the party does not have an official leader. A poll on April 6th put the Pirates’ support at 43%. If snap elections were called, the group would probably win or lead the next coalition. They do not seem strong on economic policy, unlike David Gunnlaugsson. Despite his current woes, history may judge his tenure kindly.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21696574-reformer-entangled-investigation-offshore-shell-companies-big-fish/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Nagorno-Karabakh’s war

A frozen conflict explodes

After facing off for decades, Armenia and Azerbaijan start shooting

Apr 9th 2016 | MOSCOW | From the print edition



WITH so many conflicts in the world, Nagorno-Karabakh gets little attention. The bloody fighting between Armenian and Azerbaijani forces in the mountainous enclave this week was a reminder that it should. Tanks and artillery traded fire; at least 50 people were killed in four days. The spectre loomed of a wider war, one that could draw in Russia, Turkey and Iran. A ceasefire brokered in Moscow on April 5th appears to be holding for now. But it brought the two foes no closer to peace.

The fighting dates back to 1988, when Nagorno-Karabakh’s ethnic Armenians attempted to secede from Azerbaijan. (At the time, both Armenia and Azerbaijan were republics of the Soviet Union.) As the Soviet Union broke apart in 1991, the conflict grew into a full-scale war. By 1994 some 30,000 people were dead and Nagorno-Karabakh was under Armenian control. Russia, America and France brokered a ceasefire, but sporadic shooting continued. Rather than time healing old wounds, it deepened them.

On April 2nd the frustration spilled over. Azerbaijani forces seized settlements and strategic heights along the front. (Both sides accuse each other of starting the fighting.) The campaign to capture territory marked a departure from an earlier Azeri strategy of attacks aimed at “pressure and posturing”, says Richard Giragosian, head of the Regional Studies Centre, a think-tank in Yerevan. Armenian and Karabakhi officials say they retook the captured land, but their claims have not been independently verified. The outburst demonstrates that the 1994 ceasefire framework, with no peacekeepers and only a handful of unarmed monitors, “no longer fits”, says Thomas de Waal of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

The fact that the assault began with both the Azeri and Armenian presidents in Washington for a security summit suggests that it was no accident. Discontent with the stalled diplomacy may have pushed Azerbaijan to try to change facts on the ground. “This is about bringing Armenia to the negotiating table,” says Zaur Shiriyev of Chatham House, a British think-tank.

At home, the political dividends were immediate. The brief war “created euphoria”, says Anar Valiyev, a Baku-based analyst. The government boasted of newfound military superiority, the result of the oil-rich state’s expansion of defence spending (from $177m in 2003 to $3 billion in 2015). Casualties were seen as justified. “The people are hungry for victories,” says Mr Valiyev.



That may help Azerbaijan’s president, Ilham Aliyev, cushion the pain of falling oil prices. Oil and gas accounted for 94% of the country’s exports in 2013. As prices dropped over the past two years, the Azeri central bank burned up more than two-thirds of its reserves supporting the currency before allowing it to devalue sharply. In January 2016 the government imposed a 20% tax on foreign-exchange transactions and sounded out the International Monetary Fund about a possible loan. Rising prices and unemployment prompted protests in several smaller towns earlier this year, a rarity under Mr Aliev’s tight watch.

Some on the Armenian side suggested that Turkey, a longtime ally of Azerbaijan and new foe of Russia, helped provoke the violence. Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, fueled the speculation by declaring that he would stand by Azerbaijan “to the end”. Yet the Turkish role is a red herring, says Laurence Broers of Chatham House: “The motives are local and not about great-power competition.”

Nonetheless, peacemaking will require a push from powers such as Russia. Moscow has closer ties with Armenia: it has a military base there and a treaty obligation to defend the country against attacks on its territory (excluding Nagorno-Karabakh). But Russia also sells large quantities of arms to Baku. Any peace plan depends on external pressure overcoming local resistance. The stakes of diplomatic failure have never been clearer: little is left to prevent a repeat, or worse, of last week’s clashes. “Now there is no excuse for the outside powers to say the situation can just be managed,” says Mr de Waal.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21696563-after-facing-decades-armenia-and-azerbaijan-start-shooting-frozen-conflict-explodes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Russia’s dairy embargo

War and cheese

In a land where European cheese is banned, one man dares make his own

Apr 9th 2016 | MOSCOW | From the print edition

Parmesan of patriots

AT 27, Oleg Sirota was living the Russian dream. He had an information technology company with 30 employees, an apartment in Moscow, a Toyota and a Mercedes. Yet he was tormented by an unfulfilled childhood ambition: “All that time, I was dreaming of farming, dreaming of milk, of cows and of cheese.” He thought about starting a creamery, but saw no way to compete with European imports. Besides, he told himself, corruption would make securing land a nightmare.

Then Russia annexed Crimea, and everything changed. The West imposed sanctions. Vladimir Putin retaliated by banning farm imports from the European Union. Mr Sirota saw an opening. He sold his business and moved to the countryside, 60km outside Moscow. He took out loans from family and friends. He found a partner online, a Russian working at a creamery in Germany. He hired two refugees from Makeevka, a town near the front line in eastern Ukraine. In August 2015, in a field outside the village of Dubrovskoe, Mr Sirota opened “Russkiy Parmesan”.

Mr Sirota (pictured) hopes to help restore Russia’s self-sufficiency, which (like Mr Putin) he considers a matter of both dignity and security. The Russian government is trying to stimulate domestic production of everything from butter to guns. Last year Mr Putin announced plans to spend some 2.5 trillion roubles ($37 billion) on 2,500 import-substitution projects.

The results have been unimpressive. Most industries have a hard time replacing foreign components and know-how. Yet agriculture has been a bright spot of sorts, as “anti-sanctions” have cleared space for Russian producers. Russia imported about 440,000 tons of cheese in 2013. Through the first 11 months of 2015, that had halved to just 180,000 tons.

Mr Sirota must fend off domestic rivals who substitute palm oil for dairy fats. He spends most nights in a wooden cabin next to his creamery, waking at dawn and working till dusk. His only worry is that sanctions may be lifted too early. “If Obama and Merkel extended sanctions for another 10 years, I’d build them a monument in bronze right out front.”

Russkiy Parmesan produces nine varieties, including gorgonzola and an original creation called “Gubernatorsky”. (“It goes with everything,” Mr Sirota boasts.) True parmesan remains a distant dream. Russian sanitary regulations bar unpasteurised milk and copper pots, both needed for hard cheeses. Finding high-quality milk is also a constant struggle.

Patriotism runs through Mr Sirota’s creamery: he flies both the Russian tricolor and the red and blue cross of Novorossiya. Among the wheels of cheese maturing on wooden shelves is an experimental blend infused with red wine from Crimea. Mr Sirota hopes to revive Russia’s pre-revolutionary Meshchersky cheese, invented in the late 19th century by Swiss experts working on Russian estates. (After the revolution, cheesemaking died out as foreign experts fled the Bolsheviks.)

Mr Sirota did not support Mr Putin before 2014, but he does now. The president’s interventions in Ukraine and Syria have brought Russia closer “to the country I dreamed of since childhood”, he says. Mr Putin was invited to the opening of Russkiy Parmesan, but did not make it. No matter: 5.5kg of the finest “Gubernatorsky” have been set aside for whenever the president can drop by.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21696571-land-where-european-cheese-banned-one-man-dares-make-his-own-war-and-cheese/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

The politics of memory

Poland had been coming to terms with its past. Now the government wants to bury it again

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



DARIUSZ STOLA, the owlish director of Polin, the museum of Jewish life in Warsaw, remembers when Jewish sections first started to appear in bookshops in Poland. “I thought it would fade out,” he says. It didn’t. Instead, over the past two decades Poland has become a place where the nation’s past, in particular its relationship to the 3m Polish Jews who were murdered in the Holocaust, is debated more vigorously by politicians, intellectuals and ordinary people. Many bookshops now have a section on Polish-Jewish history; since it opened in 2013, Polin has become one of the capital’s most popular museums.

This debate may now be under threat. The Polish government, led by Law and Justice, a radical nationalist party, appears intent on politicising historical discussion—and even criminalising it. In February Patryk Jaki, the deputy minister for justice, proposed banning the phrase “Polish death camps” on pain of a fine or three years’ imprisonment.

Poles detest this phrase, since it inaccurately suggests that Poles, not Germans, ran concentration camps such as Auschwitz-Birkenau and Treblinka on Polish soil. When Barack Obama used it in a speech in 2012, Poland’s previous government slapped him on the wrist. (He apologised.) Poles have long preferred the formulation “Nazi death camps in German-occupied Poland”.

Many Poles are frustrated by what they perceive to be a portrayal of Poland as a collaborator with Germany, says Michael Schudrich, the country’s chief rabbi. Many also point out that, alongside the Jewish victims of the Holocaust, some 3m non-Jewish Poles died in camps too. For Maciej Swirski, the head of the Polish Anti-Defamation League, which campaigns for the “good name of Poland”, the phrase “Polish death camps” is a form of Holocaust denial, as it underplays German responsibility.

But criminalising it is something new. Previously, when journalists used it, ambassadors would dispatch angry letters. The proposed law is a blunt instrument. It would, among other things, punish anyone, domestic or foreign, who publicly ascribes responsibility to the Polish nation or state for “crimes committed by the Third German Reich”, even inadvertently.

Alongside this, Andrzej Duda, the president, has threatened to strip Jan Gross, a historian at Princeton University, of an Order of Merit after he asserted last year that more Jews than Germans were killed by Poles during the war. And when “Ida”, a film released in 2013 depicting Polish complicity in the deaths of some Jews, was shown on public television (which was taken over by pro-government managers in January), it was accompanied by a 12-minute clip in which three critics slammed the film. One spoke of a conflict between Polish and Jewish “sides” of the story.

In isolation, these incidents are embarrassing for Poland. Together, they are alarming. They indicate the ferocity of Law and Justice’s obsession with the past. They also suggest that the party sees political gain in stirring up historical resentments. It plays up the most glorious aspects of Poland’s history, such as the anti-Nazi resistance. At the same time, it portrays the country and its people as victims, then and now.

The party and its divisive leader, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, are preoccupied with the country’s allegedly botched transition after 1989, which they contend left the communist-era elite manipulating the reins of power, just in a different guise. This leads them to denigrate Poland’s post-communist success. The previous government emphasised the country’s economic recovery, with GDP per head almost doubling since joining the European Union in 2004. By contrast, Law and Justice portrays Poland as a nation bullied by Brussels and its refugee-loving, secular leaders.

Unlike the previous, Europhile government (Donald Tusk, the former prime minister, is now the head of the European Council), the current one shrugs at what outsiders think of it. Since coming to power in October, as the first party to win an outright majority in over three decades, Law and Justice has thumbed its nose at the EU’s liberal ideals. It has made heavy-handed changes to the constitutional court, security services and public media. In January the European Commission launched a formal assessment of whether these moves breach the rule of law. On April 4th Moody’s, a credit-ratings agency, warned that the constitutional tussle may dent Poland’s attractiveness to foreign investors.

Forget about it

Law and Justice’s core supporters do not seem to mind. Many of them are old, socially conservative voters who live far from big cities like Warsaw. The proposed law would play to their sense of victimisation. This is a shame. Law and Justice is not anti-Semitic, and its leaders are firmly pro-Israel. But introducing criminal penalties into intellectual debate is no way to deal with historical resentments. Indeed, in trying to whitewash the past, the government may stir up prejudice instead. Those with anti-Semitic views may feel vindicated, or even emboldened, when they hear politicians deny that Poles bear any responsibility for crimes against Jews. This will leave Polish Jews feeling persecuted, and kick off a new cycle of recrimination.

Some of Law and Justice’s politicians seem to be aware of this. In March, Mr Duda spoke out against anti-Semitism at the launch of a museum which commemorates a Polish family killed by German forces for hiding Jews. Strikingly, he acknowledged that the war had seen cases both of Polish heroism and of Polish infamy, with some Gentile Poles betraying their Jewish neighbours and those who helped them. His statement surprised many—especially as his threat to strip the state decoration from Mr Gross, who has written extensively about the less creditable aspects of Poland’s past, is still up in the air. It hinted that, despite the populist bluster, the party may eventually let its misguided proposals slide. But not before they have damaged Poland’s reputation, and its own attempt to come to grips with its history.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21696555-poland-had-been-coming-terms-its-past-now-government-wants-bury-it-again/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




Fiscal devolution in Scotland: A taste for more

Brexit brief: The economic consequences

Defence industry: Take your partners

Domestic abuse: Violence in the shires

The housing crisis: Lords a-leaping

Second homes: To the lighthouse

Bagehot: Land ahoy!





Articles Sections Next

Fiscal devolution in Scotland

A taste for more

Devolving tax powers benefits Scotland more than the rest of Britain but may do little to keep the union together

Apr 9th 2016 | EDINBURGH AND INVERNESS | From the print edition



SCOTLAND is fast becoming one of the world’s most powerful subnational states, along with Canadian provinces and Swiss cantons. It is now adding significant control over fiscal policy, in particular income tax, to the substantial autonomy it has enjoyed since 1999. The devolution deal, hastily concluded by an alarmed British government when only 55% of Scots voted in 2014 against independence, favours Scottish taxpayers over those in the rest of Britain. Even so it may only whet the appetite for full sovereignty.

Traditionally the British Treasury has collected revenues in Scotland, as elsewhere, and handed the Scottish government a slug of money, the “block grant”, to finance most of its spending. On April 6th a new Scottish rate of income tax (SRIT) was introduced that will take ten pence from every pound subject to income taxes. Scottish taxes due to Westminster have been correspondingly reduced. Scotland will keep the revenue from its new tax band, but its grant will be smaller. Next year Scotland will gain full control over income tax, collecting roughly half the money it spends, and the grant will shrink further. Other powers are also being devolved, including more say on welfare spending and the ability to borrow a little more.

It looks like a bad time, however, for Scotland to assume control of its fiscal destiny. The effects of lower world prices for oil and gas, exports of which accounted for one-quarter of Scotland’s GDP in 2012, may worsen in 2016, as contracts for fabricating and maintaining oil rigs expire and are not renewed. Forthcoming revisions could show that the Scottish economy contracted in the fourth quarter of 2015.

In the area around Inverness, Scotland’s biggest oil region after Aberdeen, unemployment has risen for five straight months. The Port of Cromarty Firth, where rigs are stored when they are not needed in the North Sea, is jammed (see picture). Diversifying into renewable energy and tourism will not offset job losses in oil. Pay packets in the industry are about 50% above the British average, so having fewer to tax takes a big bite out of receipts.



The fine print of the devolution agreement should help the Scots to cope with a slowing economy, however. The British government cut Scotland a sweet deal. Though the Scottish government is now in charge of a chunk of income tax, it will not run any economic risk in 2016-17, says Jim Gallagher of Oxford University. The reduction in the block grant will exactly offset the tax receipts generated this year by SRIT, he says. If revenues are low, London will make up the difference.

Scotland will take on much more risk when it gets full control over income tax in April 2017, but the fine print of the deal may still mitigate it. Scotland’s income-tax take in 2016-17 will help to determine how big a block grant it receives thereafter. If the economy performs badly this year, the grant next year will be more generous. If growth then bounces back, Scotland could find itself with both juicy tax receipts and a hefty handout from London.

The way in which the block grant will be adjusted in future years is also to Scotland’s advantage. Its population is growing much more slowly than Britain’s. Revenues from income tax can be expected to grow more slowly too, and so can demand for public services.

Some argue that any adjustment to the block grant should take into account Scotland’s diminishing need for cash relative to needs elsewhere in Britain. In fact its budget will be protected from its relatively lower population growth—precisely what the ruling Scottish National Party (SNP) was aiming for in the negotiations over devolution. Public spending per person in Scotland is already more than 10% higher than it is in Britain as a whole, though Scotland is not particularly impoverished. The deal ensures that it is unlikely to decline toward the British average, says Mr Gallagher.

This latest round of devolution comes at an interesting time. The government at Holyrood is controlled by the SNP, which advocates independence, lost the referendum on it and went on to stunning victory in the British general election in 2015. It now hopes to do as well in the Scottish elections scheduled for May 5th.

One view is that the new tax powers could weaken the SNP. Since 2011, and especially since the referendum, it has built a sprawling coalition of support by bashing London and the British government’s austerity policies, combining left-wing rhetoric with middle-class goodies. Its opponents hope the transfer of fiscal powers will make it harder for the SNP to disavow responsibility for Scotland’s problems and promise all things to all people. That, in turn, might dampen popular enthusiasm for independence.

Some evidence points this way. Tax, not independence, has dominated the election campaign, with Labour seeking to outflank the SNP on the left (pledging tax rises to pay for expanded services) and the Conservatives on the right (hinting at cuts). Some think Scotland’s move towards fiscal autonomy—on generous terms—will convince people that full independence is neither necessary nor desirable.

Their hope is probably optimistic. Past transfers of powers have not stopped the SNP from fingering London for its failures in devolved areas such as education. If the Scottish economy takes off after the tax changes, the SNP can argue that Scotland deserves still more autonomy. If the new regime creates disgruntled losers, or if economic growth is weak, the party can blame Westminster for not giving it enough control over other things: employment law, say, or corporation tax. It will also grumble that the deal forces it to implement the central government’s austerity policies, given that Scotland still has very limited power to borrow.

Those who oppose the break-up of the United Kingdom will breathe a sigh of relief if Britain votes to stay in the European Union on June 23rd, as the SNP has all but promised a new Scottish independence referendum in the event it does not. But even if the Remain camp wins, Scotland is drifting away from the rest of the country, one round of devolution at a time. The new tax powers were designed to keep Scots in the union. They may nudge it closer to the exit.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21696519-devolving-tax-powers-benefits-scotland-more-rest-britain-may-do-little-keep/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit brief

The economic consequences

Most estimates of lost income are small, but the risk of bigger losses is large

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THE impact of leaving the European Union on Britain’s economy may be the most heated issue of all as the referendum on June 23rd approaches. Many of those who are unsure how to vote say they will decide on the basis of whether Brexit is likely to make them better or worse off. The arguments are hard to assess. Andrew Tyrie, the Tory MP who chairs the Commons Treasury select committee, which is inquiring into the costs and benefits of EU membership, says both sides in the debate “are prepared to set aside all qualifications and restraints in the wilder claims they make.” He hopes his committee can do better, though it too is bitterly divided.

Mr Tyrie notes that, when it comes to Brexit, “the central problem is that there is no counterfactual.” In October, for instance, a Bank of England study concluded that EU membership had boosted the British economy by making it more dynamic. That is hard to square with Brexiteers’ claim that membership has been damaging. Yet the cause of the new dynamism could be something unrelated: perhaps, as Eurosceptics say, the Thatcherite reforms of the 1980s, lower taxes or less red tape.

The missing counterfactual is even more problematic in assessing the economic effects of Brexit. Nobody can be sure what access Britain will have to the single market, what its regulatory regime and migration rules will be, or how long any of these may take to negotiate. Several teams of economists have had a go at guessing. The table shows the conclusions of six of the most comprehensive studies. The wide range of GDP predictions demonstrates how uncertain the outcome is.

One thing both pro- and anti-EU voices can agree on is that the short-term impact of Brexit is likely to be negative. Uncertainty over future trade arrangements has already reduced confidence in sterling and investment could well be discouraged. The Bank of England calls Brexit the biggest risk to domestic financial stability. That Britain is running a record current-account deficit, which has to be financed by capital inflows, makes it all the more vulnerable.



The longer-term effects are more controversial, although most economists reckon that they too are likely to be negative. That is not least because it can take many years for an economy to recover forgone short-term output (if it does). Broadly speaking, economists find five ways in which Brexit could affect future GDP.

Losses arising from lower trade are by far the biggest. Later this month the Centre for European Reform, a think-tank, will publish a revised version of its 2014 study on Brexit, based on the work of economists from Groningen University in the Netherlands. It concludes that Britain’s trade with the EU has been 55% greater than it would have been without membership—and that there have been no detectable losses from trade diverted from third countries towards the EU.

Even if only some of these gains were at risk from Brexit, they would hugely outweigh the second effect, the economic benefit from cutting Britain’s annual net contribution to the EU budget of some £8.5 billion ($12 billion). The budget gain is also swamped by likely losses from the third factor, lower foreign investment. Brexiteers argue that this will be unaffected, but the evidence is that a large chunk of foreign investment, especially in financial services and cars, has come because of Britain’s EU membership. Gains from a fourth possible factor, fewer onerous rules, are largely illusory. Analysis by the OECD, a rich-country club, finds that British labour and product markets are already among the least regulated of all its members.

The fifth consideration is migration. Were Britain to impose tighter controls on EU migrants post-Brexit, growth would depend on attracting from elsewhere the skills its economy needs. Yet it is politically unrealistic to believe that Britons who have just voted to leave the EU partly to curb uncontrolled migration from eastern Europe will want to welcome many more migrants from places like India and Africa.

The Treasury is due to produce its own assessment of EU membership later this month. It is likely to conclude that the economic effects of Brexit would be negative, and that the short-term risks to Britain’s economy are substantial. Economics is accordingly the Remain campaign’s strongest card—provided the campaigners manage to play it well.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21696517-most-estimates-lost-income-are-small-risk-bigger-losses-large-economic/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Defence industry

Take your partners

Defence firms look to joint ventures to boost exports and profits

Apr 9th 2016 | BARROW-IN-FURNESS AND STEVENAGE | From the print edition

Astutes prepare to go out and down

INSIDE the Devonshire Dock Hall in Barrow-in-Furness, the mottled black fin of Britain’s latest nuclear-powered submarine is just discernible above a mass of scaffolding. Seven storeys high and about 100 metres long, HMS Audacious, the fourth in the Astute class of attack submarines, is expected to emerge from the shed for sea trials early next year.

At around £1 billion ($1.4 billion) apiece, these are among the most advanced weapons systems in the world, capable of firing cruise missiles and torpedoes out of their four silos. The subs are so stealthy, their makers claim, that one could pass five metres behind a diver underwater unnoticed. The secret is in the propulsion system, the only part of the boat entirely sheathed in tarpaulin to keep it from prying eyes.

The seventh, and last, such boat should be finished in around 2020. Then BAE Systems, the biggest defence contractor in Britain and the world’s third-largest, expects to move straight into producing the four new submarines that will carry Britain’s Trident missile nuclear deterrent. The government has set aside £41 billion to develop them: it will be, by some way, the country’s most expensive defence procurement ever, and one of its biggest construction programmes of any kind. Already BAE Systems has engineers looking at the successor to the Astute class.

Unsurprisingly, BAE is enjoying the continuity at Barrow, boosted by the government’s renewed pledge to keep defence spending at 2% of GDP. Not every British defence contractor is doing so well.

Rolls-Royce, which makes the reactors for the nuclear submarines, among many other things, has issued five profit warnings in 20 months. Defence still makes up a sixth of its business, down from one-half during the cold war, and Rolls blames its woes partly on falling demand for military-jet engines and other equipment. QinetiQ, a defence-aviation testing agency, is another firm that has suffered. It almost ran out of cash in 2010 when military spending began to drop. Defence budgets are beginning to recover now, but as its companies search for models to sustain them in the future, Britain’s aerospace and defence industry—with a turnover of £56 billion that makes it the world’s second-largest—is being reshaped.

At one end of the spectrum BAE Systems relies almost entirely on big orders from a few sources: America’s Department of Defence (DoD), by far the world’s largest defence spender with some $585 billion requested by the president for this year; Britain’s Ministry of Defence (MoD), the fifth-biggest spender; and several others, principally Saudi Arabia, with the third-largest budget. Over one-third of BAE’s buoyant group sales in 2015 came from its American subsidiary, which operates under a Special Security Agreement there and has privileged access to the market. The contract to supply Typhoon and Hawk aircraft to Saudi Arabia generated almost as much in sales for BAE as Britain’s MoD.

At the other end are companies such as MBDA, a quintessentially pan-European firm that makes missiles. MBDA was born of the merger in 1996 between a division of BAE and a French company, to which German and Italian outfits were later added. Headquartered in Stevenage, it builds missiles in the four countries of its constituent parts. MBDA argues that it achieves economies by concentrating different functions—research or testing, for example—at one or other of its sites. Because it lacks BAE’s special status in America it has failed to make headway in that notoriously closed market. This has forced it to be more nimble in others. With a product range that includes the Brimstone missile used by British forces against Islamic State, MBDA sells strongly in Europe. In 2015, for the first time, it won more orders elsewhere.

In between BAE Systems and MBDA lies unhappier territory. Rolls is neither a niche manufacturer like the missile-maker nor, as its managers admit, big enough to compete in military engines against larger rivals such as America’s GE and Pratt & Whitney. Rolls plans to increase all engine production by 50% over the next five years, but efforts to expand are burdening its balance-sheet and using up its cashflow. As the British government has retained a controlling “golden share” in BAE, Rolls and QinetiQ, it is hard for these firms to grow through outright mergers or to raise capital from investors. BAE’s state shareholder did approve its attempted merger in 2012 with EADS (a European conglomerate known today as Airbus) but the deal was scuppered by the German government.

Holding hands

As the cost of weapons escalates—each new military-jet engine costs over $1 billion to develop—even the biggest defence firms are looking at forming alliances. Many will be determined case-by-case depending on the systems involved. Such deals would allow companies to gain scale by pooling resources with other firms, without straining financially or becoming dependent on one product.

The civil business of Rolls has said that it is looking for partners to develop an engine for narrow-bodied aircraft in the 2020s, and such a partnership could be a model for future military projects. BAE points out that its Typhoon fighter jet is a pan-European aircraft produced with Airbus and Finmeccanica of Italy. At an Anglo-French summit in March the governments pledged to spend a further £750m each on a drone project principally between BAE Systems and Dassault Aviation of France. MBDA’s success owes quite a lot to the Anglo-French defence treaty signed in 2010.

Such alliances might also help exports, increasingly Britain’s weakness. Francis Tusa, a defence expert, says that although British defence firms are now “very competitive on cost” compared with their American rivals, this does not help them much elsewhere. The exacting requirements of America’s DoD and Britain’s MoD force suppliers dependent on them to build only top-of-the range equipment that other countries cannot afford to buy.

BAE’s Type 26 frigate, for example, has so far failed to elicit firm global interest and could end up as a very expensive bespoke Royal Navy vessel. “Developing countries are being offered ships at half the price and they are much better than half as good,” says Mr Tusa. Defence firms in Germany and France now export more than British ones and to a wider spread of customers. But if British companies come to see their European counterparts more as partners than as rivals, that could change.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21696551-defence-firms-look-joint-ventures-boost-exports-and-profits-take-your-partners/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Domestic abuse

Violence in the shires

Prosecutions for domestic violence are becoming more common

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



THE village of Ambridge provides a bucolic escape for the 4.8m people who tune in to “The Archers”, Radio 4’s much-loved (and derided) soap opera. The show was created in 1950 to tell “an everyday story of country folk”, a mission from which it rarely strays. Typical fare includes discussions about a farm’s organic accreditation and the best way to milk cows, as well as the ups and downs in the villagers’ private lives. The latest story line—a two-year-long tale of domestic abuse, culminating on April 3rd in a revenge stabbing—has shocked listeners.

Some argue that although the programme has handled the issue of domestic abuse “sensitively”, the bloody retribution meted out by its victim is over the top. They may have a point: few instances of domestic abuse end with the victim taking revenge on the perpetrator, and women are far more likely to be killed or injured by their partners than the other way round. Helen Titchener was in a minority when she stabbed her ghastly husband in Ambridge.

Charities and lawyers will listen to future developments with interest. Few cases of domestic abuse reach the courts, especially given the number of people who report being victims. According to the 2015 Crime Survey for England and Wales, more than one in four women and one in ten men have known domestic abuse as adults. Such behaviour plays a part in a third of all recorded assaults involving injuries.

But prosecutions are becoming more common. In 2014-15 almost 93,000 people were taken to court for offences related to domestic violence, a 38% increase since 2008-09. Rates of domestic violence remained stable over the period, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Its figures fail to show a growth in the number of repeat crimes, though, says Jude Towers of Lancaster University. The ONS stops counting after five incidents involving the same victim so as to reduce spikes in the annual figures.

Most agree that the rise in prosecutions is a result of the police taking greater interest in such crimes. But, despite improvements, “the police response is still woefully inadequate,” says Sandra Horley, the chief executive of Refuge, a domestic-abuse charity. “Every day we hear about police officers failing women experiencing domestic abuse,” she adds.

Campaigners say that shows such as “The Archers” encourage victims to come forward. Indeed, there was a 17% increase in the number of calls to the National Domestic Violence Helpline in February. Fans of the programme—who have raised more than £100,000 ($140,870) for Refuge—will be hoping that Rob Titchener, its villain, is among the three-quarters of those prosecuted who end up with a conviction. That might just persuade them to forgive the scriptwriters for the unwelcome disruption to their rural idyll.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21696557-prosecutions-domestic-violence-are-becoming-more-common-violence-shires/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The housing crisis

Lords a-leaping

More problems for the prime minister as the Lords prepares to fight his housing bill

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

More bricks and mortar, please

AS IF David Cameron did not have enough on his plate between steel-plant closures and financial disclosures (see here and here), there is trouble brewing in the House of Lords over his government’s controversial housing and planning bill. Peers from across the political spectrum are poised to force changes when it begins its report stage in the upper chamber on April 11th. The government’s time frame is tight—it wants the bill settled before the Queen’s Speech on May 18th—and its desire to avoid negative headlines before the EU referendum on June 23rd makes its opponents confident that they will be able to extract concessions.

The bill is part of the government’s continued attempt to get more people on to the home-owning ladder and out of social housing, which Tory leaders think breeds Labour voters and dependency on the state. Critics say the bill is a disaster. It provides a massive redistribution of government resources away from the poor to those on higher pay, says Lord Kerslake, a former head of the civil service and one of the bill’s main opponents.

At the heart of the legislation is the “right to buy”, a totemic Thatcherite policy from the 1980s that allowed tenants in council housing to buy their homes at a discount to market rates. The plan was revived in 2012 and the bill now extends it to housing-association tenants. Their purchases under “right to buy” would be funded through the sale of high-value council houses as they become vacant.

The Local Government Association (LGA), which represents 371 councils across England and Wales, predicts that councils will be forced to sell off 88,000 homes. The measure will affect some of them disproportionately: fully 97% of council homes in Kensington and Chelsea in London, for instance, would be subject to sale when their current tenants leave, says Shelter, a housing charity.

The sales might raise up to £2.2 billion ($3.1 billion), less than half the £4.5 billion the government estimated it needed to fund the “right to buy” programme, warns the Chartered Institute of Housing. The measures may also add over £200m to the housing-benefits bill, the LGA says, as more people will have to be lodged at taxpayers’ expense in private rental housing. Many fear it will grow even harder to build new social housing. Selling such homes when more are needed is “like trying to fill a bathtub with the plug out”, says Adam Challis of JLL, a property consultancy.

While “right to buy” may help people who already have secure council or housing-association homes on cheap rents, rebel peers point out that it will do nothing for millions of private renters, or for adults living with their parents because they cannot afford to buy. In February a House of Commons committee called the policy’s funding model into question. “The fundamental success of this policy”, said Clive Betts, the committee’s chairman, “depends not just on whether more tenants come to own their home but on whether more homes are built.” That is not happening. Since 1990 house-building in Britain has been below its historical trend. Scotland is scrapping the “right to buy” this year. Wales intends to do the same.

The other big controversy is over “starter homes”. These are newly built houses purchased for 80% of their market value, with the government contributing the remaining 20%. Even with this discount, Shelter found that a family on average earnings would be unable to afford a “starter home” in more than half of England’s local authorities.

In London buyers can take advantage of the “starter-homes” scheme in conjunction with other programmes. Under “help to buy” the government gives the purchaser a loan, initially interest-free, for up to 40% of the value of the property. Mark Farmer of Cast, a property consultancy, worries that taxpayers’ money is boosting demand among a group of people who cannot necessarily afford to buy. The government is on the hook if there are problems when the interest-free period runs out, interest rates rise or if a market crash pushes the value of the property below the price the buyer paid for it. “It has some parallels with the sub-prime lending that led to the global financial crisis,” he says.

What is more, unless peers are able to force amendments to the bill, “starter homes” will cut into the construction of other forms of affordable housing, some of which are better suited to poorer people. The bill gives precedence to building “starter homes”, requiring them to make up 20% of any new development larger than ten homes. Activists in the Lords want to give local councils the power to decide the proportion of such homes in their area, and also the length of time before they can be sold again at full price. The bill envisages five years; some Lords prefer 15.

Since “right to buy” and “starter homes” were manifesto pledges in the general election of 2015, even optimists in the upper house recognise that it will be hard to amend them radically. Some believe there is more wiggle room on non-manifesto provisions such as “pay to stay”. This measure would force hundreds of thousands of social-housing tenants to pay market rents once they earn more than £30,000 a year. Lord Kerslake also thinks he and his allies can alter measures to end lifetime tenancies in social housing and limit new ones to five years.

Even if the government accepts a raft of amendments for the sake of tranquillity before the EU referendum, these are unlikely to solve the sector’s problems—essentially the shortage of affordable supply. Mr Cameron and George Osborne, the chancellor, continue to insist that Britain has a homeowning crisis, ignoring the housing crisis that actually exists.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21696554-more-problems-prime-minister-lords-prepares-fight-his-housing-bill-lords/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Second homes

To the lighthouse

One seaside town in Cornwall is taking on the out-of-towners

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



“I COULD fill pages remembering one thing after another that made the summer at St Ives the best beginning to a life conceivable,” wrote Virginia Woolf of her childhood summers in Britain’s idyllic south-west. The beauty of St Ives (current population: 11,000) formed the backdrop to some of her best-known works. The artistic fragrance has lingered. Writers and artists still visit. Fancy restaurants cater to their cosmopolitan tastes, and there is a branch of London’s Tate Gallery to stroll through.

One consequence of the views and the artiness is that house prices have shot up, with even parking spots in the town going for £70,000 ($99,000). A quarter of the properties in St Ives are second homes or holiday lets.

The situation has become so tense that local residents are now fighting back. On May 5th, when the town votes in a referendum on a number of local issues, tucked into the ballot will be a particularly controversial question: whether to make it a legal requirement that all new housing in the area must be for principal residences only. The town expects over 1,000 new homes to be built before 2030. If the measure passes, outsiders will still be able to buy existing properties as second homes, but not new ones.

The vote is causing divisions. Some point to the wealth brought in by second-home owners and holiday-makers. Others feel they are destroying the town. “Enough is enough,” says Tim Andrewes, a local councillor, who supports the proposal. He argues that a less wealthy family living in St Ives all year round is likely to spend just as much as a wealthy London family that is there for six weeks.

“Some people here are living on streets where half the houses are empty for more than half the year,” he says. “It affects the sense of community.” It also means that local people with low incomes cannot buy. One resident called it “financial cleansing”. There are nearly 600 households (out of 7,000) on the waiting list for social rented housing.

About 1.6m people in England and Wales (2.8% of the population) own a second home. St Ives is not the first to take action. Lynton and Lynmouth in Devon passed a similar measure in 2013. Seaside towns are idyllic, but only if you can afford them.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21696553-one-seaside-town-cornwall-taking-out-towners-lighthouse/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

Land ahoy!

Despite calls for protectionism, Britain remains strikingly comfortable with free trade

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



ADDRESSING supporters in Manchester on February 19th 1904, Winston Churchill delivered a speech that could easily describe today’s Britain. The young MP warned that victories won by past free-trade campaigners were under threat from “the fashion nowadays to sneer at the Manchester school [of economic liberalism]” that was taking hold in the newspapers and capturing chunks of the political parties. Ministers who should have known better were flip-flopping, he fretted, demanding tariffs just to please their audiences. Referring to a hero of the fight against the protectionist Corn Laws in the 1840s, he warned, “We are met to consider a very momentous question: whether… the statue of Sir Robert Peel is to be pulled down.”

History, Mark Twain observed, does not repeat itself. But it does rhyme. It is hard to read Churchill’s words and not hear their assonance. Once more Britain appears to be questioning the wisdom of the liberal economic credos of its recent past. The impetus is the announcement on March 29th by Tata, an Indian industrial giant, that it cannot afford to save its struggling British steel operations, especially its giant plant in Port Talbot, in south Wales. Tata blamed weak demand and high energy prices—but especially competition from cheap Chinese imports.

As The Economist went to press the government was in talks with potential buyers, which had allayed fears that Port Talbot would have to close entirely. Yet already the news had provoked a cacophony of condemnations of Britain’s free-trade, globalised economic model. Calls for tariffs on Chinese steel and a possible nationalisation of Port Talbot emanated not just from the hard-left Labour Party leadership but also from Conservative MPs and even (privately) some ministers. “Tata steel could spell the end for Britain’s love affair with the free market” and “Britain’s free market economy isn’t working”, ran two typical headlines.

All of which comes at a time when voters across the West—from the Republican Party in America to Scandinavia—seem to be demanding from their politicians the re-establishment and reinforcement of borders (physical and economic) between countries. In Britain hostility to the EU, itself a proxy for economic dislocation and immigration, is on the march before the June referendum. Once more the “signs of the weather” (as Churchill put it) are ominous for free traders.

Yet some perspective is warranted. The country has lived through such ruckuses in the past: during the collapse of MG Rover, a British car maker, in 2005, for example; or in 2010, when MPs and unions protested against the takeover of Cadbury, a confectioner, by Kraft, an American food-processing company. For all the chatter about protecting cherished firms and industrial heritage, of public-interest tests and strategic sectors, such moments have not significantly dented Britain’s essentially liberal instincts. That is especially true when Britain is compared with other rich economies.

Consider the polling. An international survey by YouGov in 2015 put net agreement that free trade is good for business at +6% among Americans, +3% among Germans and at -4% among the French. In Britain the figure was +40% (the country was also an optimistic outlier, ahead even of the liberal Scandinavians, on whether trade is good for jobs). A poll by the Pew Research Center found that 65% of Britons support the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Pact, compared with 50% of the French and 39% of Germans.

That openness is evident across British life. The country’s car industry is almost totally foreign owned (Tata has made a great success of Jaguar Land Rover); many of its biggest airports are in Spanish hands; chunks of its energy industry belong to French and Chinese investors; its football clubs make the United Nations look monocultural. Its central bank is run by a Canadian and the London Olympics were organised by an Australian. London’s glitziest property developers are from Qatar and Malaysia and its stock exchange may soon be in German hands. In 2013 the proportion of shares in Britain’s firms owned by foreigners zoomed passed the 50% mark, to almost total public indifference.

The country’s politics reflects this dispassion. For all the hand-wringing over immigration, Britain has spawned only one party that clearly opposes globalisation: the UK Independence Party. That outfit—mild by European or, increasingly, American standards of protectionist populism—went into the general election in 2015 with two seats in Parliament and emerged with one. As for the EU referendum, it is hard to imagine many countries where the Remain and Leave campaigns would, as in Britain, squabble over which outcome would do more to lower trade barriers.

Research suggests that generational rotation will only accentuate these traits. Ipsos MORI, a polling firm, finds young Britons markedly more inclined to free markets than their predecessors at the same age. A YouGov poll in 2014 showed that those aged 18 to 24 were about half as likely as those over 60 to say that foreign ownership of British firms was a bad thing, or to support government interference in foreign takeover bids.

Don’t batten down the hatches

None of this is to say that supporters of an economically open Britain can afford to be complacent. But it does discourage over-reaction to tabloid headlines and short-lived uproars. Britons’ instincts have been forged over centuries as a maritime trading power (that same spirit infuses their language—shipshape, high and dry, the cut of one’s jib) and by a fundamentally benign experience of globalisation and trade. As Churchill said in 1904: “Large views always triumph over small ideas. Broad economic principles always in the end defeat the sharp devices of expediency.”

Correction: In the issue dated March 19th Bagehot said that Blackpool’s economy shrank by 8% between 2010 and 2015. In fact the latest figures, from 2010 to 2014, show that the town’s output (adjusted for national inflation) fell by 3.4%. Sorry.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21696516-despite-calls-protectionism-britain-remains-strikingly-comfortable-free-trade-land/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




The Panama papers: A torrential leak

The reaction in Russia: Nothing to see here

The reaction in Russia: Internship





Articles Sections Next

The Panama papers

A torrential leak

A huge trove of documents has revealed the secrets of offshore business, presaging tougher times for tax havens

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



AS A young man, Ramon Fonseca considered taking holy orders. Instead he became an evangelist for offshore business. Now the law firm he co-founded is at the centre of a global storm, linked—unfairly, he insists—to a multitude of financial sins.

Few had heard of Mr Fonseca’s Panama-based firm, Mossack Fonseca, until April 3rd, when a collective of journalists from 76 countries began publishing stories exposing the hidden wealth of politicians, celebrities and others, based on 11.5m documents leaked from the firm’s database. The “Panama papers” cover a period of almost 40 years, but some are only a few months old. They contain details of thousands of opaque offshore companies, trusts and foundations used by Mossack’s clients. (The firm says it has never been charged with wrongdoing and conducts thorough due diligence on all clients.)



The files had been passed anonymously, in several batches, to Süddeutsche Zeitung, a German newspaper. It shared them with the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, an outfit created by the Centre for Public Integrity, an American charity. The ICIJ has made hay with leaked documents before, including the “Lux Leaks” files, which exposed tax-avoidance deals between multinational firms and Luxembourg’s government. But this leak is the biggest yet (see chart) and the most wounding. Some 140 political figures have links to firms serviced by Mossack, either directly or through family, friends or associates, according to the ICIJ.

Offshore finance has many legitimate uses. But it smells foul to Western voters, who are still angry with bankers and the politicians who seemed to treat them kindly during the financial crisis before imposing austerity on everyone else. And the opacity it offers, particularly through shell companies with nominee owners, is open to abuse by tax evaders, money launderers and corrupt officials looking for somewhere to stash their loot. In his seminal book on tax havens, “Treasure Islands”, Nicholas Shaxson describes offshore finance as “a project of elites against their, and our, societies”.

On April 5th the leak claimed its first big victim. Iceland’s prime minister, Sigmundur David Gunnlaugsson, resigned after it emerged that he had discreetly sold a stake in an offshore firm holding investments in Icelandic banks to his wife. Some 20,000 Icelanders had protested in the streets—a lot in a country of 330,000 people. A smaller scalp produced wry smiles. The head of the Chilean branch of Transparency International, which campaigns against corporate secrecy, resigned after being linked to five firms in tax havens.

There is no mention of Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, in the files. But members of his inner circle play starring roles: for instance, Sergei Roldugin, a close friend and godfather to one of Mr Putin’s daughters, apparently moved $2 billion through a web of offshore entities—not bad for a cellist. Among the investments part-owned by Mr Roldugin are a 12.5% stake in Russia’s largest television-advertising agency, which has never disclosed its ownership, and 3.2% of Bank Rossiya, a firm that American officials have described as the personal bank of Mr Putin. Such revelations appear to support their assertion that he is hugely rich but hides his wealth by parking it with trusted associates. Mr Putin’s spokesman accused the Americans of organising the leak to discredit his boss (see article).

In China, too, the Panama papers were dismissed as a Western plot by Global Times, a party mouthpiece. Censors tried to delete all discussion of them from the Chinese internet. They had plenty of work to do. The files suggest that some of China’s highest-ranking families, including a relative of the president, Xi Jinping, own or have owned secret offshore companies.

Mr Xi’s brother-in-law, Deng Jiagui, a property magnate, was a director of two companies registered in the British Virgin Islands (BVI). According to Bloomberg, a media group, he and his wife, Mr Xi’s older sister, ran businesses worth hundreds of millions of dollars, though the offshore firms were reportedly defunct by the time Mr Xi came to power. Two other members of the country’s top decision-making body, the Standing Committee of the Politburo, also have relatives connected with Mossack firms. One of them is Liu Yunshan, the man in charge of propaganda.

Not all of this will come as a shock in China, where relatives of high-ranking officials are among the country’s most successful business folk. But evidence of covert offshore holdings goes down badly in a country whose president is conducting an anti-corruption drive. And top political families are not the only ones involved. The leaked files suggest that China is Mossack’s largest market. The firm’s Hong Kong office has been its busiest, and it has outposts in eight other Chinese cities. These nine offices set up 29% of all the firms Mossack had on its books at the end of 2015, according to the ICIJ.

Although there is no evidence of illegality, obeying the law is not the only requirement for Chinese officials. Almost all of those involved are Communist Party members, who must abide by the party’s code of conduct. This bans them from registering or investing in companies abroad. So they may have broken rules, if not the law. High-ranking officials in China can also be held responsible for the business dealings of relatives.

A popular use of offshore shell companies is to circumvent sanctions, and the files are studded with examples. Mossack worked with more than 30 people and companies that were at one time or another blacklisted by America’s Treasury, the ICIJ says. These include businesses linked to senior figures in Syria and North Korea.

The law firm reportedly acted as a front for companies linked to Rami Makhlouf, a cousin of Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad. He has long been subject to Western sanctions and was once described in American diplomatic cables as a “poster boy for corruption”. The files reportedly show that in 2011 Mossack partners rejected a recommendation by their compliance team to sever ties to Mr Makhlouf, though they agreed to do so months later. The firm has said it never knowingly allowed anyone connected with rogue regimes to use its companies.

The gossip pages

Mossack also catered to entertainers. The files show that Jackie Chan, an actor, and Pedro Almodóvar, a film director, put business the firm’s way. No large financial leak would be complete these days without a mention of FIFA, football’s governing body, and this one does not disappoint. The files reportedly show that Gianni Infantino, who replaced the disgraced Sepp Blatter as FIFA boss in February, signed off on contracts with businessmen who have since been indicted on bribery charges when he was at UEFA, contrary to indications the European football body had given. Mr Infantino said he is “dismayed” that his “integrity is being doubted”.

The leak has already sparked action: probes have been launched in Australia, Britain and other countries. South African regulators are to scrutinise a firm linked to President Jacob Zuma’s nephew that struck a lucrative oil deal. France has stuck Panama back on its tax blacklist. With so many leads to follow, governments seem barely to know where to start.



The intermediaries that did business with Mossack are likely to receive plenty of scrutiny. The firm dealt with more than 14,000 law firms, banks, incorporation agents and other middlemen to set up its clients’ companies, trusts and foundations, the ICIJ reckons.

Global banks, already hounded and in some cases fined over their links to tax-dodgers and sanctions-busters, should brace for more pain. Around 500 banks registered shell companies with Mossack. HSBC alone reportedly set up or provided financial services to more than 2,000 entities, including a company linked to Mr Makhlouf, called Drex Technologies. A spokesman for the bank said the allegations were “historical” and predate HSBC’s “significant” reforms implemented in recent years.

Governments are not alone in taking an interest. The files will be a boon for corporate investigators looking, say, to revive asset-search cases related to disputes. “Many a trail has gone cold in Panama. This should open new doors,” says David Robertson of K2, a corporate-detective firm. Outfits like his might receive calls from clients hoping to use the leak to their advantage in other ways—for instance, to gain intelligence on rivals’ positions in commodities markets. Some firms route transactions through Panama to keep such information from prying eyes.

The leak will heap pressure on Panama to embrace transparency reforms to which other financial centres have committed. Its government has refused to accept an OECD-led international standard on the exchange of tax information. That could now change, especially if other countries follow France in blacklisting Panama.

Ironically, the leak comes at a time of reformist zeal. Last year Panama’s Supreme Court ordered the arrest of Ricardo Martinelli, president from 2009 to 2014, who has been accused of illegal wiretapping and embezzlement (he has denied the allegations). Panama has been praised for passing a strong anti-money-laundering law last year, though it remains to be seen if this will be rigorously enforced.

The fear in Panama is that such improvements are being ignored in the rush to traduce the country for the actions of one business. “This is a report that speaks of documents of a firm of lawyers, not our financial-services platform,” says one minister. The government has announced a probe of its own, but has also hinted at a vigorous defence. The leak undermines Panamanian sovereignty and its defence of the right to privacy, some harrumph.

The spotlight has also been thrust back on Britain’s overseas territories, which are important cogs in the offshore engine. Of the more than 200,000 firms mentioned in the files, half are domiciled in the BVI. “Panama and the BVI go together like Bonnie and Clyde,” says an offshore lawyer—though he also points out that some of the most watertight corporate secrecy can be found onshore. Shell companies set up in Delaware and Nevada have been linked to frauds and corruption scandals.

The BVI link will add to pressure on Britain’s government to persuade its dependencies (which enjoy financial autonomy) to introduce public registers of corporate ownership, as Britain itself will do later this year. A poll carried out just before the Panama story broke found that 77% of Britons believe David Cameron, their prime minister, has a “moral responsibility” to ensure that Britain’s offshore satellites are “as transparent as possible”. Mr Cameron is feeling the heat directly: he has been forced to clarify his links to an offshore fund set up by his late father, details of which appear in the files.

A louder whistle



The furore over the Mossack documents suggests that leaks will do more than any politician to sink tax havens. As the public mood towards offshore shenanigans hardens, more employees of financial and law firms seem to feel morally compelled to pilfer data and hand it to reporters or governments. Some believe the spate of whistle-blowing since the global financial crisis has helped cool interest in using shell companies; Mossack has closed more than it has opened in recent years (see chart).

The affair is also a triumph for a new model of investigative reporting. The ICIJ enlisted some 400 journalists to help it sift the data dump, which they did using a bespoke search engine. It picked some odd collaborators: in America it chose to work with the Charlotte Observer and Fusion, a news site for millennials, rather than, say, the New York Times. Still, many eyes meant less was missed. And distributed journalism of this kind is almost impossible to censor or stop.

There is much in the 2.6 terabytes of data that is yet to be noticed or revealed. The ICIJ has been drip-feeding stories daily after publishing the initial batch. More revelations were expected after The Economist went to press. And there is plenty more beyond Mossack that might be leaked: the firm has only 5-10% of the global market for shell companies. No wonder that, as one adviser to the wealthy puts it, “We’re now telling clients they have to assume anything they do offshore will become public, and they’ll have to be able to justify it when it does.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21696497-huge-trove-documents-has-revealed-secrets-offshore-business-presaging-tougher/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The reaction in Russia

Nothing to see here

The Mossack Fonseca leak shakes Ukraine more than Russia

Apr 9th 2016 | MOSCOW | From the print edition

Music to his ears

THE Kremlin had warned that an attack was coming. “Comrades are working in accordance with tried and tested schemes,” Vladimir Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said last month, predicting an attempt to “rock the boat” ahead of elections in Russia. But when the Panama papers appeared, revealing a $2 billion trail leading to Mr Putin’s inner circle, the leadership exhaled. “We were expecting more impressive results,” said Mr Peskov. “They have found little new.”

Suggestions of shady dealings in the president’s court neither surprise nor enrage most Russians. Only a few opposition activists came out to protest in central Moscow on April 5th; several were quickly detained. Some 76% of the country believes its authorities are corrupt; 66% say Mr Putin bears significant or full responsibility for such high-level corruption. Yet he remains secure. “Corruption is seen as a fact of life, and the sense that there’s nothing we can do about it is pervasive,” says Maria Lipman, editor of the journal Counterpoint. The latest revelations will do nothing to change those perceptions.

With the help of friendly media, the Kremlin has instead used the leak to reinforce a familiar story of Western meddling. As Lev Gudkov, head of the Levada Centre, an independent pollster, points out, Russian reactions depend almost entirely on the nature of the news coverage.

State-run television networks said little about the Panama papers except to present them as part of an “information war” against Mr Putin, “the curatorial work of the US State Department itself”. Mr Putin’s name, they note, does not appear in the Mossack Fonseca documents. Questions about how the president’s old friend, the cellist Sergei Roldugin, came into such enormous wealth are dismissed as “Putinophobia”. Andrey Kostin, head of the state-run bank VTB, which allegedly made loans to Mr Roldugin through a Cypriot subsidiary, called the notion of Mr Putin’s involvement “bullshit”.

The documents may prove far more damaging for Mr Putin’s counterpart in Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko. A confectionery magnate known as the “Chocolate King”, Mr Poroshenko promised to sell his company, Roshen, after winning the presidency in May 2014. Earlier this year he announced that he had transferred his assets to a blind trust. Instead, the documents indicate, they were moved offshore to the British Virgin Islands.

Legally, Mr Poroshenko may have an explanation. His associates suggest, and some experts agree, that the BVI company created in his name was nothing more than a vehicle for a pre-sale restructuring of Roshen. The documents do not suggest Mr Poroshenko abused his office to enrich himself. The Ukrainian general prosecutor’s office says that so far it “does not see any elements of a crime”.

Politically, though, this is a giant problem for a president who rode a revolution to power promising to clean up his country’s crooked political system. Ukrainian media emphasised that Mr Poroshenko opened his offshore account just as soldiers were being massacred in the battle for Ilovaisk in August 2014. Several reform-minded MPs have called for the creation of a special investigative committee in parliament, while populists are clamouring for Mr Poroshenko’s impeachment. The revelations also did little to help Ukraine’s case in the Netherlands, where voters overwhelmingly rejected a trade deal between the EU and Ukraine in a referendum on April 6th.

The Panama controversy comes at a sensitive moment for Kiev. A governmental crisis has been dragging on for more than a month. Negotiations to form a new coalition in parliament and replace the widely loathed prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, seemed poised for resolution but are now imperilled again. Early parliamentary elections look ever more likely, an outcome that Ukraine’s Western backers have been straining to prevent. “Compared with the government and the parliament, the presidency was an institution that seemed to maintain a relative measure of trust,” writes Svitlana Zalishchuk, a reform-minded MP from Mr Poroshenko’s party. “Now the war of all against all is entering a new and dangerous phase.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21696506-mossack-fonseca-leak-shakes-ukraine-more-russia-russia-finds-little-say-about-panama/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Internship

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

We are seeking a summer intern to write about foreign affairs for The Economist. The internship will last for about three months and will pay £2,000 per month. Anyone is welcome to apply. Applicants should send an original unpublished article of up to 600 words on any issue in international politics or foreign affairs, a c.v. and a cover letter to foreignintern@economist.com. We are looking for originality, wit, crisp writing and clarity of thought. The deadline is May 6th.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21696513-internship/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Global steel: Through the mill

Taxing America Inc: Pfiasco

Industrial overcapacity: Gluts for punishment

An Indian unicorn: Global appetites

Mobile services: Bots, the next frontier

Schumpeter: The grey market





Articles Sections Next

Global steel

Through the mill

It is hard to see a future for many of the world’s high-cost steel producers. Britain’s are no exception

Apr 9th 2016 | PORT TALBOT | From the print edition

Specialisation does it

PORT TALBOT in South Wales is known for producing two things: stardust and steel. Its dazzling crop of home-grown film stars stretch back for generations, including Richard Burton, Sir Anthony Hopkins and Michael Sheen. So do its steelworking families. Christian Reed, a project manager, has worked at the Tata Steel plant—Britain’s biggest—for 11 years. His father worked in the local steel industry for 40 years, and his grandfather was a foundry worker. “It’s very difficult to contemplate losing the plant,” he says. “It would be like losing a member of the family.”

The fate of his job and those of about 4,300 other Port Talbot steelworkers, as well as Britain’s loss-making steel industry in general, have become the most poignant part of the political row that has erupted in Britain since Tata Steel, Britain’s biggest producer, said in late March that it planned to sell or close its operations in the country. Opposition politicians have demanded that the government engineer a rescue, either by erecting high tariff walls against cheap steel imports, as America has done (see article), or by going for some sort of nationalisation, as Italy has attempted with the ill-starred Ilva plant in the heel of the country. On April 5th a potential rescuer, Sanjeev Gupta of Liberty House, a commodity-trading company, said he was interested in buying the Port Talbot business, though he wants plenty of government sweeteners before doing so. He has called Britain’s steel industry “probably the worst in the world.”

There are few parts of the rich world where steel remains a good business, however. Port Talbot’s woes are indicative of a global problem—especially in places where makers of unspecialised steel face competition from cheaper producers.

In the eyes of many, including the Welsh steelworkers, the main bogeyman is China, where steel output has ballooned (see chart). The country has produced more steel in two years than Britain since 1900, according to the International Steel Statistics Bureau, and is indeed awash with excess capacity. But this is part of a phenomenon that extends across the developing world. The OECD, a club mostly of rich countries, reckons that in the four years to 2017 steelmaking capacity will have grown by 50% in the Middle East, 20% in Africa and 10% in Latin America.



Meanwhile, the China-led slowdown in developing economies and low oil prices, which have hit the use of steel in rigs and pipelines, mean that demand is severely lagging supply. Even in India, which is supposed to be the bright spot of the global steel market, demand growth is unlikely to recover to levels in the years before 2010 when it embarked on a debt-fuelled infrastructure construction binge.

Across the developing world, countries are scrambling to offload their excess tonnage on global markets. In absolute terms China accounts for the lion’s share. But as a portion of its steel output, exports were only 12%. Brazil and Russia exported 24% and 29%, respectively, of their production last year, estimates CRU, a consultancy.

The upshot, says Wolfgang Eder, chief executive of Voestalpine, an Austrian steelmaker, is that many other parts of the industry will confront similar problems to those at Port Talbot. It is “a matter of fact”, he says, that costs are too high for commodity steel to be produced competitively in Western Europe. Taxes, energy costs, wages and carbon pricing all put steelmakers at a disadvantage compared with rivals in Russia, Ukraine and Turkey, let alone China. Bitter experience tells Mr Eder there has to be restructuring. In the 1980s a forerunner of Voestalpine went bust and, in the face of competition from eastern Europe, it rebuilt itself into a maker of specialised steel products, such as high-speed rail tracks and aircraft parts. As a result, it has become a rarity: a profitable steel firm.

Although higher steel prices and protectionist tariffs have pushed up share prices of American steelmakers in recent weeks, they are also in trouble. The industry is split: on the one hand, struggling integrated firms (such as loss-making US Steel) which use blast furnaces that forge steel out of iron ore, coal and gas; and on the other more nimble firms with electric-arc furnaces such as Nucor that employ scrap as raw material and rely on electricity for fuel. Such “mini-mills” have lower labour costs and can easily be switched on and off to cope with changes in demand. They are likely to be the future of American steelmaking, says Sarah Macnaughton of CRU.

Mr Gupta of Liberty House says that if he buys the Port Talbot plant from Tata Steel, he would replace its recently installed coal-burning blast furnace with an electric-arc one. He hopes for government support to reduce the labour, energy and environmental costs. His business model is unproven, however. Industry insiders say British electricity costs are prohibitively high; he admits that they are “the crux of the problem.” But he hopes to cut a deal with the government to subsidise his existing renewable-energy projects in support of his industrial ambitions. “Our model is to cover all ends of the business, from energy to downstream steel.”

At any rate, much of the European industry will need a full-scale overhaul in order to survive, reckons Voestalpine’s Mr Eder. He notes that, since 1993, the number of European steelmakers has fallen from 26 to seven. But this, he argues, was a “legal”, rather than a “structural”, consolidation: it failed to cut enough capacity. The problems, he says, will grow as steel used in car bodies, for example, declines in weight.

Mr Eder also worries that governments will interfere with the coming shake-out, mainly because they tend to think that the closing of a blast furnace symbolises the death of a region. Instead, he says, they should offer economic support, re-education and other services to those who lose their jobs—rather than “prolonging the process of dying”.

Surprisingly, Port Talbot’s steelworkers seem to agree: they are distrustful of even temporary nationalisation. They note that, at its height, when it was taken over by the state in 1967, the steelworks employed 18,000 workers. Things have gone downhill almost ever since.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21696556-it-hard-see-future-many-worlds-high-cost-steel-producers-britains-are-no/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Taxing America Inc

Pfiasco

Open warfare breaks out between the White House and America’s tax-shy multinationals

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



IN THE final year of the Obama administration its relationship with big business, always testy, is deteriorating into outright combat. On April 4th Jack Lew, the treasury secretary, announced a renewed crackdown on “inversions”, takeovers that allow American firms to switch their nationality to that of the firm they are buying, in order to escape America’s tax net.

Two days later Pfizer, a pharmaceutical firm, cancelled its $160 billion purchase of Allergan. It would have been the third-biggest takeover in history and was premised on shifting Pfizer’s tax-domicile to Dublin. Howls of outrage were heard from America’s boardrooms and from Allergan investors, who lost $13 billion in 48 hours as its shares sank. European multinationals panicked that they might become the injured bystanders in an American brawl.

The spat makes everyone look bad. It reveals an administration that is capricious and a Republican Party establishment so out of touch that it thinks it should be the mouthpiece for firms that renounce their citizenship. It shows great companies, such as Pfizer, reduced to shifty deal-junkies that are obsessed with financial fixes. It exposes a tax system that is 30 years out of date and obsolete in an age of globalisation. And it highlights a hyper-partisan political system that is incapable of reform—even though, in this case, almost everyone privately agrees what must be done.

The backdrop is that America’s headline corporate-tax rate is far too high. It stands at 39%. That is roughly the same as it was in the late 1980s, but since then other rich countries have slashed their tax rates, to an average of 25%. At the same time big American firms have become more global. Financial markets have become more sophisticated. And the tax code has become far more complex, reaching 4m words.

It is a golden arbitrage opportunity—one that big American firms have become brilliant at exploiting, pushing their bills far below the official rate. The actual tax paid by all corporations was 33% of their domestic pre-tax profits in 2015 (see table). The 50 largest listed firms in America paid global cash tax equivalent to just 24% of their pre-tax profits in 2015. Apple paid a rate of just 18% and Pfizer 27%. Despite having a notionally tougher tax regime, American firms got clobbered far less than their European cousins—the biggest 50 of which paid 35% of their global profits in tax.



How do big American firms manage it? After all, their taxman claims a right to grab a share of their global profits, unlike most European authorities, which aim to tax only the local profits of global firms. Partly by exploiting myriad loopholes: there is a reason why America Inc spends $3 billion a year lobbying politicians. But crafty global tax-planning is vital, too.

Firms shift where they book profits to countries with lower tax rates, and hope that the American tax authorities do not make up the difference. They allocate debt and its associated interest costs to their American subsidiaries, reducing profits there and boosting them elsewhere. They decline to repatriate foreign profits back to America (these are taxed only when they cross the border). At the end of 2015 the accumulated profits of big American firms stranded overseas reached an awe-inspiring $2 trillion. Apple has $92 billion parked abroad. Pfizer has $80 billion.

Tax inversions are the logical culmination of all of these tactics—the ultimate expression of a system that doesn’t work. You buy a firm that is foreign and adopt its tax domicile, which will ideally be somewhere with rock-bottom rates. You book your global profits in that territory, which is especially easy if your firm specialises in intellectual property that has no physical presence, as pharmaceutical and technology firms tend to. Because the merged company is no longer American, it can access the trapped cash and pay it out as dividends and buy-backs to shareholders without incurring American tax.

Since 2012 there have been 20-odd inversions. Allergan is itself the mutant product of two prior deals. The Treasury has tried to crack down before. This time its intervention will be decisive. The test for whether a firm qualifies will be tightened and companies that engage in serial inversions will be barred. The Treasury will also lean on firms that use intercompany loans to allocate debt to the American operations and depress their profits there. The number of pending inversions is small. Most sensible firms had already concluded they were pushing their luck. The odds of new inversions happening are negligible.

The collateral damage may include foreign multinationals, which have $550 billion of net debt allocated to their American operations. Often this is legitimate and has nothing to do with tax. By matching their assets and liabilities in dollars foreigners can hedge against currency risks. It can make sense for them to tap America’s huge bond market. The Treasury’s new ruling on intercompany debt could prompt a giant and expensive rejig of foreign firms’ American balance-sheets.

But the big loss is the chance to rewrite the tax code. The last time it happened was in the 1980s, when Ronald Reagan won cross-party support in Congress for comprehensive reform. The contours of a new settlement are obvious. Slash the headline rate to 25-30%, ditch all of the loopholes and charge American tax only on American profits. That would cut complexity, prod firms to bring profits home and keep tax revenues steady at about 2% of GDP.

Sadly, as the primary campaign demonstrates, the corporate-tax system is not the only thing that has deteriorated. So has the quality of America’s political leaders and the effectiveness of its government. Tax reform will have to wait until after the election, in the hope that a more pragmatic president and Congress are in place. Don’t hold your breath.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21696542-open-warfare-breaks-out-between-white-house-and-americas-tax-shy-multinationals-pfiasco/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Industrial overcapacity

Gluts for punishment

China’s industrial excess goes beyond steel

Apr 9th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition

FIRST a tsunami of steel—next a flood of what? Industrialists all over the place might look nervously at China’s cooling economy and ask that question. The global glut in steel is most alarming because China’s industry dwarfs all others and its mills could easily produce more. Yet other sectors also have existing or looming gluts.

One is coal. Thanks to a massive expansion now under way, China’s coal industry could have 3.3 billion tonnes of excess capacity within two years, reckons Fitch, a rating agency; domestic consumption is less than 4 billion tonnes a year and dropping. Traditionally China has imported, not exported, coal—but that could change. Shenhua Energy, the country’s biggest coal miner, says it might export 10m tonnes soon, up from 1.2m tonnes last year.

Another possibility is aluminium. Chinese smelters push out over half the world’s supply of the metal, thanks to an expansion that goes on despite the current global oversupply. China Hongqiao, the world’s biggest producer, plans to increase capacity to 6m tonnes, up from 5.2m a year ago. The output of Chinese aluminium has sent global prices plunging, hurting rivals. Yet a large part of the cost of making aluminium is in the energy consumed. Just as China might end up wary of exporting coal, it might also shy away from exports which, in effect, also mean exporting energy.

Over-capacity within the oil refining industry also poses a threat beyond China’s shores. Shanghai Securities, a broker, estimates that the country has more than 200m tonnes of overcapacity today. In 2014 Chinese refiners were thought to be running at just two-thirds of capacity. Diesel exports leapt 79% to over 7m in 2015. China National Petroleum Corp, a state energy giant, forecasts that total net exports of all oil products will rise by 31% this year to 25m tonnes.

Chemicals could be another glut candidate. Some 25,000 chemicals firms exist in greater China—though it is worth keeping in mind that statistics on Chinese business are best served with generous pinches of salt. Many of those firms are copycats cranking out commodity chemicals. For most of the 16 main types of chemicals, ranging from purified terephthalic acid (PTA) to acrylic acid, factories have been running well below capacity. Even so, Chinese firms are still increasing their potential output. For example, the capacity for making PTA, a polyester feedstock, has risen by 200% over the past five years. This flood has swept away the profits of Japanese rivals.

Other industries also have grand overcapacity, but most will pose no global threat. China’s state-owned enterprises have many under-used factories that make cars, for example, but these are so shoddy that few people want to buy them abroad.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21696552-chinas-industrial-excess-goes-beyond-steel-gluts-punishment/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

An Indian unicorn

Global appetites

An Indian startup takes a local business model overseas

Apr 9th 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition

You say “tomato”, I say “Zomato”

INDIA has surprisingly few brands that are recognised abroad. Some have been acquired, such as Jaguar, Land Rover orTetley tea, which are all part of the Tata conglomerate. One or two business-facing ones exist, such as Infosys, a firm of technology consultants. But consumer marques from India ring few bells internationally. Newcomers in its ebullient startup scene are mostly focused on the 1.3 billion-strong home market. So Zomato, a restaurant listing service now striving to diversity, counts as an exception. It is trying to take its local business model global. It operates in nearly two dozen countries, though not without some difficulty.

Zomato, which is based near Delhi, started in 2008 as a listing service for local eateries. Restaurateurs who barely know how to upload pictures or scan menus let the firm do it for them. Its staff, known modishly as “Zomans”, update this information by visiting each joint at least every three months. Although that information is painstaking to gather, it attracts foodies and in turn restaurants that are eager to advertise. The result is a business with mouth-watering margins.

Similar specialist listings and review sites exist worldwide. TripAdvisor, which serves tourists, does something similar but relies on customers reviews. Many others are locally minded, just like the restaurants they cater to. Zomato has decided that going global is a better bet. Since 2012 it has expanded to the United Arab Emirates (UAE), New Zealand, Poland, Turkey, the Philippines, America and beyond.

Few other Indian ventures go down this route. One reason for Zomato’s overseas push was, somewhat ironically, its limited domestic market, says Deepinder Goyal, one of the firm’s founders. India has relatively few restaurants and most of those are cheap: residents of Lisbon spend twice as much as those in Delhi on eating out, even though the Indian capital is 20 times more populous.

Investors, including Temasek, a Singaporean fund, smacked their lips at the strategy and have funnelled $225m to Zomato, valuing it at roughly $1 billion. After acquisitions abroad, India accounts for barely a third (and falling) of Zomato’s revenue, which is reported to have reached $30m in 2015. Among foodies, at least, the upstart has potential to become a global brand.

Some air has escaped the Zomato soufflé, however. In October it sacked around 10% of its global workforce, which now numbers around 2,200. Much of the slicing happened in America, where the firm had spent over $50m to acquire and rebrand Urbanspoon, a rival based in Seattle. A pricier workforce and savvier restaurant marketing staff made the “feet on the street” approach unviable in America. Other foreign acquisitions also seem to have flopped and no others are planned.

Mr Goyal claims the retrenchment is merely a pause for breath. It also reflects a more sober funding environment for Indian startups, which can no longer raise investments without showing at least a path to profits. The business is looking for ways to diversify, providing more services to its existing crop of restaurants. In India, the UAE and the Philippines it now offers a food-ordering app, which allows punters to order straight from restaurants.

But this is a fiddly business to get right. Rivals abound, such as FoodPanda, a delivery-only service backed by Rocket Internet, a startup foundry. Venture capitalists who have financed some 800 food-related outfits in India are happy to subsidise losses as long as their companies gain market share. Discounts are offered willy-nilly to diners, sapping profits for all. And in India at least, Zomato’s execution is far from flawless: order through its app and you can expect several calls from the restaurant before dinner arrives—almost as tiresome as cooking.

Startups focused on logistics offer a smoother experience, albeit one with slimmer margins. Zomato’s bosses have grander goals: to create a back office for restaurants worldwide and to design, among other things, table-booking gizmos and terminals to compute bills. That shows gumption, but a switch from dealing with consumers to focusing on technology would not be easy. Perfecting the recipe in its main business should be the priority instead.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21696558-indian-startup-takes-local-business-model-overseas-global-appetites/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Mobile services

Bots, the next frontier

The market for apps is maturing. Now one for text-based services, or chatbots, looks poised to take off

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

App exterminators

“YOU are a developer and you’ve just spent two weeks writing this amazing app. What is your dream? Your dream is to get it in front of every iPhone user.” That was how Steve Jobs, then Apple’s boss, introduced an online shop for smartphone apps eight years ago. At first few paid it much heed, but it launched one of the fastest-growing software markets ever. Since then over 100 billion apps have been downloaded, generating $40 billion in revenues for developers and billions more in subscriptions and other fees.

At a conference on April 12th in San Francisco, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s boss, is expected to make a similar announcement. He will probably unveil an online shop and coding tools for “chatbots”. These are text-based services which let users complete tasks such as checking news, organising meetings, ordering food or booking a flight by sending short messages. Bots are usually powered by artificial intelligence (hence the name, as in “robot”), but may also rely on humans. Many in the technology industry hope that Facebook’s event will mark the beginning of another fast-growing, multi-billion-dollar software economy. Are bots the new apps?

The timing looks right, because smartphone software is in flux. Download numbers are still growing, but the app economy is clearly maturing. “The dream of the independent developer building a business in the app store is over,” suggests Activate, a consultancy. The 20 most successful developers grab nearly half of all revenues on Apple’s app store. Building apps and promoting them is getting more costly. Meanwhile, users’ enthusiasm is waning, as they find downloading apps and navigating between them a hassle. A quarter of all downloaded apps are abandoned after a single use.



Only instant messaging bucks the trend. Over 2.5 billion people have at least one messaging app installed, with Facebook Messenger and WhatsApp, which is also owned by Facebook, leading the pack (see chart). Within a couple of years, says Activate, that will reach 3.6 billion, about half of humanity. Many teenagers now spend more time on smartphones sending instant messages than perusing social networks. WhatsApp users average nearly 200 minutes each week using the service.

Talking out of your bot

As services based on artificial intelligence improve, they need a way to talk to real people. Chatbots are one option. At a conference on March 30th Microsoft showed off several prototypes. It will be a while before anyone trusts such services, however. A few days earlier one of Microsoft’s bots, “Tay”, designed to impersonate a millennial, started parroting racist language it had learned from users on Twitter. “Tay” had to be sent to her digital room.

As a result of these various developments, a new software ecosystem has started to emerge. Text-based services have been around since the dawn of internet time, but the birth of the bot economy can be dated to June last year, when Telegram, a messaging app with Russian origins and more than 100m users, launched a bot platform and a “bot store”. It now counts thousands of bots, such as news alerts from media organisations, or feeds that link to football videos or porn.

A few dozens startups exist. Some provide tools: Chatfuel is a web-based offering that lets users build bots for Telegram. Others offer specialised services: Digit allows users to interact with their bank accounts and find ways to save money; Pana is an online travel agency that takes text messages and turns them into bookings. MeeKan sets up meetings for users of Slack, a popular corporate-messaging service (now valued at nearly $4 billion).

Then there are firms which want to be the foundation for other services. Assist aims to be the equivalent of Google’s search box—to find bots. Another firm, Operator, hopes to become the Amazon of bot-commerce: when a shopper requests, for example, certain sports shoes, its system can contact a salesperson in a nearby shop or get one of its own “experts” to handle the order. Robin Chan, Operator’s boss, talks of creating a virtuous cycle of more buyers attracting more businesses, which will in turn draw in more buyers.

The app economy grew quickly only after Apple and then Google became enthusiastic champions. The bot economy will also need industry leaders, and Microsoft and Facebook look eager to play the role. Most smartphones are powered by operating systems controlled either by Apple or Google. The bot market, by contrast, is unconquered territory. At its conference, Microsoft also introduced tools to create clever new services. Facebook is expected to open its messaging platform to all sorts of bots (users can already chat with a selected few, including one impersonating Miss Piggy of the Muppets) and launch an online shop which will list the services.

Given the drawbacks of apps, there should be plenty of demand for bots, says Michael Vakulenko of VisionMobile, a market-research firm. Much like web pages, they live on servers, not a user’s device, meaning they are easier to create and update. This is likely to make them attractive to businesses which have shied away from developing their own apps, such as restaurants and shops.

Users should find bots smoother to use, which explains another of their monikers: “invisible apps”. Installation takes seconds; switching between bots does not involve tapping on another app icon; and talking to bots may be more appealing than dealing with a customer-support agent of a bank or airline, for example.

No guarantee exists, however, that the bot economy will be as successful as the app one, which has created 3.3m jobs just in America and Europe, according to the Progressive Policy Institute, a think-tank. The economics for developers are not obviously attractive: if bots are easier to develop, that means more competition. Consumers could, again, be overwhelmed by the cornucopia of services and ways of interacting with them. And designing good text-based interfaces can be tricky. After launching the first version for Slack, Matty Mariansky, a co-founder of MeeKan, was surprised by the many different ways users tried to communicate with his bot. He has since hired dedicated script writers, who have come up with more than 2,000 sentences to handle a meeting request.

The popularity of messaging apps suggests people will happily talk to bots. But much will depend on “killer bots”—hugely popular services that work best in the form of bots. Toby Coppel of Mosaic Ventures, a venture-capital firm, sees health care as a promising market. Bots could deal with routine ailments and send difficult ones to a doctor. Ted Livingston, the founder of Kik, another messaging app, which launched a “bot shop” on April 5th, expects “instant interaction” to dominate. He predicts businesses won’t just have phone numbers and web pages, but bots too. Restaurants could take orders via instant message—as some do already in China.

As with apps, bots will need much experimentation to find their place. That will, in turn, depend on how well providers manage their platforms. Telegram lets developers do pretty much what they want (although it has shut down chat channels related to Islamic State). Microsoft has promised to be as open as possible. Developers and investors have their doubts about Facebook, given its chequered history: it made life difficult for developers of applications for its website.

There will still be an app for that

Microsoft, Facebook and others will also have to deal with Apple and Google, both of which are laggards in messaging and bots. They could try to get ahead, for instance by attracting developers with their widely used payment systems. Or they might try something entirely new, says Benedict Evans of Andreessen Horowitz, another venture-capital firm. One possibility would be to allow bots to show up on a smartphone’s notification panel.

Still, there will soon be “a bot for that”, to paraphrase Apple’s iconic slogan which suggests that an app exists for everything. Yet bots, unlike the Daleks of Dr Who fame (pictured), won’t try to take over the world. They will be happy to co-exist on people’s smartphones with websites, apps and other things yet to be invented. The mobile world will keep changing, but will always be a mixed affair.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21696477-market-apps-maturing-now-one-text-based-services-or-chatbots-looks-poised/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

The grey market

Older consumers will reshape the business landscape

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



IN 1965 Diana Vreeland, the editor-in-chief of Vogue, coined a phrase “youth-quake” to describe how baby-boomers were shaking up popular culture. Today the developed world is in the early stages of a “grey-quake”. Those over 60 constitute the fastest-growing group in the populations of rich countries, with their number set to increase by more than a third by 2030, from 164m to 222m. Older consumers are also the richest thanks to house-price inflation and generous pensions. The over-60s currently spend some $4 trillion a year and that number will only grow.

Yet companies have been relatively slow to focus on this expanding market—certainly slower than they were to attend to the youth-quake. The Boston Consulting Group (BCG) calculates that less than 15% of firms have developed a business strategy focused on the elderly. The Economist Intelligence Unit, a sister organisation to The Economist, found that only 31% of firms it polled did take into account increased longevity when making plans for sales and marketing.

One reason for this tardiness is that young people dominate marketing departments and think that the best place for the old is out of sight and mind. Germaine Greer, a feminist, speaks for her generation, as usual, when she says that “just because I’m over 60 nobody wants to sell to me.” A study by fast.Map, a marketer, and Involve Millennium, a consultant, found 68% of British 65-74-year-olds “don’t relate” to advertising that they see on television.

But the biggest reason is that oldies are such slippery customers. The definition of what it means to be “old” is complicated and dynamic. Sixty-five-year-olds are not the same as 85-year-olds. Age affects people in different ways: some fade early while others march on. Class divisions are more marked now than for previous generations of retirees: the winners, sitting on suburban mansions and defined-benefit pensions, cannot spend their money fast enough, while losers go cap in hand to charities (31% of working-age Americans don’t have a pension or savings, according to the Federal Reserve). Most greying baby-boomers in the rich world are in denial about ageing: 61% say that they feel at least nine years younger than their chronological age.

The surest way of alienating older consumers is to treat them as old. When Procter & Gamble, a consumer-goods company, repackaged some of its dental products as “selected for aged fifty-plus consumers”, it saw sales plunge. Bridgestone blundered by promoting a new line of golf cubs as one for pensioners, producing poor sales.

Yet change is in the air. Some industries such as health care and automobiles have been thinking about the grey market for a while. Others such as retailing and consumer goods started paying attention more recently. Now comes the silver rush. A report by the McKinsey Global Institute points out that older consumers are one of the few engines of growth in an otherwise sluggish global economy. The emerging-market boom is slowing in some countries, notably China, and turning into a bust in others, notably Brazil. Millennials suffer from the twin burdens of student debt (especially in America) and the lingering effects of the 2008 financial crisis. They are starting families and buying houses later than their parents, if at all. MGI calculates that pensioners in the rich world spend an average of $39,000 on consumption compared with $29,500 for the 30-44 age group. The old are becoming the new new thing.

Some firms are trying to understand older people better. Kimberley-Clark, a maker of consumer products, has built a mock-up of what a senior-friendly shop might look like in the future. Ford has created a “third-age suit” for car designers to wear to help them understand the needs of older people: the suit thickens the waist, stiffens the joints and makes movement more cumbersome. Thick gloves reduce the sense of touch and yellow-tinted goggles simulate eye cataracts. BCG research on older people suggests they are less eager to acquire material possessions than preceding generations and much keener to acquire experience, particularly through travel and study.

Understanding is giving birth to new products and business models. NTT DoCoMo not only produced a phone with large keys and a big display screen. It also redesigned it marketing, promoting the new phones during bus tours for pensioners and providing classes in shops to explain the ins-and-outs of apps. Electronics makers are producing devices that are designed specifically for old people: for example, Independa manufactures a monitor that sends an alert if something untoward happens, making it easier for the frail elderly to stay in their own homes (“age in place”) rather than move to nursing homes.

Companies are also mastering the art of discretion—addressing older people, but not too explicitly. Retailers are surreptitiously lowering shelves and putting in carpets to make it harder to slip. Package-goods firms are printing larger typefaces and using more white space. Kimberley-Clark has overhauled its Depend brand of adult nappies to make them more like regular underwear. Sabi, a design company, now sells walking canes in bright colours. Car firms don’t make a song and dance about the fact that old people with stiff necks and fading vision will benefit disproportionately from self-parking cars.

One foot in the gravy

Yet this is only the early stages of a revolution. Baby-boomers have spent their lives making noise and demanding attention. They are not going to stop now. They will be the biggest and richest group of pensioners in history. They will also be the longest lived: many will spend more time in retirement than they did working. The baby-boomers have changed everything they have touched since their teenage years, leaving behind them a trail of inventions, from pop culture to two-career families. Retirement is next on the list.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21696539-older-consumers-will-reshape-business-landscape-grey-market/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Brazilian banks: Defying gravity

Buttonwood: Betraying the promise

India’s GDP data: The elephant in the stats

Migrant workers in the UAE: Wages of chagrin

Structural reform: Don’t stop believing

Tax amnesties: Making crime pay

Free exchange: Dumping and tub-thumping

Free exchange: Marjorie Deane internships





Articles Sections Next

Brazilian banks

Defying gravity

Brazil’s banks have shrugged off the country’s recession—for now

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



IT LOOKS like a bad joke: the world’s fastest man promoting a bank in the world’s fastest-shrinking big economy. Yet the use of Usain Bolt’s image on posters for Banco Original, a five-year-old Brazilian bank, is apt in a way. In 2015 Original raced ahead at a clip worthy of Mr Bolt: profits increased by half compared with the previous year, to 111m reais ($30m). Its loan book grew by two-thirds, to 4.25 billion reais, even as Brazil’s economy shrivelled by 3.8%.

Original’s lightning loan-growth stands out. Demand for credit has sagged as the worst recession since the 1930s deprives Brazilian businesses of customers and workers of income or, worse, jobs. With non-performing loans (NPLs) on the rise, banks think twice before lending. After a decade of expansion, outstanding credit barely budged last year; in real (ie, inflation-adjusted) terms it contracted.

But look at Brazilian banks’ bottom lines, and most, like Original, have had a remarkably good crisis so far. Out of 180-odd institutions monitored by the central bank only 25, most of them small, posted losses in 2015. In the year to September the banking sector as a whole (excluding state-owned development banks) raked in net profits of 85 billion reais, up from 66 billion reais in 2014 (see chart 1). Return on equity averaged 15%, down from more than 20% in the mid-2000s, when Brazil prospered on the back of a commodity boom, but better than in the preceding couple of years.



This seems to fly in the face of financial aerodynamics, much as Mr Bolt’s towering figure (too tall for a sprinter, apparently) defies physics on the track. Part of the explanation is that lower loan volumes have been offset by higher interest margins (the difference between the rates banks pay on deposits and those they charge on loans). These have jumped as the central bank has lifted its benchmark SELIC rate by seven percentage points since 2013, to 14.25%, in an effort to curb inflation, currently around 10%. The average price of credit hit a high of 32% a year in October. As rich-world banks bewail negative rates, their Brazilian peers enjoy real returns of around 5% on government bonds, which make up a quarter of their assets, according to José Perez-Gorozpe of Standard & Poor’s, a rating agency.

But Brazilian bankers have been sensible as well as lucky. The industry drew the right lessons from a formative crisis in 1995-98, says Ivan de Souza of Strategy&, a consultancy. Back then distressed loans from failing institutions, many of them state-owned, were hived off into a government-run bad bank and the good bits sold to stronger private-sector rivals. The cleansed system that emerged was more concentrated: today the five biggest banks account for three-quarters of all loans. It was also more conservative, partly because banks must set aside hefty provisions for delinquent loans (at present, 180% of their value). When the global financial crisis struck, only one big lender, Unibanco, got into trouble, from trading losses. (It subsequently merged with a competitor, Itaú, creating Latin America’s biggest bank by market capitalisation.)

In the aftermath of that crisis Brazil’s left-wing government kept subsidised credit flowing through its two retail giants, Banco do Brasil and Caixa Econômica Federal, and the national development bank, BNDES. Rather than compete on price, rivals in the private sector focused on their own asset quality. When car loans began to sour in 2011, hinting at trouble ahead, they shifted towards less risky borrowers and safer assets, such as mortgages (nearly all for first homes, with loan-to-value ratios below 60%) and payroll loans (serviced directly from salaries, predominantly of unsackable public-sector employees). To preserve profits, the private sector let the state-owned banks chip away at its market share, which declined from two-thirds in 2008 to just 45% last year.

Meanwhile banks are putting more emphasis on less volatile, fee-based services, such as insurance and credit cards. A host of measures from voluntary redundancies to sharing ATMs has helped to contain costs. Heavy investment in technology—22 billion reais in 2014 alone—has shunted more than half of transactions online. This is reducing banks’ dependence on costly branches, which are required by law to employ at least two armed guards: last year the sector spent 9 billion reais just on physical security. Banco Original dispenses with bricks and mortar altogether, plumping instead for a digital-only service.

Relative prudence and decent management will, observers agree, help Brazil avert a banking crisis of the sort that befell other struggling economies (think Spain or Greece). Fewer than ten tiddlers have folded—chiefly as a result of fraud. Roughly 70% of loans are funded with deposits. The likelihood of a run on these is a very low: high inflation makes mattress-stuffing costly for Brazilian savers, who also cannot easily invest abroad. The system’s overall capital buffer, currently 15.8% of risk-weighted assets, is well clear of the 11% regulatory minimum.

Most private-sector banks are on course to meet the stricter “Basel 3” capital standards, which come into full effect in 2019. Public ones will have a harder time. They generate half the earnings of Itaú and Bradesco from comparable risk-weighted assets, since they charge lower interest rates (admittedly, their NPLs are also lower, since cheap loans are easier to service). They, too, have begun reining in credit (see chart 2). Nonetheless, J.P. Morgan, an investment bank, reckons that Banco do Brasil (BB), Caixa and BNDES will need to raise 56 billion reais, or 0.9% of GDP, of extra capital.



With a budget deficit of 10.7% of GDP, the government cannot afford to recapitalise the state-owned banks. That makes President Dilma Rousseff’s recent noises about getting BNDES to pump out more subsidised credit all the more alarming. The idea appeals to her left-wing base, whose support she needs to fend off looming impeachment by Congress (over, of all things, failing to make certain payments to state-owned banks on time). Most economists think earmarked loans merely crowd out private investment and force the SELIC much higher than it need be, since the benchmark rate only affects unsubsidised credit, currently just half of the total.

At least Caixa and BB are undertaking (timid) capital-preserving measures. In March BB decided to return just 25% of profits to shareholders, instead of the usual 40%. On March 24th Caixa raised the interest rate it charges on mortgages. There is talk of spinning off its insurance business.

Profits are expected to dip across the industry this year. Natalia Corfield of J.P. Morgan warns that with GDP doomed to shrink by another 4% or so in 2016, delinquent loans will take more than the usual 11-17 months to reach a peak, requiring more costly provisions for longer. With the exception of Bradesco, whose pending acquisition of HSBC’s Brazilian retail business may cut the combined entity’s costs by 30%, banks will struggle to find more savings. And with no more rate hikes on the horizon, interest margins will remain flat at best. Even Brazil’s well-run lenders cannot defy the laws of finance for ever.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21696547-brazils-banks-have-shrugged-countrys-recessionfor-now-defying-gravity/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

Betraying the promise

America’s Congress has allowed a pension-insurance scheme to become dangerously underfunded

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



MANY workers depend on their employers for their retirement income. But, for defined-benefit schemes, this is an explicit bet that their employer will still be around several decades later: quite a gamble. So governments in Britain and America have set up insurance schemes designed to protect workers against the risk that their companies go bust. These bodies, Britain’s Pension Protection Fund (PPF) and America’s Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), are funded by levies on employers.

Now that Tata Steel’s loss-making British operations are up for sale, the chances are that the company’s pension fund will end up in the PPF’s clutches before too long. Buyers are likely to cherry-pick the steel company’s assets, which may leave the scheme without a viable sponsor—contributions into the fund were £155m ($219m) in the most recent financial year. And because the scheme is a legacy of the old nationalised British Steel, it is huge, relative to the existing business: its assets are almost £14 billion compared with annual turnover of just £8.1 billion at Tata Steel’s European operations.

Fortunately, the scheme is pretty well-funded, thanks to a policy of buying inflation-linked government bonds to match its liabilities closely. As of March 2015 it had a deficit of £485m (or 3% of assets). That would still be a lot for a private buyer to agree to fund. But it is not that big a burden for the PPF, which had a surplus of £3.6 billion at the time of its last report.

Things don’t look quite as healthy over at the PBGC, which has been around for much longer. As of its 2015 report it had total assets of $87.7 billion and liabilities of $164 billion—a deficit of $76.3 billion, a record (see chart). The big problem is the multi-employer bit of the PBGC’s responsibilities, where the deficit is $52.3 billion.

Multi-employer schemes cover industries such as mining and trucking, in which a number of companies contribute to a collective pot. As the industry shrinks and individual employers go bust, the financial position of such schemes deteriorates. They end up in the arms of the PBGC when they run out of money to pay benefits (normally, when a single company goes out of business, there are enough assets to cover most of the liabilities). So when a multi-employer failure occurs, the PBGC’s liability is accordingly huge. It makes provision on its balance-sheet for funds that it expects to run dry over the next decade. But Congress has provided for the PBGC to get a levy of only $27 per employee per year. That adds up to an annual payment of around $270m, woefully inadequate to cover a $52 billion liability.

On March 31st the PBGC warned that it will require significantly higher premiums to keep its multi-employer scheme running. And last year it said, with respect to the scheme, that “the risk of insolvency rises over time, to exceed 50% in 2025.” It added that the risk increases to more than 90% within 20 years. “When the programme becomes insolvent, PBGC will be unable to provide financial assistance to pay guaranteed benefits in insolvent plans,” it concluded.

The PPF is in a much stronger financial position because it has been better funded. But the fundamental problem for such insurance schemes is the changing nature of industry and of the type of pensions promised by employers. Defined-benefit promises, where the pension is linked to a worker’s final salary, are the most expensive for companies to fund. They were the norm in the 1960s and 1970s when developed economies had a much bigger focus on heavy (and unionised) industry. Those sectors have now shrunk in size but they still must bear the legacy cost of the pensions promised to former workers. British Steel’s pension fund has fewer than 17,000 working members but more than 86,000 claiming retirement benefits.

Meanwhile, the businesses that have emerged in the past 20 years have tended to be non-unionised and to offer defined-contribution pensions, in which retirement income is not guaranteed by the employer. Such schemes are not part of the PGBC or the PPF; there is no promise for an insurance scheme to back. So there are no new companies to pay the levy; an ever-smaller number of employers are funding a huge historic liability.

Congress needs to pull its finger out. The PBGC can hardly cut benefits any further: a worker with 30 years’ service in a multi-employer scheme will get less than $13,000 a year, with no inflation protection. If Congress doesn’t want to charge employers more, it should fund the PBGC directly. Setting up an insurance scheme, and then failing to fund it adequately, is a betrayal of its constituents.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21696540-americas-congress-has-allowed-pension-insurance-scheme-become-dangerously/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

India’s GDP data

The elephant in the stats

Few economists wholeheartedly believe India’s stellar growth rate

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



GOVERNMENT statisticians shun the limelight, which only ever finds them when things go awry. So it is with India’s national bean counters, who are struggling to convince the world that an economy with idle factories, sagging exports and ailing banks grew by 7.5% in 2015, as their models purport to show. Ever since a new methodology for calculating GDP was adopted last year, India has appeared to be the world’s fastest-growing big economy, outpacing China. But scepticism about the data is growing even faster.

Growth figures are calculated by first arriving at the value of economic output over a given period and then comparing it with the prior period. The difference between the two gives a nominal rate of growth (ie, without any adjustment for inflation). Most observers agree that India’s egg-heads perform these tasks well. The problem seems to be the “GDP deflator”, a gauge of inflation by which the data are adjusted to derive the “real” growth rate. The higher inflation is assumed to be, the bigger the slice of nominal growth that is attributed to price rises rather than genuine increases in output.

Mercifully enough, GDP deflators do not normally attract much attention. Typically, different bits of the economy are deflated by whichever inflation series is most apposite. India compiles two measures: a wholesale price index (WPI), measured at the factory gate, and a consumer price index (CPI), which tracks how much consumers pay. Changes in the two usually move in tandem, so it doesn’t much matter which is used.

All that has changed since prices of oil and other commodities tumbled last year, causing wholesale prices to decline. Despite this, deflation remains a distant dream for shoppers: the price of consumer staples is still rising by over 5% a year. The gap between the change in the two indices swelled from nothing to nine percentage points in September, before falling back to six percentage points. The statisticians use WPI to deflate the nominal growth of service output, which accounts for roughly half the economy, even though most services have not benefited much from low commodity prices. The blended inflation figure used to deflate the nominal data may therefore be too low, making real GDP growth come out too high (see chart).

Investors, at any rate, roundly disbelieve India’s growth figures. Nevsky Capital, a hedge fund, cited dodgy data from India, among other places, as a reason to shut up shop at the start of the year. Even the government’s own chief economic adviser has admitted he is sometimes flummoxed by the data. A cottage industry has sprung up to cater to the sceptics, blending various indicators of economic activity to produce new gauges of growth.

Such home-brewed statistics have been common in China for some time: Li Keqiang, now the country’s premier, admitted as a provincial governor that he all but ignored “man-made” economic statistics in favour of hard-to-fiddle data such as railway-cargo volumes, electricity consumption and loans made by banks. The Economist began publishing a “Keqiang Index” when his habits became known in 2010.

Ambit Capital, a broker based in Mumbai, now computes its own “Keqiang Index” for India, which implies a real growth rate of 5.4%. Economists at HSBC, a bank, think 5.9-6% is closer to the truth.

If the divergence between WPI and CPI is indeed distorting the data, its nefarious impact should soon disappear as year-on-year readings of commodity prices stabilise and so reunite the two series. Statistical improvements are also promised by India’s boffins. But measuring fast-evolving economies is tricky: Nigeria two years ago announced its GDP was almost twice as big as official statistics had previously indicated. It does not help that 90% of India’s workers toil in the informal sector.

“The debate will reduce but not go away,” predicts Pronab Sen of the National Statistical Commission, an advisory body. Though they have flaws, India’s official statistics are pretty good by emerging-market standards, he argues. But in a global economy with few bright spots, where only America and China are adding a bigger amount to global GDP, it would be comforting to be more certain.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21696546-few-economists-wholeheartedly-believe-indias-stellar-growth-rate-elephant/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Migrant workers in the UAE

Wages of chagrin

A reform highlights how much the previous regulations were suppressing pay

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

No longer indentured

MANY in the Western world may fret about excessive immigration, but in truth its borders are relatively closed. In 2015 migrants made up 15% of America’s population, compared with 88% in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Migrants go to the Emirates in search of higher wages; 65% come from Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. But the flipside of the UAE’s astonishing openness to foreign workers is a draconian regime that restricts their rights and turns a blind eye to abuses. Those restrictions have been loosened slightly in recent years, happily, which has made it possible to quantify just how harmful they are.

To obtain a visa to work in the UAE, a migrant must first receive a job offer from an employer. (In practice, recruiting firms act as middlemen, handing out job offers to suitable candidates in exchange for a big fee.) The worker then becomes legally dependent on their employer in various ways under a system of kafala, or sponsorship. Some workers are housed in large labour camps; the government collects fees from employers to cover the cost of catching and deporting workers who abscond.

It used to be worse. Until recently workers needed their employer’s permission to seek a job anywhere else, even after their original contract had expired. Employers, in other words, held all the cards, which helped to keep wages low.

In late 2010, however, Saqr Ghobash, the UAE’s reform-minded minister of labour, issued a decree allowing workers with contracts expiring after January 2011 to look for work elsewhere after they had served out their contracts. Some employers grumbled, aware that this would raise the cost of labour.

The sharp cut-off point was a gift for economists, as it made it easy to compare behaviour before and after the reform. Suresh Naidu of Columbia University, Yaw Nyarko of New York University, Abu Dhabi and Shing-Yi Wang of the Wharton School of Business used the Ministry of Labour’s database on contracts as well as data on wages to do just that, in a forthcoming paper to be published in the Journal of Political Economy. They found that the impact of the new rule was big and fast. Workers’ real wages jumped by more than 10% in the three months after their contract expired, whereas before the change they barely moved at all.

Even though the reform made it easier for workers to change jobs, the fraction of workers renewing their contracts increased. More than twice as many workers did go to a new employer, but this was because far fewer of them left the country altogether after their contract expired. Over the first three months of the reform, the rate at which people returned home dropped by about four percentage points, from a baseline of around 12%. Workers’ original employers, Mr Naidu explains, were offering higher wages to persuade them to stay on, while higher overall earning power was keeping more workers in the country. “Before the reform you’re not allowed to switch, and after the reform you don’t have to switch,” he says.

The change also allowed the authors to calculate how much employers’ power had been suppressing wages. They worked out that wages before the reform were about half what they would have been under a perfectly free market. The reform increased wages to around 73% of their free-market value, by their reckoning.

In January of this year Mr Ghobash went further, allowing workers to leave their jobs even before the end of their contract, as long as they serve out a fixed notice period. That is likely to reduce employers’ power to suppress wages even more, although Mr Naidu expects that the reform will be of more benefit to skilled workers, who want to switch to jobs that match their training better, than to the legions of foreign labourers on construction sites in the Emirates.

Some will not benefit from the liberalisation. Maids, nannies and other domestic workers (mostly women), who are subject to some of the worst abuses reported by groups like Human Rights Watch, have largely been excluded from the new freedoms. And the ability to switch jobs is no help to the millions waiting in the subcontinent for a chance to work in the UAE. Mr Naidu and his co-authors found that after the reform in 2011 companies hired fewer workers from abroad, and did not increase the salary of those they did hire. Instead, they kept on existing workers, who were on average more productive.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21696533-reform-highlights-how-much-previous-regulations-were-suppressing-pay-wages/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Structural reform

Don’t stop believing

The IMF suggests some sweeteners to help the medicine go down

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



ASK a Greek government official what is ailing the economies of the European periphery, and he will almost certainly mention weak demand, before launching a tirade against austerity-obsessed politicians from northern Europe. Ask a German official, however, and the answer will be very different. In March, as the European Central Bank prepared a new salvo of stimulative measures, Jens Weidmann, the president of the Bundesbank, expressed his disapproval. Stimulus is no panacea, he warned, and “can’t replace urgently needed reforms.”

Structural reform is like exercise: nearly everyone could use a bit more of it. This newspaper has been known to recommend it to governments from time to time. Yet the extent to which economies stuck in a mire of low growth and low inflation should focus on structural reform, rather than stimulating demand, is a tricky question. Few economists would argue that Italy’s economy is a model of efficiency. Yet some economists reckon that making it easier to sack workers and cut prices is risky when a country is already facing high unemployment and deflation.

In its latest “World Economic Outlook”, the International Monetary Fund devotes a chapter to the debate. It affirms that structural reforms help raise an economy’s long-run growth prospects. Productivity stagnates when it is difficult to start new firms or expand healthy ones, or when labour cannot easily be shifted from moribund sectors to more efficient ones. Advanced economies still have plenty of room for reform, the IMF reckons.

However, some reforms, the IMF points out, take effect faster than others, and with a less painful adjustment. Reform of “product markets” aims to boost competition among firms, through privatisation, deregulation, the liberalisation of trade and by making it easier to start a business or attract investment. Such reforms generate bigger benefits in the long run than in the short run, but can nonetheless boost output almost immediately. Deregulation of the energy sector, for example, can reduce costs and boost profits in other industries, and open new investment opportunities. These benefits begin to accrue almost at once, even in weak economic conditions (though the IMF does caution that short-run gains may be limited when credit markets are malfunctioning, a common feature of economic crises).

The short-run payoff to reform of labour markets is much more dependent on the state of the economy. Reforms which make it easier to hire and fire workers contribute to rapid growth in output and employment when an economy is already running on all cylinders (see chart). At times of economic weakness, however, firms respond by doing far more firing than hiring, deepening the downturn.

Cuts to unemployment benefits designed to encourage the jobless to seek work follow a similar pattern: in bad times, the benefits in terms of increased interest in work are outweighed by the squeeze such reforms place on spending. An exception to the pattern are reforms that peel away inefficient taxes on labour. This delivers the greatest bang when economies are weak. A one-percentage-point cut in overall taxes on labour during a slump boosts output by 0.7% in the year of the reform, the IMF finds, but yields no benefit at all during booms.

Governments presiding over weak economies could enact changes in ways that minimise nasty short-run effects, the IMF suggests. They could prioritise product-market reforms, and adopt labour-market reforms that would only take effect after a lag, to allow time for economic recovery. Reforms could also be coupled with fiscal stimulus, the IMF reckons, which could then be unwound as growth improves.

The big debts carried by the governments of the euro-area periphery will be difficult to sustain if the prospects for growth do not brighten in the long run. A short burst of deficit-financed stimulus might therefore prove a small price to pay for a much-needed dose of structural reform. In contrast, by adopting structural reforms at the same time as slashing spending, European politicians may be creating an association in voters’ minds between reform and economic hardship—a reflex that would not bode well for the health of Europe’s economy or for the survival of the euro. Stimulus is no substitute for urgently needed changes. It might prove an indispensable complement, however.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/21696437-some-sweeteners-could-help-bitter-medicine-go-down-imf-weighs-europes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Tax amnesties

Making crime pay

Indonesia contemplates a handsome pay-off for tax dodgers

Apr 9th 2016 | SINGAPORE | From the print edition

Brodjonegoro is in a hurry

WHAT is the best design for a tax amnesty? Some object to them all, since they reward those who have broken the law. Others argue that maximising revenue should be the goal. The OECD nods at both philosophies, suggesting that an amnesty should cost the tax-dodger less than if he were caught by the authorities, but more than if he had been compliant from the start. Few, however, would recommend the approach Indonesia is taking.

The government estimates that rich Indonesians have perhaps $900 billion stashed overseas. To entice some of that money home, it wants to offer an amnesty. Parliament, which reconvened this week, is due to take up a bill soon. People who have hidden assets abroad will face no criminal prosecution or penalties, other than a flat fee of between 1% and 6% of the value of the assets in question, depending on how quickly they declare their stash and whether they repatriate it. (The 1% is for those who bring their money home immediately; 6% for those who take more than nine months to admit to hiding assets and keep them abroad.) Yet even 6% is a bargain compared with Indonesia’s top tax rate of 30%. Scofflaws should see the amnesty as an invitation “to invest their money for Indonesia’s development,” says Indonesia’s finance minister, Bambang Brodjonegoro (pictured). Indonesia’s government projects $8 billion-15 billion in revenue from the scheme.

That Indonesia has a revenue-collection problem is beyond dispute. Only some 27m of the country’s 255m people are registered for tax and in 2014 only 900,000 of these paid what they owed. Last year Indonesia took in just 82% of the tax revenue it had set out to collect. Its tax-to-GDP ratio is around 10%, compared with 13-15% for its South-East Asian neighbours. Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s president, says he wants to raise that to 16%. Indonesia’s constitution caps budget deficits at 3%, and most governments fear to get close to the cap, since missing revenue targets requires real and immediate cuts to spending.

But by taking $10 billion or so now, the government could be leaving ten times that amount on the table. Starting next year most jurisdictions where Indonesians are presumed to keep their hidden wealth, including Singapore, Hong Kong, Switzerland and Mauritius, have agreed to share information on foreign account-holders with their home governments as a matter of course, under an OECD scheme known as the Common Reporting Standard (CRS). Applying Indonesia’s normal tax rates to a conservative estimate of the money to be revealed by the CRS could yield well over $100 billion, before penalties, which Indonesia levies at 2% of the tax due a month.

The leniency is puzzling. Indonesia could levy a 25% tariff on offshore funds, and their owners would still come out ahead. Nicholas Shaxson of the Tax Justice Network deems it “very likely that powerful people in Indonesia have engineered this to make sure they’re not exposed and not subject to penalties.” But expediency is another possible explanation: Mr Brodjonegoro says that if the government waits for the CRS to take effect, “The benefit in terms of tax revenue will only start in 2019, the end of this administration.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21696503-government-contemplates-handsome-pay-tax-dodgers-indonesia-weighs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

Dumping and tub-thumping

Throwing up tariffs is a counterproductive response to economic weakness

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS a flood of cheap steel from an intimidating new economic power that prompted the passage of the world’s first anti-dumping law. In 1904 Canada’s parliament, angered by soaring imports of cut-price steel from America, imposed punitive tariffs. America is now on the other side of a similar trade dispute. Last year China exported over 100m tonnes of steel—more than the entire output of all America’s mills. Only 3% of that went to America, but American steelmakers squealed all the same and in March the government announced plans to impose an anti-dumping tariff on steel imports from China (and a handful of other countries) of up to 266%. The instinct behind such measures is understandable, but no good will come of them.

Dumping is the practice of selling goods in foreign markets at an unfairly low price—typically, one lower than the going rate in the exporter’s home market. Anti-dumping measures are intended to prevent a company from selling goods below cost in order to drive competitors out of business, before using the resulting market power to gouge customers.

The threat was all too real when Canada adopted its pioneering law. The American corporate monopolies of the day were more than willing to manipulate markets in order to put rivals out of business. American lawmakers eventually took aim at their “predatory pricing”, creating the first modern competition laws. Such laws usually bar firms from selling their wares below the cost of production. Anti-dumping rules, in contrast, tend to set a lower bar: they can be invoked if the price in one market is lower than in others. That makes it easy for firms seeking to shelter themselves from foreign competition to abuse them.

Competition is not the only concern of those who argue for anti-dumping measures. In Britain, where rock-bottom global steel prices now threaten Tata Steel, the owner of the country’s biggest surviving mill, proponents of tariffs argue that it is important to preserve domestic steelmaking to ensure supplies for the defence industry, among others. But it is hard to see how the use of French steel in British submarines harms Britain’s security (its pride is another matter). For manufacturers of all sorts, most notably carmakers, cheap steel is a boon.

Weighing against these shaky benefits are a heap of costs. Economic analyses suggest that temporary anti-dumping tariffs are actually more damaging than run-of-the-mill protectionism. Anti-dumping rules, like other trade barriers, cause economic harm by shrinking markets and excluding efficient producers, thereby raising prices for consumers. But anti-dumping measures do additional harm, because big global firms know how to game them. Should their rivals attempt to cut prices to gain market share, they file anti-dumping petitions against them. That encourages everyone to keep margins plump, in effect creating an unspoken cartel. Such tacit collusion inhibits innovation and creative destruction, and holds back growth. One recent analysis suggests that America’s anti-dumping policy reduces American consumption by 3%—an effect equivalent to a uniform tariff of 7%.

Nonetheless, anti-dumping rules have been enshrined in global trade treaties, which outline when and how such duties can be applied and provide a forum in which they can be challenged. Some economists suggest that they could actually provide a boost to globalisation, by making trade liberalisation seem more palatable to those whose livelihoods it threatens. Broad reductions in trade barriers may look less alarming if governments retain the right to impede the most disruptive imports.

Greg Mankiw, an economist at Harvard University, recently used a similar argument to defend the anti-dumping tariffs that America placed on steel imports in 2002, when he was advising George W. Bush, the president at the time. Mr Mankiw claims the tariffs were part of a calculated political strategy to push for trade liberalisation. By imposing them, he says, Mr Bush helped persuade Congress to grant him “trade promotion authority”—the right to negotiate trade deals which Congress cannot amend, but only approve or reject. Later, Mr Mankiw writes, that authority was used to secure the approval of a free-trade agreement with the countries of Central America.

At the moment, however, it is hard to justify anti-dumping tariffs as a calculated sop to the opponents of liberalisation. Progress on multilateral trade deals has stalled; the fate of regional agreements also hangs in the balance thanks to the protectionist mood seizing Western voters.

A movable glut

Cheap exports from China reflect overcapacity that has developed as the Chinese economy has slowed. The resulting “dumping” is not proof that China is on the verge of vanquishing all rivals, but rather a reflection of its manufacturers’ weakness.

That weakness is now being exported. Cheap exports depress prices in foreign markets, most of which are already experiencing worryingly low inflation. Central banks have little room to respond using conventional tools: interest rates are already at historic lows. In the 1930s economies that were unable to respond vigorously enough to headwinds blowing in from abroad (in that case, because of the gold standard, which constrained monetary policy) were the most likely to resort to protectionist tariffs.

Yet the impulse to raise tariffs, if understandable, should be avoided. Once one country gives in to it, the imports that prompted the move are diverted to another country, which naturally follows suit, setting off a chain reaction. As Tata Steel teeters, Britons are rethinking their opposition to anti-dumping tariffs. Yet Tata itself was a target of the American tariffs imposed in March. Politicians are keen to get their economies growing again; tariffs are a poor way to manage it.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance/21696325-throwing-up-tariffs-counterproductive-response-economic-weakness-why-no/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Marjorie Deane internships

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Applications are invited for The Economist’s 2016 Marjorie Deane internships. Financed by the Marjorie Deane Financial Journalism Foundation, the awards are designed to provide work experience for a promising journalist or would-be journalist, who will spend three months at The Economist writing about economics and finance. Applicants are asked to write a covering letter and an original article of no more than 500 words suitable for publication in the Finance and economics section. Applications should be sent to deaneintern@economist.com by April 30th. For more information, please visit www.marjoriedeane.com.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21696524-marjorie-deane-internships/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Space travel: Pump it up, Scotty

Ship propulsion: We are sailing

Detecting explosives: The litmus test

Coral bleaching: A hot survivor





Articles Sections Next

Space travel

Pump it up, Scotty

The International Space Station is about to get an inflatable extension

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

AT 73 metres long and 420 tonnes, the International Space Station is the biggest artificial object in space. And it is growing: its 15 existing modules are due to be joined by five more before the decade is out. On April 8th, if all goes according to plan, a rocket will lift off from Cape Canaveral in Florida carrying the first of these new additions. But it is no ordinary module.

The Bigelow Expandable Activity Module (BEAM—illustrated above) is the first bit of the ISS created entirely at the initiative of a private company. Bigelow Aerospace, its manufacturer, is an American space firm set up in 1999 by Robert Bigelow, a businessman who made his money in the hotel trade. And unlike the rest of the ISS, which is essentially a series of space-going aluminium cans, the BEAM is made from cloth. It is folded up and stowed for the journey into orbit, much like a tent, and then inflated to its full size after being attached to the station.

An inflatable space station might sound a bit mad (perhaps for that reason, Bigelow Aerospace prefers the word “expandable”). But many space cadets are fans of the idea. In the 1950s Wernher von Braun, a Nazi rocket prodigy poached by the Americans after the second world war, described a space station 75 metres across with room for 80 people, made of reinforced, inflatable rubber tubes. In the 1960s, with the space race in full swing, NASA built a full-sized test model of a smaller, 7.3 metre model. And in the 1990s the agency returned to the idea with a design called the TransHab, an inflatable spaceship designed to take a crew of humans all the way to Mars. But that mission never happened. In 1999, in a neat bit of symmetry, Bigelow Aerospace bought the relevant patents from NASA and began working on the technology itself.

Inflatable spaceships offer several advantages, but the main one is mass. An inflatable module is much lighter than its metal counterpart, and mass is the rocket scientist’s worst enemy. Lugging mass into orbit requires a lot of energy. Adding extra mass requires more fuel. That fuel, in turn, has mass of its own, requiring yet more fuel to lift, meaning that even a small increase in mass can end up requiring a dramatically bigger rocket. Bigelow Aerospace reckons that its inflatable designs offer more than twice as much internal volume per kilo as a traditional, metal design.

Space is another advantage. The size of a rigid spacecraft is limited by the size of the rocket that launches it. But inflatable craft can be launched folded up, reducing the amount of room they occupy, and then blown up once they reach their destination. When packed away for launch the BEAM measures 2.2X2.4 metres, compared with 4X3.2 metres when fully inflated. At the same time, the module’s thick fabric walls—made of tough layers of exotic materials such as Vectran, a Kevlar-like substance used in ropemaking, or Nomex, which is used to make firefighting clothing—ought to offer astronauts better protection from the hazards of space than metal walls do. Multiple layers of fabric should be good at absorbing impacts from micrometeoroids: tiny pieces of space-going debris whose high speed makes them dangerous. Finally, fabric walls should offer better protection against radiation than metal ones.

Nor is all this mere theory. In 2006 and 2007 Bigelow Aerospace launched two free-flying, uncrewed stations, Genesis I and II, using repurposed Ukranian nuclear missiles. Both stations have been circling the Earth ever since, providing data on how they cope with the rigours of orbit. Attaching an inflatable module to a crewed space station will, the firm hopes, be the final step in proving that its technology works.

Swelling ambition

Assuming it does, Bigelow has bigger plans for the future. One idea is to attach a much larger module, called a B-330, to the ISS, for use as a fully-fledged, crewed part of the station. That would be a substantial boost: a B-330, as the name suggests, offers 330 cubic metres of room, about a third of the total space presently available on the ISS. A more adventurous option is to launch a separate, free-flying station, called Space Complex Alpha, made from a pair of B-330s. Such a structure would offer about two-thirds as much pressurised space as the entire ISS at a fraction of the price. (The best guess for the ISS’s cost is $150 billion, making it one of the most expensive objects humans have ever built.) The main reason is that the ISS required dozens of rocket launches to assemble; Bigelow’s station could, in theory, be put in orbit with just a handful. The firm reckons it could lease a third of a single module (ie, 110 cubic metres) to interested customers for 60 days for around $25m. That is a lot of money, but it is considerably less than the $70m NASA presently pays Russia to fly its astronauts to the ISS.

But Alpha will have to wait for the rest of the private space industry to catch up. Bigelow’s business plan depends on the development of privately-built spaceships capable of cheaply ferrying astronauts aloft. That may not be too distant: the BEAM is being flown to the ISS by SpaceX, another private firm that offers rocket launches at far lower prices than more established competitors. For now, SpaceX is restricted to cargo flights (it has a bulging order book of satellite launches as well as ISS flights for NASA). But next year it hopes to start flying astronauts to the ISS. Boeing, a big aerospace firm, hopes to do the same thing. And on April 2nd Blue Origin, a private rocketry firm set up by Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, made the third successful flight of its New Shepard rocket. Although it only inched into space by crossing the Karman Line, the somewhat arbitrary barrier 100km up deemed to mark the beginning of space, Mr Bezos hopes one day to carry passengers into orbit proper.

If it ever flies, Bigelow hopes to rent Alpha for specialised scientific research that requires zero gravity, leasing space on the station to private companies, or perhaps national governments without space programmes of their own. That fits with NASA’s plans. The agency has been nurturing the private space business in the hope that, once it is established, private firms can take over the comparatively routine business of flying to low-Earth orbit, leaving it free to concentrate on Apollo-style megaprojects such as missions to the asteroids and Mars. But history suggests that it may be tricky to fund a space station from scientific research alone: the ISS is supposed to be a platform for science, but its contribution has so far been measly.

If that does not work, another option might be to turn the station into the world’s most exclusive hotel, an idea that Bigelow flirted with in its early days. After all, there is already a small but proven market. The ISS has hosted several tourists, including Richard Garriott, a British video-game designer, and Dennis Tito, an American investment manager, each of whom paid tens of millions of dollars for the trip. The B-330 comes with four windows built in. The views, one presumes, would be magnificent.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21696487-international-space-station-about-get-inflatable-extension-pump-it/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Ship propulsion

We are sailing

Wind power makes another comeback

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Full spin ahead

OLD technologies can return with a twist, just as airships keep threatening to and windmills and electric cars have already. Fitting ships with sails to assist with propulsion, thus saving fuel and reducing emissions, is an idea that has been around for decades. It has now gained renewed interest with a search by the Energy Technologies Institute (ETI), a British public–private partnership that promotes low-carbon uses, for suppliers and a shipowner prepared to undertake a trial of wind-driven rotors on a large cargo vessel. The plan is to gather operating data on whether rotor sails are a worthwhile investment. Depending on the routes, suitably equipped vessels could reduce fuel consumption by 5-12%. As some 90% of the world’s trade travels by sea, such savings would soon add up.

The type of sail the ETI is interested in is the Flettner rotor. These were demonstrated by Anton Flettner, a German aerospace engineer, in the 1920s. When placed on a ship the giant rotating cylinders extract energy from the wind using the Magnus effect, a force acting on a spinning body in an airstream to create a pressure difference on either side—the same effect that causes a spinning ball to curve through the air. This force can be used to help push the ship along.

Rotor sails are most suitable for ships that sail below 15 knots (28kph) on trade routes where the apparent wind (that experienced by an observer in motion) is blowing sideways across the vessel, reckons the ETI. For a rotor sail the higher the ratio of wind speed to ship speed the better. In general, the rotors produce more thrust the windier it is and the slower the ship steams.

In 1924 Flettner installed two 18.3-metre rotating metal cylinders on a converted sailing ship, the Buckau (pictured), which crossed the North Sea and the Atlantic. Other ship owners have flirted with the technology. In 2010, Enercon, a German windpower specialist, launched E-ship1 with four 2-metre rotor sails to assist its diesel engines. In 2014, Norsepower, a Finnish firm, fitted an 18-metre rotor sail to Estraden, a ferry which operates between the Netherlands and Britain. A second rotor was fitted to the ship in 2015. Norsepower reckons they produce a 6% fuel saving on average.

This is not a lot to show for more than 90 years of tinkering with the technology. But the arrival of new lightweight composite materials that enable the rotors to spin at higher speeds, together with advanced computer controls that can use sophisticated wind sensors and satellite tracking to constantly adjust the setting of the rotors, holds out greater promise of a return to sail, of a sort.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21696488-wind-power-makes-another-comeback-we-are-sailing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Detecting explosives

The litmus test

A new way to spot home-made bombs

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



ALTHOUGH surveillance has increased around the world following March 22nd’s bombings in Brussels, it remains extremely difficult to detect explosives carried into railway stations, shopping malls and other public places. The bombs used in Belgium might well have been picked up after the check-in desks at Zaventem Airport, but the suicide-attackers probably never intended to reach the security gate. The intensive screening carried out inside airports is not practical in many other places. That could change as new techniques are developed.

The bombs in Brussels were composed of triacetone triperoxide, known as TATP. This is the same explosive used to kill 52 people in London in train and bus attacks in 2005. It is extremely unstable, but for terrorists bent on sacrificing themselves TATP has considerable appeal since it can be made from compounds found in easily obtained materials such as paint thinners and hair-bleaching agents.

TATP can be detected with traditional technologies, like ion mobility spectrometry. This uses a desktop machine to analyse swabs. As the process can pick up minute traces of substances associated with explosives, it is hard to prevent at least a few molecules escaping onto someone’s hands and belongings. But even in airports, not every passenger is swabbed. Some machines sample air puffed onto passengers standing in cubicles, but it is a slow process. Dogs can pick out TATP, but handlers had been reluctant to train their animals to find the explosive because even tiny amounts can detonate. Now, though, trainers can use TATP as beads encased in a polymer that prevents detonation but also releases the odour.

Such developments help, but airport-style security would be expensive and highly disruptive if these measures were imposed at all the entry points to crowded public places. Far better would be a system that can automatically analyse air samples and raise an alarm if any dangerous compounds are detected. That idea had seemed fanciful, but Kenneth Suslick at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign thinks he has found a way to do it.

Dr Suslick’s strategy is to hunt for TATP using chemical dyes which can readily bind to reactive airborne compounds, changing colour when they do so. By using differently coloured dyes that each have an affinity for molecules of a specific compound released into the air by different explosives, the system would generate a unique colour signature when a dangerous material was nearby. Dr Suslick thinks that adding sensors onto a small cartridge-type device containing an array of different dyes would improve the system further by measuring other characteristics of airborne particles, such as their acidity and molecular polarity (the way they conduct a charge). It appears to be a complex bit of kit, but Dr Suslick is quick to point out that the method is really not much different to a multidimensional form of litmus paper.

After collaborating with colleagues for more than a decade, Dr Suslick has successfully designed a set of dyes that can detect many of the explosive compounds terrorists are likely to wield, including TATP. In a study last year they found that ferrous chloride reacted vigorously with airborne hydrogen peroxide that travelled out of a small sample of TATP and that this exposure oxidised the ferrous chloride, turning it from blue-green to yellow-brown. The researchers have also reported that a device, similar to the sort traditionally used to scan information on business cards, was able to monitor the many different colours on their dye array and signal if it had detected compounds in the air indicative of dangerous materials nearby.

Given that the researchers reckon each array at the centre of the device could cost less than a dollar to make, the technology appears to have the potential to be used in hand-held devices that could be widely carried by security staff. They could stand by the entrances to malls, airports and stations, checking people as they walk past with little disruption (although terrorists could still detonate their device among the crowds milling outside the building). Plans are afoot to commercialise the technology.

The idea, if successful, could be developed further. If the detectors were positioned around a building they might be connected by a wireless network to automatically track the chemistry of the air. The main challenge is that the arrays are like chemical fuses and must be changed after being tripped. Dr Suslick, however, thinks one way around that is to use cartridges that have multiple arrays stored on a spool, so that a new one becomes available as soon as a used one gets soiled. The trick with security is to try and remain one step ahead of the terrorists. If this idea succeeds, it might be a leap.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21696485-new-way-spot-home-made-bombs-litmus-test/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Coral bleaching

A hot survivor

A newly found species of algae might help corals survive in warm water

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



CORAL reefs are one of the world’s richest environments for marine wildlife, but they live on the edge. Coral thrives in warm water but quickly dies if temperatures rise just a single degree above the average summer maximum for their region. As climate change warms the world’s oceans this is a precarious situation. But not all corals suffer at the same temperatures. While most perish in water above 31°C, those in the Persian Gulf can withstand a punishing 35°C. Now a new study suggests that the way these corals survive could help corals elsewhere adapt to changing conditions.

Corals get their brilliant colours from tiny algae that live in their tissue in a symbiotic relationship—the coral provides a home and the algae food produced during photosynthesis. If it gets too hot the algae leave, turning coral into a “bleached” white skeleton. Last year, Jörg Wiedenmann, a marine biologist, and his colleagues at the University of Southampton in Britain discovered that the algae inside the Persian Gulf corals were in fact a different species from that commonly found in other parts of the world. It was this species’ ability to tolerate extreme heat that appeared to be crucial for its hosts’ survival.

The discovery of the aptly named Symbiodinium thermophilum raised more questions than it did answers. Dr Wiedenmann knew that the Persian Gulf was geologically very young, a mere 15,000 years old, but was unsure whether the algae had rapidly evolved there or travelled in from afar. To find out, the researchers analysed the genetics of the region’s algae.

They collected coral samples from 23 reefs within the Persian Gulf, the adjacent Gulf of Oman and the Red Sea, which sits at nearly the same latitude as the Persian Gulf but is geographically isolated from it. They screened the samples for the unique DNA signature associated with S. thermophilum and, as expected, found the species made up the bulk of the algal population inside the corals of the Persian Gulf. But it was not confined to it and was also present in the Gulf of Oman and the Red Sea, albeit in much lower numbers.

Gene genie

Dr Wiedenmann decided to take a closer look at the genetics of S. thermophilum itself. All of the samples from the Persian Gulf were genetically very similar, but those from the Gulf of Oman and the Red Sea were markedly different. While the researchers admit that the similar genetics of the Persian Gulf population could be explained by some lonely member of the species drifting in several thousand years ago only later to be cut off from the rest of the world and forced to reproduce in isolation, they think that is unlikely since the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf are well connected by the Strait of Hormuz. Instead, they argue in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that the intense heat of the Persian Gulf has historically functioned as something of a trial-by-fire for algae attempting to set up shop in the area’s corals, with most being cooked alive within just a few years of settling down.

The traits that make the population of S. thermophilum in the area so remarkably heat tolerant remain to be identified. Nevertheless, Dr Wiedenmann points out that maintaining a large biodiversity of algae in the world’s oceans might allow heat-resistant species to try their luck in other reefs as they struggle for survival.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21696486-newly-found-species-algae-might-help-corals-survive-warm-water-hot/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




Alibaba: Crocodile of the Yangzi

Myanmar: All change, or not

Wallace Stevens: More truly and more strange

Johnson: Of two minds

Birth-cohort studies: Lifelong learning

Zaha Hadid, 1950-2016: Outside the rectangle





Articles Sections Next

Alibaba

Crocodile of the Yangzi

How Jack Ma conquered China’s internet

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



Alibaba: The House That Jack Ma Built. By Duncan Clark. Ecco; 287 pages; $27.99 and £18.99.

NOT since John Rockefeller has a businessman defined a country’s transformation as well as Jack Ma does. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil capitalised on the rise of petroleum and the internal-combustion engine, a combination that powered a century of American greatness. He became America’s first billionaire and its richest man by far. Through both ruthless dealing and visionary philanthropy, he came to personify American capitalism.

Alibaba, which Mr Ma and a handful of collaborators started in a cramped apartment in Hangzhou in 1999, is now one of the world’s biggest internet companies. It utterly dominates e-commerce in China, and has also made inroads into internet finance, cloud computing and logistics. Its flotation in New York in 2014 was the biggest public offering ever, and with a fortune worth perhaps $23 billion, Mr Ma is one of China’s richest men.

How did a poor boy who barely scraped into a teacher’s college manage this? Like Rockefeller, Mr Ma spotted a confluence of technologies and market opportunities. The rise of the internet came just as China was gearing up to join the World Trade Organisation in 2001. Duncan Clark, an expert on China’s technology sector, explains the result in a fascinating new book: Mr Ma “stands at the intersection of China’s newfound cults of consumerism and entrepreneurship”.

It began with Mr Ma’s homesick search for a pint of Chinese lager. As an English translator, he got the chance to travel to Seattle in the mid-1990s and to use the internet for the first time. Told that one could find anything in the world online, he searched for “beer”. He found American beer, German beer and so on, but no Chinese beer. His country was, it seemed, living in the dark ages. That gave him the inspiration he needed.

With liberalisation would come rising incomes and global travel, reasoned Mr Ma, and soon hundreds of millions of Chinese would clamour for the goods and services enjoyed by the comfortable classes elsewhere. Unlike those in America, the land of Sears and Walmart, China’s retail chains were fragmented and stodgy. This, Mr Ma calculated, meant that e-commerce could quickly become a potent force.

He was right. China’s online consumers are now the world’s most voracious, buying over $14 billion-worth of goods on Alibaba’s platforms on just one day last year (a promotion known as Singles’ Day). That is far more than Americans purchase on Cyber Monday, when online retailers heavily discount goods for Christmas shoppers. Alibaba now sees some 3 trillion yuan ($464 billion) in e-commerce transactions flow yearly through its portals, triple the figure seen in 2012.

The cult of the entrepreneur is strong in China too. Though state-owned enterprises and national champions lumber on, it is private enterprise that has created nearly all net new urban jobs in China over the past two decades, and private firms account for perhaps two-thirds of all economic output. China is producing millions of new entrepreneurs each year, and (unlike Rockefeller, who was widely reviled as a monopolist) Mr Ma is idolised by them.

eBay for lunch

How did he come from nowhere to overcome such American rivals as Yahoo (which later became a big investor in Alibaba) and eBay? The answer lies in the most powerful cult of all: a team of martial-arts heroes with Jack Ma as its leader. Alibaba’s campus in Hangzhou features numerous artistic references to Jin Yong, a celebrated writer of martial-arts novels. Employees take nicknames from his novels and other pulp fiction, and use these names for internal communication. Team-building exercises regularly have employees doing handstands, and office romances are often made official at mass weddings (pictured), witnessed by Mr Ma. The company’s philosophy is a “six-vein spirit sword”, and during an interview conducted last year at his headquarters, Mr Ma several times got up to punctuate his answers with an actual sword from his wall.

Mr Ma does not believe in religion or communism, saving his faith for a kind of inclusive capitalism. Unlike the founders of other big Chinese internet firms, Mr Ma distributed shares to employees from the beginning, and continued to find ways for them to cash in during Alibaba’s spectacular rise. As a result, his share is smaller than that held by comparable tycoons. Western technology founders like Google’s Larry Page and Sergey Brin and Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg structured share offerings so that they retained a tight grip on their creations. Mr Ma formed a partnership before Alibaba’s flotation, and shares control with several dozen colleagues.

Mr Ma rejects Milton Friedman’s nostrum that “the business of business is business”, namely that companies exist only to make a profit and that philanthropy should be strictly personal. He has set up a philanthropic fund, but uses Alibaba itself as a vehicle for social change, helping people book doctors’ visits, for example, or selling cheap water-testing devices and encouraging his customers to upload results for big-data analysis. Given his ambitions, perhaps it is a good thing that Mr Ma plans for Alibaba to flourish “at least 102 years”: begun in the last year of the 20th century, it may yet leave a mark on the 22nd.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21696495-how-jack-ma-conquered-chinas-internet-crocodile-yangzi/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Myanmar

All change, or not

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Soon to have her hands even fuller

Understanding Reform in Myanmar: People and Society in the Wake of Military Rule. By Marie Lall. Hurst; 346 pages; £20. To be published in America in July; $30.

The Lady and the Generals: Aung San Suu Kyi and Burma’s struggle for freedom. By Peter Popham. Rider; 440 pages; £20.

ON March 30th Myanmar’s new government was sworn into office. For the first time in over 50 years the South-East Asian country now has a civilian president and executive, all from the National League for Democracy (NLD), founded by Aung San Suu Kyi in 1988 to oppose military rule. It has been an extraordinary turnaround for a country that only five years ago was being ruled by one of the world’s most brutal and callous dictators, Than Shwe. Two new books help to shed some light on how this came about.

“The Lady and the Generals” is by a British journalist, Peter Popham. He has already written one biography of Miss Suu Kyi, taking her story up to 2010 or so. His latest book picks up, roughly, from there, when she was released from house arrest and then persuaded by a new president, Thein Sein, to help start reforming the country. This latest tranche of Suu Kyiology is less successful than the last, partly because the author, as he laments at some length, failed to get anything first-hand out of his subject, despite her new freedoms. As a result there is a fair bit of padding.

However, in some places the book does offer a useful, rounded portrait of Miss Suu Kyi, now aged 70, as she finally takes over running the country—and none of it is reassuring. Mr Popham writes of the Nobel prizewinner’s “ravenous egotism” and “queenliness”. He exaggerates, perhaps, but many of her sympathisers and colleagues have been dismayed by her authoritarian and high-handed ways as the NLD has been trying to prepare for power. Her inability to delegate, to share power or to listen much has hampered the NLD in the new democratic era. Denied the presidency itself by the army-designed constitution, she has instead taken on the burden of the foreign ministry and a specially created job that makes her, in effect, prime minister as well. Myanmar could well end up learning the follies of micromanagement the hard way.

If Mr Popham’s book is intended to reach a wide readership, Marie Lall’s is more academic. At its heart is a rigorous look at the reform process over the past few years, written partly from an insider’s viewpoint: Ms Lall continued to work with NGOs and colleges in Myanmar even when the country was largely boycotted by the West before 2010. She emphasises the role that civil-society organisations played in Myanmar’s transition, particularly Myanmar Egress. This think-tank was formed by intellectuals to bridge the gap between the few in the government who did actually want to reform and the NLD. Certainly one legacy of those years is that Myanmar does have a flourishing network of local NGOs. That should help to embed democracy.

But Ms Lall’s book is also a sobering reminder of what a monumental job the new NLD government has to reconstruct the country. She credits Mr Thein Sein’s government, rightly, with making a start, but running through the grim statistics on poverty, educational attainment and more, it is clear that they were only scratching the surface. Now it’s up to the Lady.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21696491-all-change-or-not/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Wallace Stevens

More truly and more strange

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



The Whole Harmonium: The Life of Wallace Stevens. By Paul Mariani. Simon & Schuster; 481 pages; $30.

AS A freshman at Harvard, Wallace Stevens—who would go on to become one of the most significant American poets of the 20th century—inscribed a quotation from Benjamin Jowett in his journal: “If I live I ought to speak my mind.” It is ironic, then, that Stevens would keep his life as a lawyer and senior insurance executive in Hartford, Connecticut, separate from his career as a poet. While he pored over surety bonds during the day, his poetry, which flourished as a “secret vice”, became a place where “fire-fangled feathers” coexisted with “dream[s] of baboons and periwinkles”.

Stevens is an inscrutable figure in American letters, his life a constant contrast between the exotic pleasures of imagination and the mores of the insurance lawyer—what Paul Mariani, the author of a new biography, “The Whole Harmonium: The Life of Wallace Stevens”, calls “exterior vacancy while the mind roiled beneath”. As Stevens boasts in a decadent early poem, “My titillations have no foot-notes.”

After a quiet childhood in Reading, Pennsylvania, Stevens picked up a “Harvard manner” (irking his parents) at the exclusive Signet Society and the literary magazine, the “Harvard Advocate”, of which he was president.

Stevens suffered sporadically from a “habitual blackness”, which Mr Mariani diagnoses as depression, and his marriage to the awkward, pretty Elsie Kachel, also from Reading, was an unhappy one. Stevens would describe the couple as “warty squashes”, their home life like “two grave-diggers spending a rainy night in a vault”. As he rose through the ranks of the Hartford Accident and Indemnity Company, he dictated poems to his secretary, wrote them on walks to the office and even, Elsie once complained, barrelled out of the bathroom “with a poem in his teeth”. His only indulgences came on trips to Key West, Florida, where he drank, smoked and even brawled with Hemingway.

Nothing in this life can prepare a reader for the sensuous obscurity of Stevens’s vocabulary (ice cream as “concupiscent curds”) or his startlingly lucid vision (“The world imagined is the ultimate good”). The voice of an awesome god speaks in his first book, “Harmonium”, published when he was 44: “I was the world in which I walked, and what I saw/Or heard or felt came not but from myself;/And there I found myself more truly and more strange.”

Stevens believed in the divine power of the imagination, “the central mind” that provides irrepressible illumination. “How high that highest candle lights the dark”, he marvels in a late poem. In this light, the poet sees both himself and the world “more truly and more strange”.

Stevens is a difficult biographical subject. First, he and Elsie destroyed many of his letters, manuscripts and notes, giving Mr Mariani less to work with than recent biographers of, for example, James Merrill and Gore Vidal. Second, his poetry is sometimes abstruse, despite his protestations that they are “so simple and natural to me”. Third, any biographer must confront Stevens’s racism, which has rightly troubled many readers and recently received renewed attention in American literary circles. A major shortcoming of this biography is the only passing attention that Mr Mariani pays to this element of Stevens’s character, even as he devotes many pages to Stevens’s attitudes toward wars, elections and other political events.

But Mr Mariani’s primary concern is not Stevens’s life, which after all lacks the drama that attracts readers to biographies of Ted Hughes or Dylan Thomas. Mr Mariani instead provides a careful and clear introduction to Stevens’s essential poetry, offering strong evidence that with the appropriate context, Stevens’s poems “will yield their richness”.

However, the Wallace Stevens of “The Whole Harmonium” remains a mysterious vessel for his genius. He appears in these pages “more truly and more strange”. His life, even in this fine telling, only makes sense if one is willing to believe in the transcending and total power of the imagination—a second world within us, the “highest candle” of our interior lives.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21696493-more-truly-and-more-strange/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

Of two minds

The advantages of working in your own language are obvious. Those of working in a foreign one are subtle

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



MORE and more of the world is working in English. Multinational companies (even those based in places such as Switzerland or Japan) are making it their corporate language. And international bodies like the European Union and the United Nations are doing an ever-greater share of business in the world’s new default language. At the office, it’s English’s world, and every other language is just living in it.

Is this to the English-speaker’s advantage? Working in a foreign language is certainly hard. It is easier to argue fluently or to make a point subtly when not trying to call up rarely used vocabulary or construct sentences correctly. English-speakers can try to bulldoze opposing arguments through sheer verbiage, hold the floor to prevent anyone else from getting a word in or lighten the mood with a joke. All of these things are far harder in a foreign language. Non-natives have not one hand, but perhaps a bit of their brains, tied behind their backs. A recent column by Michael Skapinker in the Financial Times says that it’s important for native English-speakers to learn the skills of talking with non-natives successfully.

But, as Mr Skapinker notes, there are advantages to being a non-native, too. These are subtler—but far from trivial. Non-native speakers may not be able to show off their brilliance easily. It can be an advantage to have your cleverness highly rated, and this is the luck of verbally fluent people around the world. But it is quite often the other way round: it can be a boon to be thought a little dimmer than you really are, giving the element of surprise in a negotiation. And, as an American professor in France tells Johnson, coming from another culture—not just another language—allows people to notice stumbling blocks and habits of thinking shared by the rest of the natives, and guide a meeting past them. Such heterodox thinking can be wrapped in a bit of disingenuous cluelessness: “I’m not sure how things work here, but I was thinking…”

People working in a language not their own report other perks. Asking for a clarification can buy valuable time or be a useful distraction, says a Russian working at The Economist. Speaking slowly allows a non-native to choose just the right word—something most people don’t do when they are excited and emotional. There is a lot to be said for thinking faster than you can speak, rather than the other way round.

Most intriguingly, there may be a feedback loop from speech back into thought. Ingenious researchers have found that sometimes decision-making in a foreign language is actually better. Researchers at the University of Chicago gave subjects a test with certain traps—easy-looking “right” answers that turned out to be wrong. Those taking it in a second language were more likely to avoid the trap and choose the right answer. Fluid thinking, in other words, has its down-side, and deliberateness an advantage. And one of the same researchers found that even in moral decision-making—such as whether it would be acceptable to kill someone with your own hands to save a larger number of lives—people thought in a more utilitarian, less emotional way when tested in a foreign language. An American working in Denmark says he insisted on having salary negotiations in Danish—asking for more in English was excruciating to him.

All this applies regardless of the first language. But in the modern world it is English monoglots in particular who work in their own language, joined by non-native polyglots working in English too. Those non-native speakers can always go away and speak their languages privately before rejoining the English conversation. Hopping from language to language is a constant reminder of how others might see things differently, notes a Dutch official at the European Commission. (One study found that bilingual children were better at guessing what was in other people’s heads, perhaps because they were constantly monitoring who in their world spoke what language.) It was said that Ginger Rogers had to do every step Fred Astaire did, but “backwards, and in high heels”. This, unsurprisingly, made her an outstanding dancer.

Indeed, those working in foreign languages are keen to talk about these advantages and disadvantages. Alas, monoglots will never have that chance. Pity those struggling in a second language—but also spare a thought for those many monoglots who have no way of knowing what they are missing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21696489-advantages-working-your-own-language-are-obvious-those-working-foreign/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Birth-cohort studies

Lifelong learning

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

The Life Project: The Extraordinary Story of Our Ordinary Lives. By Helen Pearson. Allen Lane; 399 pages; £20. To be published in America by Soft Skull Press in May; $17.95.

UNKNOWN to the vast majority of the population, a small group of British 70-year-olds has shaped the health and well-being of everyone in Britain for their whole lives. They are not policymakers or professors, but a random nationwide sample linked only by the week of their birth in 1946. Recruited barely out of the womb, they have been followed by researchers and an army of data-gatherers asking about their lives and behaviours. These have yielded profound insights into the causes of health and illness in Britain from the cradle to the grave.

Helen Pearson, a geneticist and journalist, has written “The Life Project”, a fascinating book charting the 1946 cohort and four that followed. They are a peculiarly British undertaking, and despite perhaps not being championed enough in the country—their funding has frequently been in peril—within epidemiological fields they are looked on with envy and admiration by the rest of the world.

The five cohorts, begun in 1946, 1958, 1970, 1991 and 2000, total about 70,000 Britons, providing data ranging from punch-cards in the earliest cases to fully sequenced genomes today. The 1946 cohort revealed that working-class women suffered high rates of stillbirth due to lack of medical care during pregnancy; when the National Health Service was launched shortly after in 1948, those findings led to prenatal care being provided free. Findings from the 1958 cohort were the first to reveal the impact of smoking during pregnancy on the risk of stillbirth, which led to a change in advice to pregnant women. Free adult-education courses launched in the early 2000s were offered as a result of cohort studies revealing that around one in five adults in the early 1990s struggled with reading, and even more, around one in three, with basic mathematics.

But the sad message that has emerged from the studies, from the birth of the 1946 cohort to the present day, is that being born poor remains a huge source of risk to health and well-being. While it is possible to triumph over adversity (reading for pleasure as a child, for example, predicts better outcomes later in life, whatever the socioeconomic status of your parents) the odds are stacked against some people from before they are even born. For all the subjects’ influence on public policy, this has hardly changed in the half-century since the first published study from the 1946 group.

Despite this bad news (and Ms Pearson’s passion about it) the book is often a delight, interspersed with vignettes about individual members of the different cohorts, as well as the researchers. (One research-team leader kept falling asleep during the making of a video about the project, after two days without sleep. Another liked to joke of his own birth “at an early age”, head “the wrong way round”.)

It’s hard to believe something as simple as observing a group of babies follow their path through the world can provide such a huge amount of knowledge about the human condition. “The Life Project” makes the case for why they should be a jewel in the crown of British science.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21696494-lifelong-learning/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Zaha Hadid, 1950-2016

Outside the rectangle

The Iraqi-British architect refused to choose between art and building

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition

Striking in Glasgow

ZAHA HADID, like her architecture, was striking to look at. Ring-like objects stretched across her hands like delicate cutlery, and she favoured pleated fabrics, feathers, unusual silhouettes and complicated footwear. Like the swimming pools with swooping double-curved roofs she built for the London Olympics, she was instantly recognisable. But like the cancer centre she designed for Kirkcaldy’s Victoria Hospital, she was reluctant to reveal everything at once: a spiky exterior protects a sheltering and intimate interior from a bleak setting.

There were times Ms Hadid needed a hard shell. Her design for the Cardiff Bay Opera House won a competition against 268 entrants, but was torpedoed by a minority that didn’t like it—or her. The Heidar Aliyev centre she designed for Azerbaijan’s capital was called a monument to a dictator, a charge not often levelled at male peers in similar political environments. In 2014 the New York Review of Books retracted and apologised for a claim that there had been more than 1,000 deaths of migrants working on the site of a stadium she was building in Qatar. There had been no deaths, and construction had not even started. But the story was repeated by the BBC, so in a radio interview about her winning the Royal Gold Medal for Architecture, she rebutted the claim, then cut the interview short.

Ms Hadid built one of the world’s most impressive architectural practices. Its professionalism allowed her to work on a large scale all around the world, from Istanbul to Wolfsburg, Doha to Cincinnati. In Glasgow her Museum of Transport (pictured) is as striking as a lightning flash on the banks of the Clyde. Of two huge projects in Beijing, one is a cluster of dune-like skyscrapers, the other a hollowed out vortex of glass and steel.

Her life was marked by the loss of a secular modern Iraq that might have been: her father was a prominent politician before the Baathists took power. After studying mathematics at the American University of Beirut, she studied at the Architectural Association in London in the 1970s, at a time when there was still a huge divide between the art of architecture and the business of building. That this divide has vanished can partly be attributed to Ms Hadid.

Under the influence of her charismatic teacher, Rem Koolhaas, she discovered the paintings of Kazimir Malevich, the pioneer of “dynamic suprematism”. She began to draw and paint, beautifully and compulsively, producing images with little apparent connection to buildings. She didn’t want to be conventional, but she certainly did want to build. Those drawings presaged her search for fluid ideas about what architectural spaces could be like. Through sheer force of will she realised them.

Give or take the Sydney Opera House, architecture was still in the era of the rectangle when she began. For better or worse, her work, together with that of a few others, notably Frank Gehry, has given permission for an entire generation to experiment with explosive architectural forms. In the process, what was once revolutionary has become mainstream. She tackled office towers and ski jumps and cutlery, all the while trying to make materials do new things and to create new shapes. And that is what gained her a constituency far beyond the world of architects.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books/21696432-iraqi-british-architect-refused-choose-between-art-and-building-zaha-hadid/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Peter Maxwell Davies: The roar of the sea





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Peter Maxwell Davies

The roar of the sea

Peter Maxwell Davies, composer, died on March 14th, aged 81

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition



WHAT he hated most was noise. An aircraft flying low overhead; the buzz of a traffic light at night; the awful possibility, with a telephone, that it might “go off” at any moment. All this drove Peter Maxwell Davies to a frenzy. Critics of his early works might have been puzzled by that. They had only to think of “Worldes Blis”, a piece building to an unbearable climax of violent brass, or the manic percussion of “Eight Songs for a Mad King”, or, in “Revelation and Fall”, a howling soprano assaulting a megaphone. Max, like some demon elf with his springing curls and blazing blue eyes, seemed to spend the 1960s testing listeners to the limit. But these wildly avant-garde productions had come, against all probability, from a well of quiet.

He had to listen out for music. It might come through at any minute, when he was in the bath, or in bed. The notes had been crowding in ever since, at four, he had come home from Gilbert and Sullivan’s “Gondoliers” with his head full of tunes, and his life-path set. So many ideas thronged there later that the minute he put a double bar at the end of a piece, he had to start something new. Forget revision; what was done was old already, and the next piece beckoned, better. Over his career he stacked up 335 opus numbers, starting with a hair-raising trumpet concerto and ending in 2015 with “The Hogboon”, a fairytale of Orkney for children’s choirs.

And one particular sound had changed his life. He first heard it in 1970, when he was visiting the near-deserted valley of Rackwick on the island of Hoy, in Orkney: the continuous “Aeolian harp” of the thronging seas of the Pentland Firth. While others talked, he sat entranced. His life, as it happened, was at a point of change. Many of his possessions had been lost in a fire; and his music, too, was shifting. He was finishing his first large-scale opera, “Taverner”, based on the life of the Tudor composer: a piece about belief corrupted into inhumanity, in appropriately strident modes, which had obsessed him for 14 years. Now he needed a new landscape, and fresh quiet. At Rackwick, a fog-draped ruined croft above the sea offered more solitude than he had ever known. Danger, too; but he lived by danger.

From stone to thorn

He stayed there for 24 years, the first six without electricity and with driftwood fires. When he eventually moved it was only to a more remote island, Sanday, and closer to the shore. Music poured out of him, coloured now with reel-rhythms, pipes, the pounding sea and the light cast from it. In Orkney some of his searching, at least, seemed to be answered, and some of his artistic contradictions calmed.

From his years at music college in Manchester in the mid-1950s, defying fashion, he had loved early music: Dunstable, Monteverdi, Taverner of course, and plainsong. Many of his works in the 1960s were based on masses and hymns, which he then broke up, distorted or turned into silly foxtrots. He loved the ancient settings; but religion was a dirty word, fit for bitter jokes. He would not be told what to do or what to believe: a view sharpened by his homosexuality, at a time when it was illegal.

Orkney did not change those convictions. But through his friendship with George Mackay Brown, a local poet whose every line suggested music, he began to sense the ties between Christianity and the rhythm of the seasons. On Hoy he cut peat, grew potatoes and delivered lambs. One shock-work of his pre-Orkney years, “Vesalii Icones”, had featured a near-naked dancer acting out the Stations of the Cross and bursting from the tomb as AntiChrist. The first thing he wrote on Hoy, “From Stone to Thorn”, was a setting of a poem by Mackay Brown in which Christ was a grain of wheat, cut down and threshed to spring again. His second opera, “The Martyrdom of St Magnus”, grappled again with that theme of sacrifice, this time in the life of Orkney’s own saint.

He also realised on the islands his greatest ambition. As a composer, he was bound to be an outsider; but not one in an ivory tower. (He was naturally anti-elitist, a delicately polite Salford boy, born above a shop.) His responsibility was to promote a love of music, especially in children. In his 20s, teaching at a school in Cirencester, he would tell his pupils to write any music they liked: no rote-learning for him. On Hoy, and while he was a resident composer with the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, he wrote ten “Strathclyde Concertos”, ideal to take into schools. Shy as he was, he “de-inhibited” himself to do it. In 1977 he set up the summer St Magnus festival, bringing world-famous musicians and poets to Orkney alongside the locals, adults and children, who loved to sing and play whatever he wrote for them.

He was made a knight and then, in 2004, master of the queen’s music. Both of these he found amusing, because his work continued to lambast any and all authority. “Black Pentecost” (1979) raged against uranium mining on Stromness; “Last Door of Light” (2008) was a violent plea to tackle climate change. What the public most fondly remembered of him, a gentle chanson triste for piano called “Farewell to Stromness”, was another anti-mining lament. But at the same time it evoked the hush from which his music had continued to leap, burn and cry, while beneath his windows the sea surged on and on.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21696496-peter-maxwell-davies-composer-died-march-14th-aged-81-roar-sea/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Markets

The Economist poll of forecasters, April averages





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21696498-interactive-indicators/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21696562-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21696567-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21696568-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21696569-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist poll of forecasters, April averages

Apr 9th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21696577-economist-poll-forecasters-april-averages/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

TE20160409

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



Facebook: Imperial ambitions





Libya: Another chance





Peru’s election: A dangerous farce





Leak of the century: The lesson of the Panama papers





Tata Steel: Cast-iron arguments





Letters



On Harvard, HPV, the budget, America, our covers, Moore's law, Canada, queuing: Letters to the editor





Briefing



The new face of Facebook: How to win friends and influence people





United States



Wisconsin and after: Donald downed?





Open conventions: A user’s manual





Wisconsin’s Democratic primaries: Sewer socialism’s heir





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





Hawaiian agriculture: Paradise sprayed





Atlantic City: Out of luck





Catching halibut: Wiki-fishing





Lexington: The primaries puzzle





The Americas



Peru’s election: Choosing a new broom





West Indian cricket: The Windies won





Bello: When a “coup” is not a coup





Asia



Coping with senility in Japan: Grey zone





State elections in India: Back at the spinning wheel





Patriotism in India: Oh mother





Legislative elections in South Korea: No walk in the Park





Timor-Leste and Australia: Line in the sand





Banyan: Of blowhards and bombs





China



Catholics: Party and pontiff





House churches: Underground, overground





Middle East and Africa



Kenya and international justice: Obstruction of justice





Libya’s civil war: Unity, up to a point





The West Bank: Deadly DIY





Djibouti: The superpowers’ playground





South Africa: Moment of truth





Europe



French student politics: I dreamed a dream





Greece’s migrant deal: Back where they came from





Iceland’s prime minister: Big fish





Nagorno-Karabakh’s war: A frozen conflict explodes





Russia’s dairy embargo: War and cheese





Charlemagne: The politics of memory





Britain



Fiscal devolution in Scotland: A taste for more





Brexit brief: The economic consequences





Defence industry: Take your partners





Domestic abuse: Violence in the shires





The housing crisis: Lords a-leaping





Second homes: To the lighthouse





Bagehot: Land ahoy!





International



The Panama papers: A torrential leak





The reaction in Russia: Nothing to see here





The reaction in Russia: Internship





Business



Global steel: Through the mill





Taxing America Inc: Pfiasco





Industrial overcapacity: Gluts for punishment





An Indian unicorn: Global appetites





Mobile services: Bots, the next frontier





Schumpeter: The grey market





Finance and economics



Brazilian banks: Defying gravity





Buttonwood: Betraying the promise





India’s GDP data: The elephant in the stats





Migrant workers in the UAE: Wages of chagrin





Structural reform: Don’t stop believing





Tax amnesties: Making crime pay





Free exchange: Dumping and tub-thumping





Free exchange: Marjorie Deane internships





Science and technology



Space travel: Pump it up, Scotty





Ship propulsion: We are sailing





Detecting explosives: The litmus test





Coral bleaching: A hot survivor





Books and arts



Alibaba: Crocodile of the Yangzi





Myanmar: All change, or not





Wallace Stevens: More truly and more strange





Johnson: Of two minds





Birth-cohort studies: Lifelong learning





Zaha Hadid, 1950-2016: Outside the rectangle





Obituary



Obituary: Peter Maxwell Davies: The roar of the sea





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Markets





The Economist poll of forecasters, April averages





