The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Special report: Technology and politics

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



Suicide-bombers attacked the check-in area at Brussels international airport and a train at a metro station, killing more than 30 people and injuring hundreds of others. Belgium declared three days of national mourning; the authorities carried out raids and a manhunt. Islamic State claimed responsibility for the assault, which came a few days after the arrest at a flat in the Belgian capital of Salah Abdeslam, a suspect in last November’s attacks in Paris, which were also claimed by IS. See here and here.

Nadia Savchenko, a Ukrainian army pilot accused of directing artillery fire which killed two Russian journalists, was given a 22-year prison sentence by a Russian court. Her supporters say the charges are nonsense and the trial a farce. Asked if she understood the sentence, she sang the Ukrainian national anthem.

The EU agreed to provide €6 billion ($6.8 billion) and political concessions, including accelerated talks on visa-free travel, in return for Turkey accepting the return of migrants from Greece. The EU will instead accept refugees directly from camps in Turkey. Separately, a suicide-bombing in one of Istanbul’s busiest shopping districts killed four people. See article.

Britain’s Conservative Party was rocked by the resignation of Iain Duncan Smith as welfare minister; he claimed that cuts to disability benefits were “a compromise too far” in a government budget that favoured higher earners. A supporter of Brexit, the timing of his departure has been questioned. His successor promptly reversed the cuts, leaving a £4.4 billion ($6.3 billion) hole in the budget. George Osborne, the chancellor, saw his future leadership hopes dashed further as open rebellion over the budget broke out within the party. See here and here.

Very diplomatic

Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of Myanmar’s National League for Democracy, chose the job of foreign minister in the new civilian government, the first after 50 years of control by the army. She will hold several other portfolios too. Ms Suu Kyi’s party won an election last November, but she was barred from becoming president under the army’s constitutional manoeuvring.

Jia Jia, a journalist and critic of the government in China, has been detained by the authorities, according to his lawyer, apparently in relation to an open letter that sharply criticised President Xi Jinping and called on him to resign. However, the lawyer says Mr Jia did not write the letter.



Jakarta, the capital of Indonesia, came to a standstill when taxi drivers and public-transport workers demonstrated against ride-hailing apps, such as Uber. But the march turned unruly. Some protesters attacked rival taxi cabs and pulled drivers out of their cars who did not agree with their aim of banning app-based transport services.

Australia seems to be heading for an early general election. Malcolm Turnbull, the prime minister, surprised the opposition by recalling Parliament for a sitting next month to discuss union reforms that have been held up in the Senate. See article.

He has their support, for now

A meeting of the national executive committee of South Africa’s ruling party, the African National Congress, expressed confidence in President Jacob Zuma. Some had predicted that the party would “recall” Mr Zuma after a series of damaging allegations of influence peddling, which the party said it would investigate.

The government in Zimbabwe started to investigate the payment of compensation to farmers whose land it has seized illegally. An agreement to pay compensation is seen as a necessary first step towards winning debt forgiveness from Western governments.

Judges from the International Criminal Court found Jean-Pierre Bemba, a former Congolese vice-president, guilty of a deliberate campaign of widespread rapes and killings that took place in the Central African Republic a decade ago. The ruling is the first by the ICC in which it passed a guilty verdict for rape as an act of war. Mr Bemba was held to have had “command responsibility”, even though he did not take direct part in the acts.

Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader, accused America of acting to block the sanctions relief promised by last year’s nuclear deal. The remaining American non-nuclear sanctions have deterred banks from financing business deals with Iran.

You need hands

Donald Trump went to Washington to woo an establishment unnerved by the prospect of him winning the Republican nomination. At a speech to the American Israel Public Affairs Committee he gave assurances that he could broker a deal between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Speaking to the Washington Post he said that other NATO members should do more to counter Russian aggression. He also spoke at length about the size of his hands. See article.

The Justice Department said that “an outside party” had shown it could unlock the iPhone used by one of the assailants in last December’s terror attack in San Bernardino. The FBI has asked Apple for help, but it has refused, arguing it would undermine its commitment to data privacy.

Our man in Havana



Barack Obama became the first American president since 1928 to visit Cuba. In a speech broadcast live on Cuban television he said he had come to “bury the last remnant of the cold war in the Americas”. He told Cuba’s Communist president, Raúl Castro, he “need not fear” freedom of speech and democracy. Mr Obama also met Cuban dissidents. See article.

A supreme court judge in Brazil suspended the appointment of Luiz Inácio Lula de Silva, the former president, as chief of staff to the current president, Dilma Rousseff. Lula, who faces investigation in connection with the scandal centred on Petrobras, could only be tried in the supreme court if he were a member of the cabinet. Supporters of the government accused an investigating judge of breaking the law by releasing wiretapped conversations between Lula and his associates. See here and here.

Rob Ford, a former mayor of Toronto most famous for having been caught on camera smoking crack cocaine, died from cancer. He was a popular mayor who ended a car-registration tax during his term in office from 2010 to 2014.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21695571-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

The saga at Valeant rumbled on. Michael Pearson decided to quit as chief executive of the troubled Canadian drugmaker. He acknowledged that the past few months, during which time the company has been criticised for introducing whopping price increases on heart medicines and has come under federal investigation for its ties to an online pharmacy, have been “difficult”. He will stay until a successor is named. The company blamed the “tone at the top of the organisation” and pressure to achieve targets as factors causing it to restate its earnings. William Ackman, an activist investor whose hedge fund owns 9% of Valeant, was appointed to the board.

IHS and Markit, two providers of market and financial data, agreed to merge in a transaction they valued at $13 billion. IHS is based in Colorado but will move to London, where Markit has its headquarters, thus allowing it to lower its corporate-tax rate considerably. It is the latest in a series of “tax inversion” deals that have attracted political controversy in America. The new IHS Markit will compete with Bloomberg and Thomson Reuters for business.

Phone home

Apple went back to basics, unveiling a new iPhone, the SE, which comes with a smaller screen than the iPhone 6 and is billed by the company as the cheapest iPhone ever. Meanwhile, America’s Supreme Court agreed to hear Samsung’s appeal against the penalties it has incurred for copying Apple’s patented designs on the iPhone.

Marriott increased its offer for Starwood Hotels to $13.6 billion in order to fend off a rival bid from Anbang, a Chinese insurance company. Starwood, which counts the Sheraton and Westin chains among its brands, accepted Marriott’s new deal, which was discussed by the companies’ bosses when they accompanied Barack Obama on his visit to Cuba. Starwood also announced that it had struck a deal with the Cuban government to operate hotels on the island, the first American hotelier to do so since the revolution in 1959.

The minutes from the latest meeting of the Bank of England’s policy committee showed that its members think uncertainty in the markets over the outcome of the June referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union is a “significant driver” behind the fall of the pound. The central bank, which is officially neutral in the Brexit debate, said the uncertainty was also causing some businesses to delay spending decisions.

In a surprise move, Nigeria’s central bank raised its benchmark interest rate by 1 percentage point, to 12%. Nigeria’s currency, the naira, has been hurt by the fall in oil prices. That has helped push up inflation to 11.4%.

Football’s governing body, FIFA, posted its first annual loss since 2002, citing increased development expenses and higher competition costs. It also revealed that Sepp Blatter, the disgraced former president, had received a pay package of $3.7m, the first time it has detailed his remuneration.

Fish out of water



The price of salmon recovered some of the ground it lost last year, as prices on the Norwegian market leapt this week; they are up by over 30% compared with early last year. An algal bloom has reduced the output of salmon farms in Chile, the world’s second-biggest producer, unnerving investors. Share prices of salmon firms have surged amid worries over supply; prices are expected to stay buoyant in the short-term.

Two former executives at Porsche SE were acquitted by a court on charges of misleading the markets about their intention to launch a takeover of Volkswagen in 2008. VW was not party to the trial. Porsche SE, a holding company, is being sued by investors over the matter, though the judge in the case said there was “absolutely nothing” to the allegations.

The pilot of a Lufthansa passenger jet reported that a drone had come within 61 metres (200 feet) of his A380 on its landing approach to Los Angeles. Hundreds of intrusions by drones into planes’ air space have been reported around the world in the past few years, but this one was close. Dianne Feinstein, a senator who has sponsored a drone-safety bill, called the incident “reckless”.

Left grappling

Terry Bollea, a former wrestler better known as Hulk Hogan, pinned down Gawker, a celebrity-news blog, when he won an invasion-of-privacy case over part of a sex tape it had published. Mr Bollea was awarded $115m, more than he had claimed, by a jury in Florida; a further $25m was added for punitive damages. Gawker expressed confidence that it would win with a full submission on appeal.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21695580-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21695578-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




Business in America: The problem with profits

Bombings in Brussels: The new normal

Brazil’s political crisis: Time to go

Reform in rural China: Sell up, move on

Welfare cuts: Two-nation Britain

Technology and politics: Bits and ballots





Articles Sections Next

Business in America

The problem with profits

Big firms in the United States have never had it so good. Time for more competition

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



AMERICA used to be the land of opportunity and optimism. Now opportunity is seen as the preserve of the elite: two-thirds of Americans believe the economy is rigged in favour of vested interests. And optimism has turned to anger. Voters’ fury fuels the insurgencies of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders and weakens insiders like Hillary Clinton.

The campaigns have found plenty of things to blame, from free-trade deals to the recklessness of Wall Street. But one problem with American capitalism has been overlooked: a corrosive lack of competition. The naughty secret of American firms is that life at home is much easier: their returns on equity are 40% higher in the United States than they are abroad. Aggregate domestic profits are at near-record levels relative to GDP. America is meant to be a temple of free enterprise. It isn’t.

Borne by the USA

High profits might be a sign of brilliant innovations or wise long-term investments, were it not for the fact that they are also suspiciously persistent. A very profitable American firm has an 80% chance of being that way ten years later. In the 1990s the odds were only about 50%. Some companies are capable of sustained excellence, but most would expect to see their profits competed away. Today, incumbents find it easier to make hay for longer (see Briefing).

You might think that voters would be happy that their employers are thriving. But if they are not reinvested, or spent by shareholders, high profits can dampen demand. The excess cash generated domestically by American firms beyond their investment budgets is running at $800 billion a year, or 4% of GDP. The tax system encourages them to park foreign profits abroad. Abnormally high profits can worsen inequality if they are the result of persistently high prices or depressed wages. Were America’s firms to cut prices so that their profits were at historically normal levels, consumers’ bills might be 2% lower. If steep earnings are not luring in new entrants, that may mean that firms are abusing monopoly positions, or using lobbying to stifle competition. The game may indeed be rigged.

One response to the age of hyper-profitability would be simply to wait. Creative destruction takes time: previous episodes of peak profits—for example, in the late 1960s—ended abruptly. Silicon Valley’s evangelicals believe that a new era of big data, blockchains and robots is about to munch away the fat margins of corporate America. In the past six months the earnings of listed firms have dipped a little, as cheap oil has hit energy firms and a strong dollar has hurt multinationals.

Unfortunately the signs are that incumbent firms are becoming more entrenched, not less. Microsoft is making double the profits it did when antitrust regulators targeted the software firm in 2000. Our analysis of census data suggests that two-thirds of the economy’s 900-odd industries have become more concentrated since 1997. A tenth of the economy is at the mercy of a handful of firms—from dog food and batteries to airlines, telecoms and credit cards. A $10 trillion wave of mergers since 2008 has raised levels of concentration further. American firms involved in such deals have promised to cut costs by $150 billion or more, which would add a tenth to overall profits. Few plan to pass the gains on to consumers.

Getting bigger is not the only way to squish competitors. As the mesh of regulation has got denser since the 2007-08 financial crisis, the task of navigating bureaucratic waters has become more central to firms’ success. Lobbying spending has risen by a third in the past decade, to $3 billion. A mastery of patent rules has become essential in health care and technology, America’s two most profitable industries. And new regulations do not just fence big banks in: they keep rivals out.

Having limited working capital and fewer resources, small companies struggle with all the forms, lobbying and red tape. This is one reason why the rate of small-company creation in America has been running at its lowest levels since the 1970s. The ability of large firms to enter new markets and take on lazy incumbents has been muted by an orthodoxy among institutional investors that companies should focus on one activity and keep margins high. Warren Buffett, an investor, says he likes companies with “moats” that protect them from competition. America Inc has dug a giant defensive ditch around itself.

Most of the remedies dangled by politicians to solve America’s economic woes would make things worse. Higher taxes would deter investment. Jumps in minimum wages would discourage hiring. Protectionism would give yet more shelter to dominant firms. Better to unleash a wave of competition.

The first step is to take aim at cosseted incumbents. Modernising the antitrust apparatus would help. Mergers that lead to high market share and too much pricing power still need to be policed. But firms can extract rents in many ways. Copyright and patent laws should be loosened to prevent incumbents milking old discoveries. Big tech platforms such as Google and Facebook need to be watched closely: they might not be rent-extracting monopolies yet, but investors value them as if they will be one day. The role of giant fund managers with crossholdings in rival firms needs careful examination, too.

Set them free

The second step is to make life easier for startups and small firms. Concerns about the expansion of red tape and of the regulatory state must be recognised as a problem, not dismissed as the mad rambling of anti-government Tea Partiers. The burden placed on small firms by laws like Obamacare has been material. The rules shackling banks have led them to cut back on serving less profitable smaller customers. The pernicious spread of occupational licensing has stifled startups. Some 29% of professions, including hairstylists and most medical workers, require permits, up from 5% in the 1950s.

A blast of competition would mean more disruption for some: firms in the S&P 500 employ about one in ten Americans. But it would create new jobs, encourage more investment and help lower prices. Above all, it would bring about a fairer kind of capitalism. That would lift Americans’ spirits as well as their economy.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695392-big-firms-united-states-have-never-had-it-so-good-time-more-competition-problem/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bombings in Brussels

The new normal

Europe has suffered another series of murderous attacks by jihadists. They will not be the last

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



ON THE streets of Brussels they had been dreading the next attack. But when Islamic State (IS) eventually struck, on March 22nd at Zaventem airport and then, just over an hour later, in the city’s metro system, anticipation did nothing to diminish the shock or the suffering. As we went to press, the death toll was over 30; at least 200 were injured, some of them critically (see article). Belgium’s prime minister, Charles Michel, called the bombings “blind, violent and cowardly”.

Over the coming days Europe will once again pass through terrorism’s stages of grief: despair over innocent lives cut short; anger towards the young men and women (some of them citizens) who kill in the name of jihad; questions about the grip of the police and intelligence services; and eventually, as news bulletins and headlines subside, a weary resignation.

Yet even now, immediately after the attack, two lessons are clear. One is that, despite being at the top of the most-wanted list for years, IS remains resourceful enough to mount synchronised bombings in the heart of Europe. The other, which flows from this, is that big cities in Europe and America will have to get used to a long campaign of terror in which all are targets.

Havens and have nots

IS’s resilience will cause alarm and rightly so. The Brussels bombers struck days after police arrested Salah Abdeslam, a chief suspect in last year’s attacks in Paris in which 130 people died. For four months he had found haven with sympathetic friends and neighbours just a few streets away from his home in Molenbeek, a Brussels suburb. Plainly, some people are prepared to endorse Mr Abdeslam’s methods even if they are not yet ready to dip their own hands in their compatriots’ blood.

As well as enjoying some support, IS commands expertise and recruits. Across six European countries 18 jihadists are known to be under arrest, suspected of a hand in the Paris attacks. Even so, IS could muster enough jihadists to mount a complex, co-ordinated operation under the nose of the authorities in Brussels, possibly at short notice. French officials have concluded that IS has learnt how to make bombs from commonplace chemicals such as hair dye and nail-polish remover. They have yet to find any of the group’s bombmakers and struggle to penetrate the jihadists’ communications.

The threat is not about to diminish. Some would-be terrorists will be recruited locally. Thousands of men and women have left Europe for IS’s self-styled caliphate in Syria and Iraq, where they have received training and indoctrination. Libya is seething. Al-Qaeda and IS are competing to prove their jihadist credentials. The near-certainty is of more attacks in more cities.

How should governments respond? The starting point is an awareness that terrorists set out to provoke an overreaction. They exult when politicians like Donald Trump vow to exclude Muslims from the United States; when leaders from eastern Europe say they will accept migrants from Syria only if they are Christian; or when Marine Le Pen, leader of the French National Front, compares Muslims praying in the street to the Nazi occupation. Such intolerance helps turn discontents into sympathisers and radicals into bombers. Equally, IS rejoices when Western countries dwell on scores of people dying at home rather than the hundreds of Muslims killed by bombs in Beirut and Turkey or the millions mouldering in refugee camps and suffering in Syria’s civil war. Policy should aim to split radicals off, not force the mainstream into their arms.

Another priority—which goes some way to preventing an overreaction—is to reassure ordinary people that the government is working to protect them. Some politicians think that popular fears of perishing in a terrorist attack are irrational. Barack Obama, in a recent interview in the Atlantic, explained how he likes to remind his staff that more Americans die from falling over in the bath. But terrorism is different from accidental death or even from random murder. The public react to terrorism so strongly because they sense that their government cannot fulfil its basic duty to keep them safe from such enemies. The fear that terrorism provokes is not just a statistical delusion but also an inkling that people who know no limits are organising a conspiracy against the state.

Asked to offer reassurance without straying into overreaction, governments struggle. France, which has suffered grievously in two attacks, is still living under a state of emergency in which the police can search houses without a warrant and place suspects under house arrest. President François Hollande and his prime minister still frequently declare that France is at war. Strong words and the suspension of normal rights were understandable just after the attacks in November. They may now be counterproductive (see article).

Grains of sand

The best protection would be peace in the Middle East—a distant dream, alas. The coalition has made progress against IS in its caliphate, which is shrinking and losing people. But eradicating it needs Iraqi troops (as yet unprepared) and ground forces in Syria (as yet non-existent). Meanwhile, IS’s ability to command and inspire terrorists will persist and, anyway, the West has its own, self-radicalised jihadists to deal with.

And so the police and intelligence services need to operate in every sphere at home, from surveillance to deradicalisation. One thing that can be fixed quickly is underinvestment. Antiquated IT systems hinder collaboration. The security services also need to penetrate jihadist networks and their supporters, using human recruits and enhanced signal intelligence. Inter-agency co-operation has improved, but privacy-protection still hinders the sharing of data. Jihadists work across borders more easily than the security services do. (Brexit could well be a further obstacle.) Better policing and prisons can help stop petty criminals being radicalised. The economic and cultural isolation of districts like Molenbeek must end. It is a long, hard toil and much of it must go on unobserved—except when it fails.

Many will dread the struggle ahead and regret the never-ending contest between security and liberty. But as long as jihadists threaten the West, there is no escaping the need to act. Welcome to the new normal.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695393-europe-has-suffered-another-series-murderous-attacks-jihadists-they-will-not-be/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brazil’s political crisis

Time to go

The tarnished president should now resign

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



DILMA ROUSSEFF’S difficulties have been deepening for months. The massive scandal surrounding Petrobras, the state-controlled oil giant of which she was once chairman, has implicated some of the people closest to her. She presides over an economy suffering its worst recession since the 1930s, largely because of mistakes she made during her first term. Her political weakness has rendered her government almost powerless in the face of rising unemployment and falling living standards. Her approval ratings are barely in double digits and millions of Brazilians have taken to the streets to chant “Fora Dilma!”, or “Dilma out!”

And yet, until now, Brazil’s president could fairly claim that the legitimacy conferred by her re-election in 2014 was intact, and that none of the allegations made against her justified her impeachment. Like the judges and police who are pursuing some of the most senior figures in her Workers’ Party (PT), she could declare with a straight face her desire to see justice done.

Now she has cast away that raiment of credibility (see article). On March 16th Ms Rousseff made the extraordinary decision to appoint her predecessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, to be her chief of staff. She portrayed this as a shrewd hire. Lula, as he is known to all, is a canny political operator: he could help the president survive Congress’s attempt to impeach her and perhaps even stabilise the economy. But just days before, Lula had been briefly detained for questioning at the order of Sérgio Moro, the federal judge in charge of the Petrobras investigation (dubbed lava jato, or “car wash”), who suspects that the former president profited from the bribery scheme (see Bello). Prosecutors in the state of São Paulo have accused Lula of hiding his ownership of a beach-front condominium. He denies these charges. By acquiring the rank of a government minister, Lula would have partial immunity: only the country’s supreme court could try him. In the event, a judge on the court has suspended his appointment.

This newspaper has long argued that either the judicial system or voters—not self-serving politicians trying to impeach her—should decide the president’s fate. But Ms Rousseff’s hiring of Lula looks like a crass attempt to thwart the course of justice. Even if that was not her intention, it would be its effect. This was the moment when the president chose the narrow interests of her political tribe over the rule of law. She has thus rendered herself unfit to remain president.

Three ways to leave the Planalto

How she exits the Planalto, the presidential palace, matters greatly. We continue to believe that, in the absence of proof of criminality, Ms Rousseff’s impeachment is unwarranted. The proceeding against her in Congress is based on unproven allegations that she used accounting trickery to hide the true size of the budget deficit in 2015. This looks like a pretext for ousting an unpopular president. The idea, put forward by the head of the impeachment committee, that congressmen deliberating Ms Rousseff’s fate will listen to “the street”, would set a worrying precedent. Representative democracies should not be governed by protests and opinion polls.

There are three ways of removing Ms Rousseff that rest on more legitimate foundations. The first would be to show that she obstructed the Petrobras investigation. Allegations by a PT senator that she did so may now form the basis of a second impeachment motion, but they are so far unproven and she denies them; Ms Rousseff’s attempt to shield Lula from prosecution may provide further grounds. A second option would be a decision by Brazil’s electoral court to call a new presidential election. It may do that, if it finds that her re-election campaign in 2014 was financed with bribes channelled through Petrobras executives. But this investigation will be drawn out. The quickest and best way for Ms Rousseff to leave the Planalto would be for her to resign before being pushed out.

Her departure would offer Brazil the chance of a fresh start. But the president’s resignation would not, of itself, solve Brazil’s many underlying problems. Her place would initially be taken by the vice-president, Michel Temer, leader of the Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement. Mr Temer could head a national-unity government, including opposition parties, which, in theory, might be able to embark on the fiscal reforms needed to stabilise the economy and close a budget deficit that is close to 11% of GDP.

Sadly, Mr Temer’s party is as deeply enmeshed in the Petrobras scandal as the PT. Many politicians who would join a unity government, including some from the opposition, are popularly seen as representatives of a discredited ruling class. Of Congress’s 594 members, 352 face accusations of criminal wrongdoing. A new presidential election would give voters an opportunity to entrust reforms to a new leader. But even this would leave the rotten legislature in place until 2019.

The judiciary, too, has questions to answer. Judges deserve great credit for holding Brazil’s mightiest businessmen and politicians to account, but they have undermined their cause by flouting legal norms. The latest example is Mr Moro’s decision to release recorded telephone conversations between Lula and his associates, including Ms Rousseff. Most jurists believe that only the supreme court may divulge conversations in which one of the parties has legal immunity, as the president does. This does not justify the claim from government supporters that the judges are staging a “coup”. But it makes it easy for lava jato suspects to divert attention from their own misdeeds to the blunders of their pursuers.

Brazil’s war of parties and personalities obscures some of the most important lessons of the crisis. Both the Petrobras scandal and the economic crash have their origins in misconceived laws and practices that are decades old. Getting Brazil out of its mess requires wholesale change: controlling public spending, including on pensions; overhauling growth-crushing tax and labour laws; and reforming a political system that encourages corruption and weakens political parties.

These can no longer be put off. Those chanting “Fora Dilma!” on the streets would claim victory if she was ousted. But for Brazil itself to win it would be just the first step.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695391-tarnished-president-should-now-resign-time-go/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Reform in rural China

Sell up, move on

Rural residents are largely shut out of China’s booming property market. That is a mistake

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



CHINA’S great lift-off began more than three decades ago in the countryside, when the Communist Party began loosening the rules it had used to ensure that farmers stayed in their villages and produced food at the party’s behest.

Under Maoist madness, farmers were corralled into “people’s communes” where they toiled in abject poverty and sometimes extreme hunger. But from the late 1970s, farmers gradually gained yearned-for freedoms: to farm their own plots of land and sell their produce privately, and eventually to move into cities to work in factories. These changes were a liberation; they helped to transform the country from basket case to economic powerhouse. But they did not go far enough. The remaining vestiges of Maoist control are deeply unfair and hold back the country’s economic development at a time of slowing growth. China needs a new wave of reform.

Twin shackles

Farmers still cannot freely trade the land they use or the houses they own. And if they do move to cities, many of them are still shut out of subsidised urban public services, such as health care and education, simply because of their rural origins. For a country that sees middle-class spending as a vital source of future growth, these problems bode ill. They limit the ability of hundreds of millions of people to join the urban middle-class. And they create a dangerous social divide: the 250m or so who have already moved into urban areas are often treated as second-class citizens. Their household-registration papers, or hukou, still classify many as “peasants”.

The Communist Party admits these problems need fixing. But it has been slow to reform. The south-western region of Chongqing is one of the few places that has put much effort into creating a rural property market (see article). It has also turned many migrants into full urban citizens, with hukou papers to prove it. But both experiments have run into obstacles. One is the colossal cost of building affordable housing for migrants, and of providing them with access to the same public services as everyone else. Another problem is that farmers still cannot trade their property freely; the rural-land market set up in Chongqing has benefited only a few of them.

Rather than tinker with incremental reform, it is time for China both to scrap the pernicious hukou system, and give farmers full rights to the land they live on and till. That means letting them profit by selling their houses, a right that urban residents have enjoyed since the 1990s. It also means that rural dwellers must give up their claim to be allocated land, free of charge, to use for farming and the building of homesteads. Rural land rights should be privatised; just as urban land rights have been privatised in all but name.

The government worries that farmers might sell everything and rush into cities, creating shantytowns filled with landless, jobless migrants who could pose a threat to stability. The party is wrong to fret. It is evident that many farmers would not sell up impetuously. Fearful of losing land rights, and with them a guarantee of somewhere to go if life goes awry in the cities, migrants often do not take up urban hukou even when offered it. At the same time millions of farmers have already been forced off their land with little or no compensation by China’s relentless urban expansion. They have not created vast slums nor, despite their many protests, have they threatened stability.

Many in the party also believe that “collective” ownership of rural land is a sacred legacy of Mao, that, for all his mistakes, was created with noble intent. But the president, Xi Jinping, says that market forces should play a “decisive role” in China. Let that be so in the countryside, as much as in the cities.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695394-rural-residents-are-largely-shut-out-chinas-booming-property-market-mistake-sell/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Welfare cuts

Two-nation Britain

Iain Duncan Smith’s flounce was opportunistic, but he is on to something

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN Iain Duncan Smith resigned on March 18th in protest at curbs to disability benefits, eyes in Westminster rolled. How odd for the man who has run the Department for Work and Pensions (fairly incompetently) for the past six years to turn on his own policies. How transparently his animus towards George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer, motivated his accusations. How conveniently these bolstered Mr Duncan Smith’s complaints, as a pro-Brexit campaigner, about an aloof and elitist Europhile establishment. “Disappointed” by the resignation and using sturdier language privately, a red-faced David Cameron went before his MPs in the House of Commons on March 21st to offer his retort and confirm that the disability cuts would not go ahead. He also reminded them of his government’s “one nation” achievements, including falling inequality, soaring employment and school reform.

Mr Duncan Smith’s motives may be dubious and his complaint off-target (the proposed disability cuts were less egregious than some others). But he has stumbled on something that matters. The budget was regressive, cutting welfare as it reduced income tax for the top 15% of earners and capital-gains taxes mostly paid by the asset-rich (see article). Ministers say that a forthcoming increase in the minimum wage compensates for the cuts. In fact it most benefits middling households (since its recipients often support a higher-earning partner) and is part of a wider post-election tilt towards the better off. According to one estimate, changes announced since the Conservatives won a majority last year will leave the average annual income of the top 30% of households £280 ($400) higher and that of the bottom 30% £565 lower. Meanwhile the jobs engine is slowing, wage growth is faltering and the wealthiest are roaring ahead. The fall in inequality over the previous parliament will probably be wiped out over the course of this one.

Blame politics. The Conservatives won the election partly by pledging a rush to budget surplus through welfare cuts so stringent that the Labour Party could not bring itself to match them. It also promised to ring-fence sensitive budgets like hospitals, schools and foreign aid, and committed to a “triple lock”, increasing the state pension by the rate of inflation, earnings growth or 2.5% a year, whichever is greatest. Such promises have left Mr Osborne with little option but to dip into the pockets of poorer, younger Britons who, conveniently, are less likely to vote. And with a divisive EU referendum looming in June, local Tory associations in revolt and a leadership election on the horizon (see Bagehot), no minister wants to sting the plump, grey Conservative base. The Labour Party may have trooped into the left-wing wilderness under Jeremy Corbyn, but the centrist overtures with which the prime minister has recently wooed the opposition’s more moderate supporters have been confined to safe schemes like improving mental health and sprucing up sink estates.

Fools to the left, jokers to the right

This newspaper cheers politicians who reduce dependency and sharpen the incentives to work, as the Tories have. We recognise the need to be mindful of Britain’s deficit, which some in Labour appear to disregard. But as long as the country’s belt-tightening disproportionately squeezes the worse-off, there will be a hole in the prime minister’s “one nation” rhetoric. If he wins the EU vote, Mr Cameron will face few threats and, having pledged to step down by 2020, no more general elections. He should use that freedom to spring the pensions “triple lock”, ease cuts to working-age benefits and release his party from the rigid promise to be in surplus by 2020. Today, swathes of the centre ground are vacant. The country would be better off if the Conservatives did more to seize it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695395-iain-duncan-smiths-flounce-was-opportunistic-he-something-two-nation-britain/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Technology and politics

Bits and ballots

Social media have made the world more democratic—for now

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



THE world’s first tweet was as dull as they come. “Just setting up my twttr,” wrote Jack Dorsey, now Twitter’s chief executive, on March 21st 2006. Ten years after that inauspicious start, Twitter’s 320m monthly users send hundreds of millions of tweets a day. However cloudy the firm’s current prospects, and however trivial many of those tweets may be, Twitter is part of a wider communications revolution. As this week’s special report shows, the internet has distributed more political power to citizens. But new technologies also carry risks.

Initial scepticism about the political impact of social media has faded. With the advent of the smartphone, messaging apps and video-streaming services, Twitter and other social platforms have become central to all kinds of collective action. They let like-minded people quickly find one another. They make it easy to get the message out and to mobilise the masses. And they allow nascent protest movements to function without leaders or formal organisations, to begin with at least.

All this is to be welcomed. Twitter and other social media have made the world a more democratic place. They give voice and power to people who have neither—and not just in autocratic countries. Social media turbo-charged anti-austerity movements such as the indignados in Spain. More recently, they helped get Black Lives Matter, a movement fighting violence against African-Americans, off the ground.

But technology is never purely good or bad—it always cuts both ways. Social media also facilitate more troubling kinds of activism: xenophobic groups in Germany and Islamic State both make extensive use of such platforms, for example. And even as social-media services democratise political movements, the data they carry can also concentrate power in pernicious ways.

Online campaigns leave a big digital footprint that can be analysed, often in real time. Again, Twitter is a good example: those with access to its millions of tweets can map networks of activists, analyse what they are talking about and identify the most influential. This flood of digital information is a bonanza for intelligence agencies and, especially, for autocratic regimes. Both can use social media as a tool for surveillance. True, citizens can use encryption to protect themselves from the eye of the state. But greater secrecy also makes media less social, and political campaigns harder to organise.

Power to the algorithm

Access to data can concentrate power in the hands of private entities, too. Political campaigns, particularly in America, have long harnessed electoral data to identify supporters who need a nudge to get out to vote or who may be convinced to change their mind. Thanks to social media, voters can now be targeted with ever more precision. Facebook, for instance, allows political organisations to upload lists of voters and inject tailored ads into their newsfeeds. That might exacerbate political polarisation, by further walling off voters from different views. And such digital campaigns do not come cheap, handing an advantage both to those firms that sit on most data and to those candidates with most financial resources.

The original vision of the internet, as a self-governing cyber-Utopia, has long since been consigned to history (see article). But it remains a public good. The danger is that the centralisation of data may undo many of the democratic gains that social media and other technologies have brought.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21695396-social-media-have-made-world-more-democraticfor-now-bits-and-ballots/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




On American politics, African trade, companies, migrants, glyphosate, Malaysia, the semicolon: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

On American politics, African trade, companies, migrants, glyphosate, Malaysia, the semicolon

Letters to the editor

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



The party’s over

Your assessment of the fractious condition of America’s political parties concluded that “it is impossible to imagine a big democracy staying healthy without them” (“The party declines”, March 5th). But the current state of many large democracies suggests exactly the contrary. The polarisation of politics in America; the entrenchment of party whips in Britain; complete dysfunction in Italy; and institutionalised corruption and class prejudice in India: all of these result from the misplaced importance accorded to political parties.

America’s Founding Fathers focused on representation, not parties. This year’s presidential race shows how the parties have become so out-of-step with that ideal. The parties now represent the various interest groups they have cobbled together to justify their existence and have become part of the “establishment”, whose raison d’être is self-preservation. It is little wonder that voters are swayed more by the superficial emotional appeal of simple anti-establishment rhetoric than by serious consideration of the issues facing the country.

Where, for example, is the debate on the role of education when it come to competing with the surging skills of India and China? Where is the serious analysis of how best to return the economy to surplus and manage the crushing burden of national debt on generations to come?

Ultimately voters get the representatives they vote for. Sadly, too few give too little thought to this crucial right and duty.

MIKE RAVEN

Buffalo, New York





Trade in Africa

* Your article “Tear down these walls” (February 27th) covered a range of factors that impeded intra-African trade, such as tariffs and non-tariff barriers and overlapping memberships of African countries in regional trade bloc. The factors you listed relate mostly to trade in goods. Increasingly, African countries not only trade in goods but also in services.



UNCTAD advises African countries to sharpen their competitiveness not only by revising national policy and regulatory regimes but also by fostering intra-African trade in services through regulatory co-ordination and co-operation in critical areas of infrastructure and finance. Ongoing negotiations toward both the Tripartite Free Trade Area and the African Union’s Continental Free Trade Area must include services in trade. Downplaying the importance of services in such negotiations will be a critical mistake that African countries need to avoid.



The services sector is the oil that greases the wheels of trade: the complementarities between efficient services provision and competitive supplies of goods on regional and world markets must not be overlooked. Indeed, intra-African trade will be among urgent matters discussed by African and other states at a global ministerial conference to be held in Nairobi this July.



JOAKIM REITER

Deputy secretary-general

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

Geneva





Stay out of the limelight

Projecting statesmanship may be necessary for some business leaders (Schumpeter, February 27th), but not if there is something rotten in the overall state of the company. We have found that, during the economic slump of 2007-10, those chief executives who were the media face of their company while simultaneously being connected with other issues of public interest, fared worst as business leaders. The market capitalisation of their companies shrank the most.

Companies where market capitalisation contracted the least had CEOs who, relative to their peers, played the smallest role in the media coverage of their business, and were also hardly linked to any other public issue.

GREGOR HALFF

Professor of corporate communication practice

Singapore Management University





Migrants in Germany

It is absurd to claim that in Germany “suddenly foreigners are in schools, swimming pools and hospitals” (Charlemagne, March 5th). In 2014, before the million refugees arrived, more than 20% of the German population had a foreign background. We have lived together for a long time in the real world, not in some 1950s fairy tale.

In this refugee crisis a large number of Germans (and foreigners) have displayed a can-do attitude that is the opposite of what you describe as people withdrawing to private life. That said, it is right that the influx has polarised society and that political debate is becoming more aggressive.

MICHAEL MEYER-RESENDE

Executive director

Democracy Reporting International

Berlin





Regulating glyphosate

You stated that regulators in Europe “are arguing over the safety of glyphosate, the world’s top weedkiller” (“Fog of uncertainty”, March 5th). Although some politicians might be arguing about glyphosate, no pesticide regulator in the world considers it to be a carcinogen. In November 2015, the European Food Safety Authority concluded that “Glyphosate is unlikely to pose a carcinogenic hazard to humans.” And in April 2015, the Canadian regulator found that “the overall weight of evidence indicates that glyphosate is unlikely to pose a human cancer risk.” Also last year, America’s Environmental Protection Agency reaffirmed that glyphosate is not an endocrine disrupter.

Glyphosate’s renewal is up for a vote by the European Commission, and it is no surprise that this process has sparked political debate. Much of the debate centres on a classification by a working group of the International Agency for Research on Cancer, even though it is not a regulatory authority.

Regulators depend on science and an informed public to make the best decisions for all of us.

PHILIP MILLER

Vice-president, global regulatory and governmental affairs

Monsanto

St Louis, Missouri





The state of Malaysia

Many Malaysians barely recognise the country that you described in “The Najib effect” (March 5th). Contrary to your assertion that the economy is in trouble, growth last year beat expectations at a very healthy 5%, which the OECD predicts we will be able to maintain over the next five years. Since Najib Razak, the prime minister, launched Malaysia’s Economic Transformation Programme in 2010, 1.8m jobs have been created, and private investment has more than tripled. The truth is that our economy “continues to perform well”, to quote the IMF’s most recent report on our country.

In addition, far from regressing, Malaysia has undergone a political-reform programme unmatched in recent history. Since assuming office, the prime minister has repealed the Internal Security Act; eliminated the bans on opposition party newspapers and removed the annual renewal requirement for printing licences; lifted the ban on student participation in politics; repealed the Banishment Act and the Restricted Residences Act, as well as emergency proclamations; passed the Peaceful Assembly Act, enshrining the right to protest into law for the first time; and set up a bipartisan panel on electoral reform.

Moreover, the prime minister regularly attends the festivals of non-Muslims, going to churches and temples to share the celebrations of fellow Malaysians, and is acknowledged as a leader in the fight against terrorism and extremism, both nationally and internationally.

This is the true picture of Malaysia today.

DATO’ AHMAD RASIDI HAZIZI

High commissioner of Malaysia

London





The semicolon; and its faults



One bit of punctuation that should follow the diastole, the trigon, the interpunct and the diple onto the scrap heap of history is the semicolon (Johnson, March 12th). Very few people know how to use semicolons correctly and The Economist’s constant overuse contradicts its advice—contained in its very own style guide—not to overdo them.

Kurt Vonnegut said it best: “Do not use semicolons. They are transvestite hermaphrodites representing absolutely nothing. All they do is show you’ve been to college.”

JOHN O’CALLAGHAN

Singapore



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21695365-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Business in America: Too much of a good thing





Articles Sections Next

Business in America

Too much of a good thing

Profits are too high. America needs a giant dose of competition

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



AMERICA’S airlines used to be famous for two things: terrible service and worse finances. Today flyers still endure hidden fees, late flights, bruised knees, clapped-out fittings and sub-par food. The profit bit of the picture, though, has changed a lot. Last year America’s airlines made $24 billion—more than Alphabet, the parent company of Google. Even as the price of fuel, one of airlines’ main expenses, collapsed alongside the oil price, little of that benefit was passed on to consumers through lower prices, with revenues remaining fairly flat. After a bout of consolidation in the past decade the industry is dominated by four firms with tight financial discipline and many shareholders in common. And the return on capital is similar to that seen in Silicon Valley.

What is true of the airline industry is increasingly true of America’s economy as a whole. Profits have risen in most rich countries over the past ten years but the increase has been biggest for American firms. Coupled with an increasing concentration of ownership, this means the fruits of economic growth are being hoarded. This is probably part of the reason that two-thirds of Americans, including a majority of Republicans, have come to believe that the economy “unfairly favours powerful interests”, according to polling by Pew, a research outfit. It means that when Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, the Democratic contenders for president, say that the economy is “rigged”, they have a point.



The last year has seen a slight dip in aggregate profits because of the high dollar and the effect of the oil price on energy firms. But profits are at near-record highs relative to GDP (see chart 1) and free cash flow—the money firms generate after capital investment has been subtracted—has grown yet more strikingly. Return on capital is at near-record levels, too (adjusted for goodwill). The past two decades have seen most firms make more money than they used to. And more firms have become very profitable.

Opportunities

An intense burst of consolidation will boost their profits more. Since 2008 American firms have engaged in one of the largest rounds of mergers in their country’s history, worth $10 trillion. Unlike earlier acquisitions aimed at building global empires, these mergers were largely aimed at consolidating in America, allowing the merged companies to increase their market shares and cut their costs. The companies in question usually make no pretence of planning to pass the savings they make this way on to their customers; take their estimates of the synergies involved at face value and profits in America will rise by a further 10% or so.

Profits are an essential part of capitalism. They give investors a return, encourage innovation and signal where resources should be invested. Their accumulation allows investment in bold new ventures. Countries where profits are too low—Japan, for instance—can slip into morbid torpor. Firms that ignore profits, such as China’s state-run enterprises, lurch around like aimless zombies, as likely to destroy value as to create it.

But high profits across a whole economy can be a sign of sickness. They can signal the existence of firms more adept at siphoning wealth off than creating it afresh, such as those that exploit monopolies. If companies capture more profits than they can spend, it can lead to a shortfall of demand. This has been a pressing problem in America. It is not that firms are underinvesting by historical standards. Relative to assets, sales and GDP, the level of investment is pretty normal. But domestic cash flows are so high that they still have pots of cash left over after investment: about $800 billion a year.

High profits can deepen inequality in various ways. The pool of income to be split among employees could be squeezed. Consumers might pay too much for goods. In a market the size of America’s prices should be lower than in other industrialised economies. By and large, they are not. Though American companies now make a fifth of their profits abroad, their naughty secret is that their return-on-equity is 40% higher at home.

Most explanations of America’s high profits draw on national-accounts data which show that the fall in the share of output going to workers over the past decade is equivalent to about 60% of the rise in domestic pre-tax profits. Scholars typically have three explanations for this: technology, which has allowed firms to replace workers with machines and software; globalisation, which has made it easier to shift production to lower cost countries; and a decline in trade-union membership.

None of these accounts, though, explain the most troubling aspect of America’s profit problem: its persistence. Business theory holds that firms can at best enjoy only temporary periods of “competitive advantage” during which they can rake in cash. After that new companies, inspired by these rich pickings, will pile in to compete away those fat margins, bringing prices down and increasing both employment and investment. It’s the mechanism behind Adam Smith’s invisible hand.

In America that hand seems oddly idle. An American firm that was very profitable in 2003 (one with post-tax returns on capital of 15-25%, excluding goodwill) had an 83% chance of still being very profitable in 2013; the same was true for firms with returns of over 25%, according to McKinsey, a consulting firm. In the previous decade the odds were about 50%. The obvious conclusion is that the American economy is too cosy for incumbents.

In 1998, Joel Klein, who ran the antitrust operation at the Department of Justice (DoJ), declared that “our economy is more competitive today than it has been in a long, long time.” He may well have been right. In the post-war boom American firms grew into mighty conglomerates; in the 1960s J.K. Galbraith, a left-leaning economist, predicted the rise of a symbiotic “industrial state” in which large companies worked closely with the government. But in the 1980s deregulation opened some industries, such as telecoms and railways, to competition. And a new doctrine of shareholder value led big firms, such as RJR Nabisco, to be broken-up and sprawling conglomerates to become focused. In the 1990s American firms faced a wave of competition from low-cost competitors abroad (and, reciprocally, focused their energy on expanding overseas).

Since then the pendulum seems to have swung back. Huge companies, long the focus of American worries about competition, have not actually got any bigger. In 2014 the top 500 listed firms made about 45% of the global profits of all American firms, as they did in the late 1990s. Instead they, and other companies, have become more focused. The strategy can be seen as an amalgam of the philosophies of two deeply influential business figures. Jack Welch, the boss of General Electric for two decades at the end of the 20th century, advised companies to get out of markets which they did not dominate. Warren Buffett, the 21st century’s best-known investor, extols firms that have a “moat” around them—a barrier that offers stability and pricing power.



One way American firms have improved their moats in recent times is through creeping consolidation. The Economist has divided the economy into 900-odd sectors covered by America’s five-yearly economic census. Two-thirds of them became more concentrated between 1997 and 2012 (see charts 2 and 3). The weighted average share of the top four firms in each sector has risen from 26% to 32%.



INTERACTIVE: Explore all 893 industries grouped by sector in our interactive scatter chart

Miracles

These data make it possible to distinguish between sectors of the economy that are fragmented, concentrated or oligopolistic, and to look at how revenues have fared in each case. Revenues in fragmented industries—those in which the biggest four firms together control less than a third of the market—dropped from 72% of the total in 1997 to 58% in 2012. Concentrated industries, in which the top four firms control between a third and two-thirds of the market, have seen their share of revenues rise from 24% to 33%. And just under a tenth of the activity takes place in industries in which the top four firms control two-thirds or more of sales. This oligopolistic corner of the economy includes niche concerns—dog food, batteries and coffins—but also telecoms, pharmacies and credit cards.

Concentration does not of itself indicate collusion. Other factors at play might include regulations that keep competitors out. Business spending on lobbying doubled over the period as incumbents sought to shape regulations in ways that suited them. The rising importance of intangible assets, particularly patents, has meant that an ability to manage industry regulators and the challenges of litigation is more valuable than ever.

The ability of big firms to influence and navigate an ever-expanding rule book may explain why the rate of small-company creation in America is close to its lowest mark since the 1970s (although an index of startups run by the Kauffman Foundation has shown flickers of life recently). Small firms normally lack both the working capital needed to deal with red tape and long court cases, and the lobbying power that would bend rules to their purposes. A lack of lobbying clout and legal savvy may also help explain foreign firms’ loss of momentum. In the 1990s adventurers from abroad piled into America, with the share of output from foreign-owned subsidiaries rising steadily. But foreign firms seem to have lost their mojo. Since 2003 their contribution has been flat at about 6% of private business output.

Another factor that may have made profits stickier is the growing clout of giant institutional shareholders such as BlackRock, State Street and Capital Group. Together they own 10-20% of most American companies, including ones that compete with each other. Claims that they rig things seem far-fetched, particularly since many of these funds are index trackers; their decisions as to what to buy and sell are made for them. But they may well set the tone, for example by demanding that chief executives remain disciplined about pricing and restraining investment in new capacity. The overall effect could mute competition.

Quantifying the effect of the corporate America’s defences is tricky. Profits are not the whole picture. In some industries—banking is a case in point—rent-seeking will result in high pay to an employee elite instead. But one can get a crude sense of what is going on by dividing the profits all firms generate into the “bog-standard” and the “exceptional”. Over the past 50 years return on capital has averaged about 10% (excluding goodwill) and that is what investors tend to demand, so let that represent bog-standard profits. The excess on top of that—which may reflect brilliant innovations, wise historic investments in intangible assets such as brands, or, perhaps, a lack of competition—is the exceptional bit. For S&P 500 firms these exceptional profits are currently running at about $300 billion a year, equivalent to a third of taxed operating profits, or 1.7% of GDP.

I love you, you pay my rent

About a quarter of America’s abnormal profits are spread across a wide range of sectors. Returns on capital, concentration and prices have risen in many pockets of the economy. The cable television industry has become more tightly controlled, and many Americans rely on a monopoly provider; prices have risen at twice the rate of inflation over the past five years. Consolidation in one of Mr Buffett’s favourite industries, railroads, has seen freight prices rise by 40% in real terms and returns on capital almost double since 2004. The proposed merger of Dow Chemical and DuPont, announced last December, illustrates the trend to concentration. After combining, the companies plan to split into three specialist companies each of which will have a higher share of its market than either original company had before the deal. They say the plan will yield $3 billion in cost savings. Since 2008 American mergers have sought to remove recurring annual costs of about $150 billion from industrial ledgers. Few firms that are not regulated utilities have public plans to pass these gains on to consumers.

Concentration is contagious. As firms become more powerful those elsewhere on associated chains of customers and suppliers bulk up in response. Google now dominates internet searches for flights and hotels. This has led Expedia, the leading internet travel-agent, to beef up by buying two of its main rivals over the past two years. The spectre of very big online travel sites dominating the purchase of hotel rooms has led the hotel firms to consolidate, too, with Marriott agreeing to buy Starwood this month. (A Chinese firm, Anbang, may make a counter-bid).

Roughly another quarter of abnormal profits comes from the health-care industry, where a cohort of pharmaceutical and medical-equipment firms make aggregate returns on capital of 20-50%. The industry is riddled with special interests and is governed by patent rules that allow firms temporary monopolies on innovative new drugs and inventions. Much of health-care purchasing in America is ultimately controlled by insurance firms. Four of the largest, Anthem, Cigna, Aetna and Humana, are planning to merge into two larger firms.

The rest of the abnormal profits are to be found in the technology sector, where firms such as Google and Facebook enjoy market shares of 40% or more. By Silicon Valley’s account such penetration reflects the popularity and inventiveness of the products on offer, some of which are free to consumers. Today’s dominant firms could be tomorrow’s Nokia or Blackberry: Apple now trades on just 11 times earnings, suggesting investors expect it to decline. Firms such as Uber and Airbnb are a rare source of disruption in the economy, competing fiercely with incumbents.

But many of these arguments can be spun the other way. Alphabet, Facebook and Amazon are not being valued by investors as if they are high risk, but as if their market shares are sustainable and their network effects and accumulation of data will eventually allow them to reap monopoly-style profits. (Alphabet is now among the biggest lobbyists of any firm, spending $17m last year.) A fall from grace in the tech world is not as bad as you might imagine. Microsoft’s operating profits today are twice what they were in 2000, when Mr Klein was prosecuting it in an antitrust trial. And the “sharing economy” startups that are being so highly rated by some investors mostly seek to dominate their markets. The large mountains of cash they are burning today can only be justified if they eventually mature to enjoy very high market shares and margins.

In the past, periods of high and stable profits have ended. Just three years after Mr Galbraith made his 1967 prediction of a cosy, collaborative business world, it was already toast: profits had collapsed by a third relative to GDP as recession struck. Today’s profits, too, may be more vulnerable than they look. If wages finally pick up it could crimp margins. The earnings-per-share of listed firms have fallen slightly in the past few quarters, though a strong dollar and declining oil revenues explain much of that. Some observers of the stockmarket argue that it is already signalling more decline. The gap between the real yield on equities and that on government bonds suggests that either firms are riskier than ever, bond yields are freakishly low, or that profits face a cyclical downturn.

Even so, it is hard to identify a mechanism by which profits might fall to more normal levels. Investors and managers continue to place extraordinarily high profit multiples on businesses with “moats”. The cable television industry is supposedly under pressure from the likes of Netflix and Amazon Prime. Yet in 2015 Charter Communications, a cable company, bought Time Warner Cable for $79 billion, or 26 times its free cash flow, which implies that it believes it will be in a position to raise prices. When Heinz (part-controlled by Mr Buffett) bought Kraft Foods in 2015, it paid 31 times the free cash flow and promptly slashed spending to boost margins, suggesting it felt the threat from rival makers of cheese slices was rather small.

Antitrust, but verify

Perhaps antitrust regulators will act, forcing profits down. The relevant responsibilities are mostly divided between the DoJ and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), although some industries, such as railways and telecoms, also have their own regulators. The DOJ and FTC are busy trying to police the mergers-and-acquisition boom. Rather than contest every deal they select cases that set new precedents and argue them in court: of the 15,000 deals between 2005-14, about 3% have been subject to close scrutiny.

Together the two bodies have roamed far and wide. The DoJ has blocked domestic deals, such as the takeover by AT&T of T-Mobile USA in 2011, and cross-border combinations that would have caused concentration in global industries, such as the merger of two chipmakers, Applied Materials and Tokyo Electron, in 2015. The FTC spends a big chunk of its time looking at health care. It has blocked hospital mergers and fought “pay-for-delay” deals in which pharmaceutical firms try to stop generic competitors from launching rival products when patents expire. The DoJ is casting a beady eye over the airlines.

Yet the system suffers two limitations. One is constitutional. The two bodies’ job is to police infringements of a well-established and mature body of law through the courts. This leaves them admirably free of overt political interference and lobbying but it also limits their scope. Lots of important subjects are beyond their purview. They cannot consider whether the length and security of patents is excessive in an age when intellectual property is so important. They may not dwell deeply on whether the business model of large technology platforms such as Google has a long-term dependence on the monopoly rents that could come from its vast and irreproducible stash of data. They can only touch upon whether outlandishly large institutional shareholders with positions in almost all firms can implicitly guide them not to compete head on; or on why small firms seem to be struggling. Their purpose is to police illegal conduct, not reimagine the world. They lack scope.

The second limitation is intellectual. America’s antitrust apparatus has gone through periods of leniency (1915-35) and stridency (1936-72). By the 1980s the Chicago school of free-market thought was ascendant. Its insistence that the efficiency benefits of big mergers should not be dismissed had a big influence on the courts. Antitrust guidelines which held that any deal involving a firm with a market share of 35% or more should be considered suspect on principle have been set aside in favour of a more granular approach, with regulators looking ever more closely at the specific effects of a deal. To work out if a deal lowers consumers’ level of choice or lets firms hike prices they will study micro-markets in specific regions.

Who does not prefer the rifle to the blunderbuss, the scalpel to the axe? Such sophistication allows regulators to demand clever remedies, such as the disposal of subsidiaries. But with their heads deep in data and court rulings that set fine precedents, the scientists of antitrust are able to sidestep some troubling questions. If markets are truly competitive, why do so many companies now claim they can retain the cost synergies that big deals create, not pass them on to consumers? Why do investors believe them? Why have returns on capital risen almost everywhere?

These legal and intellectual limitations of the antitrust apparatus raise the question of competition to the political sphere—currently, alas, a realm well supplied with blunderbusses and axes wielded haphazardly and at the wrong targets. Americans’ mistrust of their economic system and the companies that make so much money in it has so far been channelled into calls for protectionism and government intervention. Free trade should be limited. Health-care firms should be more regulated. Foreign firms—particularly Chinese ones—should be discriminated against. Wages should be forced up. Taxes on companies should be raised.

Memories of the future

Nowhere has the alternative approach been articulated. It would aim to unleash a burst of competition to shake up the comfortable incumbents of America Inc. It would involve a serious effort to remove the red tape and occupational-licensing schemes that strangle small businesses and deter new entrants. It would examine a loosening of the rules that give too much protection to some intellectual-property rights. It would involve more active, albeit cruder, antitrust actions. It would start a more serious conversation about whether it makes sense to have most of the country’s data in the hands of a few very large firms. It would revisit the entire issue of corporate lobbying, which has become a key mechanism by which incumbent firms protect themselves.



Large firms no longer employ all that many people in America: the domestic employee base of the S&P 500 is only around a tenth of total American employment. New firms would invest more, employ more staff, and force incumbents to invest more in order to compete. If this sounds pie in the sky, consider the shale revolution over the past decade. Although the industry is now suffering from low oil prices, it is a rare example of entrepreneurial spirit taking on a stodgy industry to the benefit of all. A new commitment to competition could be the source of optimism that America is desperately searching for. After all, it is only a healthy dollop of greed and a belief in a better future that prompts people to start from scratch and try to cross the moat that has been dug around corporate America.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21695385-profits-are-too-high-america-needs-giant-dose-competition-too-much-good-thing/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




Trump and the world: Don’t deal with it

The primaries: Heard on the trail

College endowments: Yard sale

Deporting child migrants: Self-defence

Primaries in the West: Mormons against the Donald

Florida’s Haitian-Americans: The Creole caucuses

Lexington: The meaning of blue jeans





Articles Sections Next

Trump and the world

Don’t deal with it

If Donald Trump wins the nomination he is likely to ditch half a century of Republican thinking on foreign policy

Mar 26th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition



CONVENTIONAL candidates for the American presidency signal how they might deal with the world in three main ways. First, they are expected to issue detailed foreign policies, though—in truth—few of these plans are robust enough to survive when stuff happens. Next, by choosing advisers known for strong views or special expertise, candidates nod to their own priorities. The third signalling mechanism is the most nebulous but the most useful, and happens when contenders let slip some remark that betrays their deepest prejudices and gut instincts.

Donald Trump, an unconventional candidate, has come a long way without revealing very much about his views on foreign policy. He has offered such bumper sticker slogans as “Bomb the shit out of ISIS”, and dodged questions about his preferred sources of geopolitical advice, recently declaring: “I’m speaking with myself, number one, because I have a very good brain.”

On March 21st, however, the Republican front-runner visited Washington, DC for a day of traditional foreign-policy chin-stroking and speechifying. He joined presidential rivals in addressing some 18,000 supporters of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC), an influential pro-Israel lobby group, outlining his most detailed thoughts yet on the prospects for Middle East peace, on curbing Iran’s nuclear ambitions and on defeating the violent extremists of the Islamic State. In an earlier meeting at the Washington Post, he revealed the names of five close foreign-policy advisers.

Mr Trump’s AIPAC speech, which unusually for him he read from a prepared text, was a mixture of pandering, implausible bluster and contradictory promises. The billionaire denounced the United Nations as an anti-Israeli opponent of democracy. “We will totally dismantle Iran’s global terror network, which is big and powerful—but not powerful like us,” he promised, without further explanation. He said he would “dismantle the disastrous deal” struck by President Barack Obama to curb Iran’s nuclear ambitions, then seemed to say that he would enforce it, or perhaps the sanctions regime that preceded it, “like you’ve never seen a contract enforced before, folks, believe me.”

In recent months Mr Trump has set nerves jangling among conservative supporters of Israel by suggesting he would be “neutral” in efforts to broker peace between Israel and the Palestinians. When speaking to AIPAC he cast himself as sternly pro-Israeli, citing his role as Grand Marshal of the 2004 “Salute to Israel” Parade in New York and his daughter’s conversion to Judaism after marriage as evidence. Months after angering a gathering of Jewish Republicans by fudging his views on the status of Jerusalem, Mr Trump bowed to conservative pressure and pledged that he would move the American embassy to that divided city, calling it “the eternal capital of the Jewish people”.

Yet Mr Trump also brought his constant campaign-trail refrain about being a dealmaker offering America as a broker between Israel and the Palestinians. “Deals are made when parties come together, they come to a table and they negotiate. Each side must give up something,” he told delegates. Even suggesting that Israel might have to give anything up in the name of peace involves challenging conservative shibboleths. In recent years, Republicans have aligned themselves with the views of Binyamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, in suggesting that Israel should not be prodded to engage in talks, because the Palestinian side has shown no sincerity or seriousness as a potential partner for peace.

The little-known advisers named by Mr Trump shed only limited light on his views. They include Joseph Schmitz, a Pentagon inspector general under George W. Bush; Walid Phares, a Lebanese Christian academic who has in the past advised warlords in Lebanon; J. Keith Kellogg Jr., a retired army lieutenant-general and former chief operating officer for the Coalition Provisional Authority in Baghdad; and Carter Page, a businessman and analyst specialising in the oil and gas industry in the former Soviet block.

Where Mr Trump was more revealing was in comments and asides that pointed to his deep instincts on foreign policy—instincts which mark a sharp break with recent Republican orthodoxy. He seems ready to break with Republican traditions of using America’s wealth, diplomatic clout and military muscle to promote universal values of economic and political freedom around the world—traditions which have dominated the party since the days of Ronald Reagan and the cold war.

Appealing to Americans who want to feel safe from Islamic extremism but who wonder what almost 15 years of intervention in the Islamic world has achieved, Mr Trump has spent months promoting an America First policy of unleashing no-holds-barred violence, including torture, against foes in the Middle East, while shunning nation-building far from home.

While doing the rounds in Washington he expanded a little more than before on those views. Asked at the Washington Post about the future of NATO, the businessman scolded other members of that Atlantic alliance for doing too little after Russia invaded Ukraine on their doorsteps. “Why are we always the one that’s leading, potentially the third world war, okay, with Russia?” he asked. To the cable television news station CNN, Mr Trump said that while he would remain a member of NATO he would “certainly decrease” American funding for the alliance.

Asked about how to counter Chinese aggression in the South China Sea and Asia, Mr Trump again voiced long-standing gripes about how such allies as Japan and South Korea only pay for some of the costs of American bases in the region. Does America gain anything by having bases overseas, he was asked? “Personally I don’t think so,” he replied.

Mr Trump keeps saying things like this. At some point it seems reasonable to believe that what comes out of his mouth reflects his views. Supporters love his message of chin-jutting, heavily armed isolationism. If elected, President Trump would be able to claim a mandate for ending decades of global power projection. It may be frustratingly hard to pin the Republican front-runner down on how, precisely, he would deal with the world. But do not discount the possibility that he intends to deal with it as little as he can.



Why Ted Cruz triumphed in Utah

If Donald Trump were to become the Republican nominee, most people in Utah would do what might once have seemed unthinkable: vote Democrat



Mormons against the Donald

The Republican contest, for so long overcrowded, has been reduced to a single main contest: between Donald Trump and those trying to stop him bagging the delegates to win the presidential nomination



Hillary Clinton’s problem with (white) men

One group which has been the most resistant to the front-runner's charms



Heard on the trail

The latest quips and quotes from the campaigns



A 2016 election calendar

Follow the results, delegate count and dates of the primaries for both parties





More US election coverage



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695407-if-donald-trump-wins-nomination-he-likely-ditch-half-century-republican/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The primaries

Heard on the trail

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



Let us drink beer

“Now that the label talks so loudly, what’s in the bottle has lost its voice."

A sommelier explains why she won’t serve Trump wines. Washington Post

Old Testament

“God called King David a man after God’s own heart even though he was an adulterer and a murderer. You have to choose the leader that would make the best king or president and not necessarily someone who would be a good pastor.”

Jerry Falwell, Jr. sees something in Donald Trump. Liberty Champion

The reverse Godwin

“The truth is, by the way, they might be rehabilitating that fellow with the mustache back there in Germany.”

David Duke, former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan and Trump fan, thinks comparisons of Mr Trump and Hitler might do wonders for the latter’s image.

Barron’s financial news

“I believe on occasion I used that name.”

When reporters called the Trump Organisation in the 1980s they were sometimes put through to a spokesman called John Barron. Mr Trump later admitted in court that he and Mr Barron were one and the same. Washington Post

Faint praise

"He’s the best alternative to Donald Trump."

Lindsey Graham endorsed Ted Cruz, who he once said could be murdered on the floor of the Senate without repercussions.

Bromance

"It was conservative erotica coming out of his mouth. Oh tell me more big boy"

Glenn Beck, talk-radio and TV host explains why he’s supporting Ted Cruz.

Classy

Be careful, Lyin’ Ted, or I will spill the beans on your wife!”

Mr Trump tweets.

The opium of the people

“The white American underclass is in thrall to a vicious, selfish culture whose main products are misery and used heroin needles. Donald Trump’s speeches make them feel good. So does Oxycontin.”

The National Review’s Kevin Williamson examines the Trump phenomenon.

Half-right

“Washington has a very good football team but it doesn’t have to be called the Redskins.”

Bernie Sanders is generous to DC’s lousy American football team.



Don’t deal with it

If Donald Trump wins the nomination he is likely to ditch half a century of Republican thinking on foreign policy



Why Ted Cruz triumphed in Utah

If Donald Trump were to become the Republican nominee, most people in Utah would do what might once have seemed unthinkable: vote Democrat



Mormons against the Donald

The Republican contest, for so long overcrowded, has been reduced to a single main contest: between Donald Trump and those trying to stop him bagging the delegates to win the presidential nomination



Hillary Clinton’s problem with (white) men

One group which has been the most resistant to the front-runner's charms



A 2016 election calendar

Follow the results, delegate count and dates of the primaries for both parties





More US election coverage



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695404-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

College endowments

Yard sale

Colleges with big endowments face calls to scrap tuition payments

Mar 26th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

Mr Harvard and his yard

ON his deathbed in 1638, John Harvard bequeathed half of his estate, about £800 and his library of some 400 books to a new college in present-day Cambridge, Massachusetts. Harvard’s founders decided to name their new university for its first big benefactor. About 370 years ago the first Harvard scholarship to help “some poore scholler” was set up thanks to £100 donated by Ann Radcliffe. The university continues to be the beneficiary of generous donors. Last year, John Paulson, a hedge-fund investor, donated $400m to Harvard’s engineering school, its largest gift ever. Harvard has an endowment of $36 billion, the largest in the country. Last year it raised more than $1 billion. Some of its alumni think this ought to be sufficient to scrap tuition fees.

Among them are Ralph Nader, a veteran political activist, and Ron Unz, author of a number of searing articles on American meritocracy. Both are hoping to win election to the university’s board of overseers, from which perch they will push to make Harvard free for all students to attend, and also pressure its admissions office to disclose data on how it chooses which students to admit. They hope that other well-endowed Ivies would then be shamed into doing the same.

America’s universities raised a record $40.3 billion last year, according to the Council for Aid to Education. Harvard’s endowment is made up of 13,000 funds and is its largest source of revenue by far. Endowments are not usually used to lower tuition fees, but they can be used to provide scholarships and financial aid to students who cannot afford to pay (70% of students at Harvard get some assistance with fees and living costs).



Some lawmakers are wondering whether threats to change the tax-exempt status of endowments might be used to persuade colleges to bring down the cost of tuition, which has increased by 220% in real terms since 1980. Nexus Research and Policy Centre (a group set up by the University of Phoenix, which is for-profit and therefore not tax-exempt) says colleges receive $80 billion in support from state and local government every year, which ought to give politicians some leverage in return.

In January Tom Reed, a Republican congressman from New York, proposed a bill requiring endowments with assets of more than $1 billion to allocate 25% of their income for financial aid or lose tax-exempt status. Two congressional committees, the Senate Finance Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee, have sent letters to the heads of the colleges with the biggest endowments asking about spending, conflicts of interest and fee arrangements for money managers. The 56 largest private university endowments have until April 1st to explain how they use their tax-free investment earnings.

The colleges have their defenders. “Most of these places are already providing a fair amount of financial aid for students well beyond the poverty line,” says Kim Rueben of the Tax Policy Centre. Kevin Weinman, Amherst’s chief financial officer, says his university’s endowment provides $90m to the college’s budget, $30m more than tuition, room board and various fees combined. This school year, it will spend $50,000 per student to fund financial aid, pay faculty and fund student activities. After Congress last examined the topic in 2007, more colleges began to award grants instead of loans. Financial aid has doubled over the past decade. Some schools, like Brown in Providence, Rhode Island also make voluntary payments in lieu of property taxes.

In addition to pointing out their generosity, colleges also argue that forcing them to spend endowment money on free tuition might even be illegal. Donors can restrict their tax-exempt gift to a legally-binding particular purpose, such as creating a chair, establishing a scholarship or building a new lab. Around 70% of endowments are restricted funds. Not abiding by a donor’s wishes can result in a lawsuit. Princeton was sued by the heirs of the A&P grocery fortune who claimed a gift of $35m made in 1961 was misused and not spent as directed. Amherst, which has a $2.2 billion endowment, ran the numbers and found that if it increased annual spending to 8% from its current level of 4-5%, it would have to rely on tuition to fund running costs. After 25 years its endowment would be 60% smaller than it is now.

If the wealthiest colleges already spend so much on financial aid, where is the problem? Mr Unz argues that relentless endowment-fuelled spending on new buildings, sports facilities and the hiring of administrators has created an arms-race in higher education, pushing up prices at those universities that are not fortunate enough to have lots of generous benefactors. Harvard could scrap tuition payments without damaging its finances or touching the restricted portion of its endowment, he reckons. Furthermore, the abolition of both complicated financial-aid forms and terrifying sticker-prices for tuition (ie, before financial aid is calculated) could, he argues, do much to encourage applicants from beyond the plutocracy.

Correction: This piece has been updated to provide the correct figure for the contribution of Amherst's endowment to the college budget.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695548-colleges-big-endowments-face-calls-scrap-tuition-payments-yard-sale/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Deporting child migrants

Self-defence

Can toddlers represent themselves in court? At the moment, yes

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN G.J.C.P., as she is known in court documents, was 13, gang members in her native El Salvador began tormenting her. The men offered her drugs, nagged her to get involved with them romantically and urged her to join their gang. G.J.C.P. refused, though the men had previously murdered a friend of hers for a similar offence. Fearful for her life and hoping to begin anew, she fled to America. Before she could get far, she was scooped up by border patrol agents in Hidalgo, Texas.

Like many undocumented, unaccompanied migrant children, G.J.C.P. has no lawyer to represent her in her deportation proceedings. By law, migrants facing removal are assured the right to an attorney. They do not, however, have the right to a free one—only defendants in criminal cases do. If they can afford the $2,000-$10,000 it costs to process most deportation cases, unaccompanied migrant children are welcome to appear in court with a lawyer. If not, they are expected to seek help from non-profit organisations, which are stretched, or to represent themselves against government prosecutors. In the 91,104 deportation cases involving unaccompanied migrant children between 2004 and 2014, 46% of the plaintiffs have not had legal representation. Ninety percent of those who represented themselves were deported, while only 39% of children with lawyers were.

The number of children from Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador crossing the border with Mexico began to rise steeply in 2012, after people-smugglers discovered that their odds of success were better with minors, who cannot so easily be turned back by border guards, than with adults and changed their business model accordingly. The federal government responded by speeding up the deportation of child migrants in July 2014. This message seems to have reached Central America: in 2015 the number of unaccompanied children picked up by border patrol dropped back down to 40,000. For those already in the country, the government increased funding for child migrants in court, but not by enough to assure they all get lawyers. Adolescents over 16 were excluded from the initiative entirely.

A few days after the federal government changed tack, a team of civil-liberties groups, advocacy organisations and private law firms launched a nationwide class-action lawsuit against the attorney-general’s office for failing to provide migrant children with representation in deportation proceedings. Not doing so, they argued, violates immigration laws and the 5th Amendment right to due process. On March 24th, after nearly two years of back and forth, a judge will rule on whether to certify the plaintiffs’ proposed class: all children under 18 involved in immigration proceedings after July 2014, who do not have attorneys and are unable to afford one. Should the judge reject the certification, the case will press forward to a trial in September with just a handful of plaintiffs.

Both Eric Holder, the former attorney-general, and Loretta Lynch, the present one, have expressed dismay at the current state of affairs. One immigration judge has said he had “taught immigration law literally to three- and four-year olds.” Eleni Wolfe-Roubatis of the Centro Legal de La Raza, a non-profit group in Oakland, California, says that she has seen a child as young as 18-months old in proceedings on their own. When Ms Wolfe-Roubatis later took on the 18-month-old girl as a client, she held the infant in her arms as she made her pleadings. Kathryn Coiner-Collier, who works with unaccompanied migrant children in North Carolina, describes how lawyerless four- and five-year-olds fidget and play around in their hearings.

Unaccompanied child migrants often struggle even to make it to court to defend themselves. Atenas Burrola, another immigration lawyer in North Carolina who serves low-income clients, explains that undocumented people cannot get driving licences in many states, and anyway lots of the children in deportation proceedings aren’t old enough to drive. She recalls one 15-year-old boy who had to shell out $300 each way for a taxi from his home in South Carolina to immigration court in North Carolina. Unrepresented children have missed more than 70% of their court appearances since 2005, and are often ordered to be deported in absentia. This was the case for G.J.C.P. When her grandmother called to check the status of her case, she learned a judge had already ordered her granddaughter to be removed.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695572-can-toddlers-represent-themselves-court-moment-yes-self-defence/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Primaries in the West

Mormons against the Donald

Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton bag Arizona, but falter in Utah

Mar 26th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition

Stop Trump HQ

THE Republican primary contest, for so long overcrowded, has been reduced to a single main contest: between Donald Trump and those trying to stop him bagging the 1,237 delegates he needs to win the party’s presidential nomination. Besides Ted Cruz and John Kasich, Mr Trump’s bruised but surviving competitors, his opponents include most elected Republicans, most conservative journalists, perhaps half of Republican voters. On March 22nd the tycoon caused them further dismay by winning the Arizona primary. Its 58 delegates are a handsome prize and Mr Trump, having won the “winner-takes-all” state with just under half of the vote, got the lot.

With 739 delegates overall, he is the only candidate with a serious chance of securing the Republican nomination before the party’s convention in July. It looks awfully tight; a reckoning of his prospects in the states still to vote suggests he might just fall short. For that, his opponents can now thank Mr Cruz’s coterminous success in Utah, where the Texan senator won easily, securing a rare statewide majority in the Republican contest and taking all its 40 delegates. Mr Cruz was heavily backed by the state’s Mormons, who represent most of Utah’s Republican primary electorate. As the sort of outsider group Mr Trump loves to pick on, its members dislike him. He also antagonised them further by questioning the Mormon faith of Mitt Romney, the most recent Republican presidential candidate and a leader of the emerging Stop Trump effort. Mr Trump came third in Utah.

The Democratic contests held on March 22nd, in the same two states and in Idaho, showed a similar pattern. The party’s front-runner, Mrs Clinton, won comfortably in delegate-rich Arizona, with three-fifths of the vote. But she was well-beaten by Bernie Sanders in the two smaller states. In Idaho and in Utah the leftist senator won around 80%. Mrs Clinton won fewer delegates, but with an overall lead of over 300 delegates she still looks uncatchable. The extremity of her defeats was embarrassing, though, and left her rival nicely primed for an upcoming series of states he could win, including Alaska, Hawaii and Washington on March 26th.

In winning Arizona, Mr Trump and Mrs Clinton appeared, albeit in the absence of exit polls, to have once again confirmed their main strengths. Mr Trump was popular with the many whites in the border-state who worry about illegal immigration. A large section of the wall he has promised to hide Mexico behind would be in Arizona, whose most divisive public figure, Sheriff Joe Arpaio, a well-known immigrant-basher, had endorsed him. Mrs Clinton, correspondingly, was supported by the state’s older white and large non-white populations. Having won big in Arizona, she will look forward more confidently to California, which has 546 delegates, up for grabs on June 7th, and a somewhat similar ethnic mix.

For those hoping to block Mr Trump, Mr Cruz’s triumph in Utah is a rare fillip. He had been expected to win the state; it was unclear that he would pass the 50% threshold required to take all its delegates—in particular because of uncertainty over the effect of Mr Kasich in splitting the anti-Trump vote. The trouble for Mr Cruz, who has now won eight states to Mr Trump’s 20, is that he only seems able to win in places, such as Utah, with rare concentrations of evangelicals, Mormons or the otherwise ultraconservative. And there are not many such places left to vote. In only a handful, including Montana and Indiana, do evangelicals and Mormons make up more than 30% of the population; together they account for just 146 of the 905 Republican delegates still in play. That makes Mr Trump’s target, to win 60% of the remaining delegates, look achievable.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695573-donald-trump-and-hillary-clinton-bag-arizona-falter-utah-mormons-against-donald/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Florida’s Haitian-Americans

The Creole caucuses

Just possibly, the road to the White House might run through Little Haiti

Mar 26th 2016 | MIAMI | From the print edition

Little Haiti, big mural

AMONG the shelves in Libreri Mapou, a bookshop in a row of pastel-fronted stores in Little Haiti, is a dull-looking door. Beyond it, up a staircase, lies a technicolour trove of paintings, statues, embroidery, memorabilia of bygone political campaigns and honours awarded to the proprietor, Jan Mapou. Imprisoned under Papa Doc Duvalier, Mr Mapou fled, moving to Miami in 1984 and establishing himself as a radio host, Creole-language advocate and poet. For years activists, lawyers and artists gathered above his shop.

They still do, though much of the action has moved around the corner to the swish Little Haiti Cultural Centre. A candidate in Haiti’s disputed presidential race recently spoke in its classy theatre (many locals cannot vote in their ancestral homeland, but their remittances, estimated by the World Bank at $1.1 billion in 2012, give them a say); one of the centre’s galleries currently displays photos of Little Haiti by youngsters from Little Havana, and vice versa. In his adjacent studio Edouard Duval-Carrié, a Haitian-born artist, creates haunting nocturnal beach scenes, etched in glitter—a skeleton in a voodoo suit, a gunboat on the horizon—intended, he says, to illuminate the darkness behind rich-world fantasies of the tropics.

The short stroll from Libreri Mapou to the cultural centre maps the evolving contours of the Haitian-American community. Built by the city government and opened in 2009, the centre is a testament to the community’s growing influence; the resilient links to Haiti exemplify the hybrid identities many immigrants now maintain. In a twist characteristic of this postmodern era of powerful diasporas and hotly contested microconstituencies, these features—Haitian-Americans’ progress, and their long memories—might play a role in November’s presidential election.

The Port-au-Prince primary

Counting immigrants and their descendants, there are officially around 1m Haitian-Americans, a population swollen by successive political and natural calamities (the true figure is doubtless higher). Almost half live in Florida, especially in and around Miami; in some counties they represent the biggest minority group. An early, small wave escaped Duvalier’s regime in the 1960s, largely for New York; a bigger, poorer, more rural one arrived, mostly in Florida and by boat rather than plane, in the 1980s. Less educated, slower to assimilate, they were also stigmatised by a supposed association with AIDS.

In Miami’s bubbling ethnic stew, the tensions of those years have only partly dissipated. Among Haitian-Americans, as others, resentment lingers over Cubans’ preferential immigration status. As Mr Mapou puts it, Haitians had the extra misfortune to be victimised by a right-wing dictator, and so instead of the “red-carpet treatment” were liable to detention and repatriation. There has been friction with black Americans over jobs and local politics—though younger Haitians are much readier than their elders to see themselves as African-American, too. “When my son walks down the street, he is black,” says Sandy Dorsainvil, the cultural centre’s director. “Colour shows first.”

Beneath that convergence, though, histories are different—which gives hope to Michael Barnett, chairman of Palm Beach County’s Republicans. In the past, he says, Haitian-American votes have been taken for granted by the Democrats and “written off by Republicans”. But Haitians are not instinctively suspicious of his party as other black Floridians are. Many are socially conservative; rising numbers are well-off. Mr Barnett points, as a model, to the 2014 campaign of Rick Scott, Florida’s governor, who visited Haitian evangelical churches and ran radio adverts in Creole.

But perhaps the main ground for Republican optimism involves events in Haiti itself—in particular, allegations of mismanagement in the relief effort following the earthquake of 2010. Various agencies are implicated, but, overwhelmingly, one surname: Clinton. Bill was a UN envoy, Hillary secretary of state. As well as botching the aid, she is widely thought to have strong-armed Michel Martelly, the unloved former leader, into office. Some still grumble about Bill Clinton’s ruinous insistence, as president, that Haiti drop its rice tariffs. He cannot have anticipated that this arcane bit of trade policy might one day interfere with his wife’s presidential bid.

Even if these gripes merely keep some would-be Democrats at home, they might matter. Florida’s result was the country’s closest in the election of 2012. In 2000, of course, Al Gore lost it, and the presidency, by 537 votes. “If 537 Haitians decide not to go to the polls,” the outcome could change, says Jean Monestime, a Democrat who came by boat as a teenaged refugee, with no English, and is now chairman of the Miami-Dade county commission. Jean-Philippe Austin, an oncologist and Democratic fundraiser, says he has advised the Clintons that Haitian-American votes “aren’t going to be automatic.” Mrs Clinton needs to explain the relief effort, he says.

Still, some countervailing factors endure. Immigration policy remains a leading concern; should he be the Republican nominee, Donald Trump’s xenophobia is unlikely to go down well. Overall Florida’s Haitian-Americans are still poorer than average and more likely to be jobless. Gepsie Métellus of the Sant La Haitian Neighbourhood Centre, which offers employment and health-care services, frets that some Haitian teenagers are emulating the “bad boy” personas of their renegade peers.

Yet, as is common in modern cities, even as Haitian-Americans struggle with hardship they also face the deracinating effects of prosperity. “Gentrification is in full force now,” says Father Reginald Jean-Mary of Notre Dame D’Haiti Catholic congregation. “It is Little Haiti in name only.” As Miami’s downtown and smart brands encroach on the old neighbourhood, rising rents are pushing people out, even as others leave voluntarily for more space and better schools. They trek back for Notre Dame’s child-care programmes and Creole services in the beautiful new church: one stained-glass window depicts Christ welcoming a boatload of refugees, Miami’s skyline looming behind them. Meanwhile, in an area recently considered dicey, tourists now come to browse Haitian crafts. “It doesn’t get any more American than that,” reckons Ms Dorsainvil.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695406-just-possibly-road-white-house-might-run-through-little-haiti-creole/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

The meaning of blue jeans

Denim’s history suggests that American attitudes to work are more complex than they seem

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



IN AN interview near the end of his career the fashion designer Yves Saint Laurent confessed to a regret: that he had not invented blue jeans. “They have expression, modesty, sex appeal, simplicity,” sighed the owlish Frenchman. “All I hope for in my clothes.” American denim-lovers might add other attributes. As far back as the 1930s, when the popularity of cowboy films helped jeans make the leap from workwear into the wardrobes of Hollywood stars, denim has been understood to stand for something larger about the American spirit: for rugged individualism, informality and a classless respect for hard work.

“Deep down in every American’s breast…is a longing for the frontier,” enthused Vogue magazine in 1935, advising readers on how to dress with true “Western chic” (combine jeans with a Stetson hat and “a great free air of Bravado,” it counselled). Levi Strauss & Co., the San Francisco firm which invented modern blue jeans in 1873, saw sales boom after it crafted posters showing denim-clad cowboys toting saddles and kissing cowgirls.

Jump to the 1950s and 1960s, and American consumers learned the heroic history of denim from nationwide magazine and television advertising campaigns. They were told that the tough blue cloth began life as “Serge de Nîmes”, in the French town of that name, and was used by Columbus for his ships’ sails, before outfitting the pioneers who tamed the West. In a country so often riven by culture wars, jeans crossed lines of ideology, class, gender and race. Presidents from Jimmy Carter onwards have worn denim when fishing, clearing brush or playing sports to signal their everyman credentials—though Barack Obama has endured mockery for donning capacious jeans that he later conceded were “a little frumpy”.

Since the second world war, when GIs and sailors took blue jeans to the Old World and Asia, denim has carried ideas of American liberty around the globe, often leaving governments scrambling to catch up. Emma McClendon, a curator at the Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT) in New York, notes in a fine new book, “Denim: Fashion’s Frontier”, that when the Berlin Wall came down in 1989, reporters were surprised to see young East Berliners dressed exactly like their cousins from the West—in stonewashed jeans. Ms McClendon’s book accompanies a small but splendid exhibition on denim at the FIT on Seventh Avenue.

The popularity of clothing invented to survive hard labour is of topical interest in America, a country gripped by election-year debates about blue-collar, working-class voters, and whether their interests have been ignored by ruling elites. Ms McClendon argues, persuasively, that much of what Americans think they know about denim draws on a set of “origin myths”, crafted and disseminated by manufacturers over many years, both individually and in campaigns run by the Denim Council, an industry group of clothing-makers and textile mills that was active from 1955-75. The council, whose papers are now in the FIT’s archives, was formed after jeans-clad motorcycle gangs and such films as “The Wild One” and “Rebel Without a Cause” led to something like a nationwide panic about denim and its unseemly effects on young bodies and minds. Committees of denim manufacturers and advertising executives set out to combat “anxieties over juvenile delinquency”. Wholesome films about jeans appeared on over 70 television stations, and “How It All Began” cartoons ran in newspapers, tracing the origins of denim back to medieval Europe. From the late 1950s Levi Strauss & Co. ran advertisements and a letter-writing campaign urging schools to allow students to attend classes in denim. Their pitch combined images of clean-cut, studious children in jeans with such slogans as “Right for School”, explains Tracey Panek, Levi’s company historian.

Quite a lot of this marketing was hokum, or close to it. There is no evidence that Columbus crossed oceans under billowing denim sails, while the latest research is that the term “denim” may have been invented in England. Perhaps most strikingly, relatively few cowboys wore blue jeans at the height of the Wild West, Ms McClendon says: canvas and leather trousers were also common. Denim was mostly worn by small farmers, field-hands, labourers and miners—some of the oldest pieces in the archives of Levi Strauss & Co. were found in disused mines in California and Nevada (there is a whole world of denim-hunters out there, willing to endure much hardship to find a pair of 1880s Levi’s).

The best history money can buy

Ms McClendon describes economic and commercial forces at work in the 1930s. Denim sales to working-class customers slumped during the Depression. At the same time ranchers in need of extra income touted their properties as “dude ranches” at which affluent tourists could play at cowboys, apeing favourite film stars. Even Depression-era protectionism arguably played a role: Sandra Comstock, a sociologist at Reed College in Oregon, has written that tariffs on imported French clothing prodded department stores to promote domestic fashions including jeans.

Myth-making about jeans suggests a political conclusion, too: that for a supposedly classless country America takes a complicated view of work. Study denim’s history and it is hard to avoid concluding that heroic individuals roaming the land, such as cowboys, are easier to sell as fashion icons than folk who toil by the hour in a factory, garage or field, taking orders from a boss. The first gallery at the FIT exhibition shows how the earliest denim clothes were often uniforms: it includes a prison uniform, sailor’s overalls and, most tellingly, the sort of blue work-shirt made of chambray (a cousin of denim) that inspired the term “blue-collar worker” back in the 1920s. Yet, other than to a few urban hipsters in recent decades, chambray shirts have mostly lacked the “cross-over cool” of denim jeans, says Fred Dennis, senior curator at the FIT—they did not fit into a “romanticised, cool-dude weekend look”. Small wonder that blue-collar workers feel forgotten.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21695405-denims-history-suggests-american-attitudes-work-are-more-complex-they-seem/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Brazil’s political crisis: Tick tock

Canada’s budget: Globalisation with a human face

The United States and Cuba: An American invasion

Bello: The drama of Lula





Articles Sections Next

Brazil’s political crisis

Tick tock

Dilma Rousseff’s chances of remaining in office are diminishing by the day

Mar 26th 2016 | SÃO PAULO | From the print edition



ON MARCH 18th the clock started ticking for Dilma Rousseff. The lower house of Brazil’s Congress voted to start the impeachment process against the president, who has until early April to present her defence. She faces charges of using accounting trickery to hide the true size of the budget deficit. Her congressional foes plan to put forward a second motion based on allegations that relate more directly to the main scandal that threatens her future: a former ally claims that she tried to obstruct a wide-ranging investigation into a multibillion-dollar bribery scheme at Petrobras, the state-controlled oil giant, from which her left-wing Workers’ Party (PT) profited.

As congressmen in Brasília, the capital, cast their votes, 300,000-odd PT supporters swept onto the streets across the country in support of their embattled leader. But before the crowds dispersed, the president suffered another setback. The appointment as minister of her wily predecessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, was blocked by a supreme-court judge.

Thus ended the most eventful and oddest 72 hours in recent Brazilian history. They leave the president weakened, possibly fatally. The reputation of her once-revered predecessor is in tatters (see article). That of the crusading judge leading the Petrobras investigation, Sérgio Moro, has been damaged, too. The country, which is suffering its worst recession since the 1930s, is angry and bewildered.

The latest furore began on March 16th, when Ms Rousseff named Lula as her chief of staff—a position she once held under him. She needed “a skilful political negotiator” by her side, she explained, which is no doubt true. But most Brazilians think she hired Lula to give him the immunity from prosecution in ordinary courts that Brazilian law grants to members of cabinet. Mr Moro is investigating whether he benefited from the shakedown of Petrobras, which appears to have started while he was president from 2003 to 2010. Earlier this month police briefly detained him for questioning. Lula denies any wrongdoing.

The anger of the government’s foes was fuelled by a telephone conversation between the former and current presidents, released by Mr Moro on March 16th. In it, the president tells her mentor that she will send a nomination letter for him to sign “if necessary”, which many interpreted as proof of a conspiracy to avoid justice. Anti-government protests erupted in several cities; in Brasília the night sky was lit up with burning tyres. The president’s office said the conversation was merely a reference to Lula’s possible absence from the swearing-in ceremony the next day. He attended the event, but was in office for a matter of hours before Gilmar Mendes, a supreme-court justice, suspended his appointment.

The government is appealing against Mr Mendes’s ruling to the full tribunal. Ms Rousseff’s allies have also vowed to seek judicial redress against Mr Moro, who unsealed the wiretaps in “flagrant violation of the law and constitution”. Many lawyers agree that he erred in releasing recordings in which one party—the president no less—is not under formal investigation and enjoys strong constitutional protection. The controversial exchange was recorded after Mr Moro had ordered the police to stop tapping Lula’s phone. One supreme-court justice chastised the judge for “leaving the law by the wayside”.

In theory the weight of evidence against Ms Rousseff, who denies all wrongdoing, will determine her fate in Congress. In practice political passions will play a big role. A poll published last weekend found that 68% of Brazilians favour impeachment. Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a former president who long believed that impeachment would set a dangerous precedent, now supports it. “That is what the streets clamour for,” he told a newspaper. A record 3.6m people marched earlier this month to demand Ms Rousseff’s fall.

The passion of Dilma Rousseff

On March 16th the Brazilian Republican Party decided to leave Ms Rousseff’s coalition—depriving her of 22 centrist votes. The Progressive Party, with 55 legislators, may do the same. More worrying for Ms Rousseff, her biggest coalition partner, the Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB), led by Brazil’s vice-president, Michel Temer, may also leave. It is to decide on March 29th.

Several PMDB bigwigs have already declared themselves in favour of impeachment. Brasília is abuzz with talk of a Temer-led government of national unity, which would include Mr Cardoso’s centre-right Party of Brazilian Social Democracy (though not the former president himself). When this week Mr Temer denied any negotiations on such an alliance were taking place, few believed him.



Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts

Ms Rousseff’s chances of winning support from 172 of the 513 federal deputies—the number needed to stop the lower house from referring the impeachment motion to the Senate for trial—are diminishing. The upper house, too, appears hostile to the president. It is likely to accept for consideration any impeachment motion referred by the lower house, the chamber’s Speaker, Renan Calheiros, reportedly said. This could happen by mid-April. Ms Rousseff would then have to leave office for up to 180 days while the Senate deliberates. Mr Temer would take over. If the Senate impeaches her, Mr Temer would probably govern until the after next election in 2018.

He would inherit a mess. GDP is expected to shrink by 4% in 2016 for the second year running. Inflation of more than 10% is reducing real wages. The unemployment rate has nearly doubled since 2014 (though it is still less than 10%). One in five young Brazilians is without work; economists warn of a “lost generation”. Brazil is no Venezuela: some export-oriented industries are thriving thanks to the weak currency (see article). But for most companies and workers the outlook is grim.

Confidence will return only if the government reduces the budget deficit. At nearly 11% of GDP, it keeps interest rates high and has pushed public debt to what for Brazil is an unsustainable level, of 70% of GDP. Ms Rousseff’s proposals to cut spending and raise taxes are stuck in Congress—partly because her party opposes them. If that does not change, the government will miss this year’s unambitious target for a primary budget surplus (excluding interest payments) of 0.5% of GDP. Samuel Pessoa of IBRE-FGV, a think-tank, forecasts a “recurring” primary deficit (not counting one-off revenues) of a record 2.5% of GDP. It is time for politics to help the economy, the largely powerless finance minister, Nelson Barbosa, pleaded forlornly.

Financial markets are pinning their hopes on a new government. If Mr Temer takes over at the head of a national-unity coalition, a stronger finance minister could push through emergency measures, such as a levy on financial transactions, to reduce the budget deficit. Share prices in São Paulo have risen by 25% since late February as odds of that happening have improved.

Most Brazilians do not share this enthusiasm. Just one in six thinks a government led by Mr Temer would be any good. That is understandable. Six PMDB congressmen are being investigated in the Petrobras affair, including Mr Calheiros and the lower-house Speaker, Eduardo Cunha, whom the supreme court indicted for corruption earlier this month. Nearly 60% of Congress’s 594 members face criminal accusations, from presenting dodgy electoral accounts to homicide. Whether Ms Rousseff stays or goes they could remain in office until after an election in 2018. The renewal Brazilians yearn for is years away.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21695577-dilma-rousseffs-chances-remaining-office-are-diminishing-day-tick-tock/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Canada’s budget

Globalisation with a human face

The new prime minister begins to make his mark

Mar 26th 2016 | OTTAWA | From the print edition



JUSTIN TRUDEAU has been Canada’s prime minister since November, but it was only on March 22nd that he showed the country in detail how he intends to lead it. His government’s first budget, presented by the finance minister, Bill Morneau, broke decisively with the austerity of the previous Conservative administration. Faced with an economy weakened by low commodity prices, Mr Trudeau and his finance minister had no hesitation in keeping the lavish promises of extra spending made by their Liberal Party during the election campaign.

Federal spending is projected to rise from 13.6% of GDP in the last fiscal year to 14.6% in 2016-17. The Liberals had promised a big programme of spending on infrastructure to repair the country’s creaking transport systems and invest in green technology. Their first budget wisely does this by boosting maintenance spending on existing facilities while they ponder backing bigger projects, perhaps including oil pipelines and LNG facilities, later on. The deficit is set to rise this fiscal year to C$29.4 billion ($22.5 billion), about 1.5% of GDP, from C$5.4 billion. Mr Trudeau seems to have given up on his goal to balance the budget by 2019.

At a time when most rich-country governments are squeezing their budgets Canada’s can afford to splurge, in part because of the budget discipline practised by the Conservatives. Canada’s public debt is considerably lower than that of its peers (see chart). The government is hoping that the economy will strengthen with a looser fiscal policy enhancing the stimulus of low interest rates, rather than counteracting it as it has done since 2012.

Mr Trudeau scrapped the Conservatives’ fiscal policy in part to preserve their other achievements. He supports the Canada-EU trade agreement negotiated by his predecessor, Stephen Harper, and has signed the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a trade accord among 12 Pacific nations. The Liberals have already kept their promise to cut income tax for the middle class, and pay for that with an increase for top earners. The budget does not raise corporate-tax rates, which remain comparable with those of Canada’s competitors.

The aim seems to be to maintain Canada’s commitment to globalisation, but to give it a human face. With Donald Trump whipping up resentment across the border among Americans who feel left behind, Mr Trudeau is eager to keep anger and populism at bay. “A lot of what I worry about is that ordinary folks are going to withdraw their support for the growth economy,” said Mr Trudeau to a business audience in New York last week. The median income of the middle class has not risen in 30 years, he noted. Confidence in the economy is at its lowest point in 20 years, according to a recent poll.

With total revenues of C$300 billion, the federal government’s capacity to lift the C$2 trillion economy is limited. The budget’s impact will be modest, says Craig Alexander of the C.D. Howe Institute, a think-tank. Still, most economists support deficit spending at a time when borrowing rates are low and the economy is weak. The question is: will Mr Trudeau know when to stop?



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21695579-new-prime-minister-begins-make-his-mark-globalisation-human-face/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The United States and Cuba

An American invasion

Barack Obama brings a message of friendship and human rights

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR more than half a century Fidel Castro ordered Cubans to be prepared to resist an American invasion. When it finally came this week it took the peaceful and friendly form of President Barack Obama, his wife and daughters, nearly 40 members of Congress and some top business leaders. Even so, many residents of Havana, Cuba’s capital, had to pinch themselves when they saw Air Force One fly over the city on March 20th and the “Beast”, as Mr Obama’s armoured limousine is dubbed, ply the streets. Cubans turned out spontaneously to greet him.

Mr Obama’s visit could truly be called historic. It set the seal on his dramatic move to restore diplomatic relations with the communist island and to loosen the economic embargo imposed in 1960 after Fidel Castro’s revolution.

In 48 hours of walkabouts, meetings and speeches, the American president delivered the same message, politely and respectfully, but firmly: that he had come to “bury the last remnant of the cold war in the Americas” and “to extend a hand of friendship to the Cuban people” but also to make plain that Cuba needs to change.

Raúl Castro, Fidel’s brother and Cuba’s president since 2008, treated Mr Obama with warmth and stressed that both sides should respect their differences. He also called for the lifting of the embargo (only the United States Congress can do that) and for the return to Cuba of the naval base at Guantánamo Bay.

Mr Obama’s message rang out most clearly in the speech he gave on March 22nd in Havana’s newly renovated Grand Theatre, the same venue where the last sitting American president to visit Cuba, Calvin Coolidge, spoke 88 years ago. Mr Obama voiced his support for the right of Cubans “to speak their mind”, to “protest peacefully” and “to choose their governments in free and democratic elections”.

The speech was broadcast live to the Cuban nation. So was a press conference the previous day at which Mr Castro crustily replied to a question about political prisoners by saying “give me the list right now” and he would order their release. Human-rights groups responded by circulating lists of 40 or so on social media. Mr Obama later met with dissidents, some of whom had been briefly arrested hours before his visit.

Mr Obama’s Cuba opening is popular at home. Some of his Republican opponents criticised the visit as cosying up to America’s enemies. That is to understate its significance. It was the first time that a visiting head of state in Cuba has called so openly for democracy. Mr Obama may well have planted a seed that will germinate after Mr Castro steps down in 2018.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21695574-barack-obama-brings-message-friendship-and-human-rights-american-invasion/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

The drama of Lula

A working-class hero’s sad fall from grace

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



“I NEVER had access to formal study, as Brazilians know,” wrote Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva in an open letter to the supreme court this month. “I’m not a doutor, lettered or with great knowledge of the law,” he wrote. “But I know, like every human being, how to distinguish between right and wrong, what is just and unjust.” It was vintage Lula, reminding poorer Brazilians that he is one of them, that like them he suffers injustice meted out by the lettered classes, and that he, like them, is an honest man. But is he?

The missive was part of an increasingly desperate defence by Brazil’s most important politician of this century. Two years after they began investigating a hydra-headed $2.5 billion corruption scandal at Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company, prosecutors are closing in on Brazil’s former president. They think he took gifts from construction companies involved in the Petrobras bribery scandal, which he vehemently denies.

Lula has been charged with concealing ownership of a beachside apartment. Sérgio Moro, the judge leading the probe, had Lula briefly detained to answer questions about that, as well as a country retreat and donations to his institute. Lula insists the properties were borrowed and the donations above board. On his release, he pledged a political campaign to clear his name. Mr Moro then published tapes of his phone calls to allies. In often profane language, Lula cries persecution and accuses the supreme court of cowardice—prompting the emollient open letter.

Only a few years ago he could do no wrong. Born in a dirt-poor family in the north-east, as a child he sold oranges and peanuts on the street. He first came to his country’s notice as the fiery leader of strikes by carworkers during Brazil’s military dictatorship. Having founded the left-wing Workers’ Party (PT), he was elected president, at the fourth attempt, in 2002.

In office he combined the pragmatism of a trade-union leader with a determination to help Brazil’s poor. Unlike Hugo Chávez he didn’t harass business. Instead, he decreed big increases in the minimum wage and in social programmes. Helped by a commodity boom, it worked. In eight years 30m left poverty. With his homespun phrases and quick wit, Lula had a unique rapport with ordinary Brazilians. He became a global symbol of progressive social change. “He’s my man,” gushed Barack Obama. Lula left office with an 83% approval rating, having secured the election of his hand-picked successor, Dilma Rousseff, a politically clumsy bureaucrat.

So where did it go wrong? On leaving office Lula returned to his modest flat in São Bernado, a suburb of São Paulo. He became an ambassador for Brazilian business, especially the construction companies. He charged around $100,000 a pop for lectures. That is half the going rate for the likes of Bill Clinton or Tony Blair. But prosecutors say he received $8m in all, and they doubt all the lectures took place. At the least Lula showed poor judgment in drawing so close to the construction magnates. But was it worse than that? The prosecutors have not so far proved that he has taken gifts through corrupt dealings with Petrobras.

André Singer, a political scientist who once worked for Lula, calls Mr Moro, other judges, the prosecutors and their allies in the media the “Party of Justice”. It has long had Lula in its sights, holding him ultimately responsible for the scheme to funnel tainted cash from Petrobras to the PT and its allies. Lula denies that. His supporters see in such allegations the class hatred that he has always inspired among the better-off, for having grabbed power from them.

Lula is far from the first working-class hero to enjoy the good things in life. He is in part a victim of his own hubris. He developed his own hatred of the centre-right opposition. He sought to isolate it by polarising politics between “the people” and the “neoliberals” and by engineering a ramshackle coalition of opportunists. PT officials were convicted of paying bribes to allies in an earlier scandal. Cornered over this in his first term, he fought back. But iron had entered his soul.

Whether or not he is guilty, Lula has lost respect. According to Datafolha, a pollster, 57% of respondents disapprove of him. That may preclude a return to the presidency. The PT is set for big losses in mayoral elections in October. But at 70, Lula is not finished. His political skills are still unrivalled. “I’m the only person who could set this country on fire,” he told an ally on the tapes (adding that he didn’t want to). Brazil is in for a long fight between the Party of Justice and the leader who has most powerfully embodied the cause of social justice. The tragedy is that they are not on the same side.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21695576-working-class-heros-sad-fall-grace-drama-lula/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




New political drama in Australia: Turnbull’s big gamble

Money laundering in the Philippines: Walls of silence

Relations between China and Taiwan: The Gambia gambit

South Korea and wartime sex slaves: Kindred spirits

The South China Sea: China v the rest





Articles Sections Next

New political drama in Australia

Turnbull’s big gamble

The prime minister threatens an early election in a bid to stamp his authority

Mar 26th 2016 | SYDNEY | From the print edition



RIGHT after Malcolm Turnbull defenestrated his Liberal Party boss last September, Australia’s new leader, the fourth prime minister in three years, promised “substantial change” and a “different style of leadership” to that of Tony Abbott, his ousted predecessor. In place of the division and dysfunction of Mr Abbott’s time as prime minister, Mr Turnbull would be a unifying force, promoting sound policy while dragging politics back to the centre ground. After Mr Abbott’s rightist demagoguery, Mr Turnbull would lead through “advocacy, not slogans”.

Australians cheered, and the approval ratings of the government that the (conservative) Liberals lead in coalition with the smaller National Party leapt. Mr Turnbull talked of a new dawn. Yet until recently the sun has shone upon the not much new. Mr Turnbull has struggled to assert his authority and carry out his promises.

One problem lies in the Senate, where eight senators representing tiny parties, including the Australian Motoring Enthusiast Party (mission: to safeguard people’s right “to modify and restore vehicles based upon their own freedom of expression”), hold the balance of power. Another is that the Liberal Party’s rifts remained unhealed, with Mr Abbott and allies continuing to snipe from the backbenches.

Mr Turnbull, a former investment banker and businessman, has made a few policy strokes. For instance, he wants legislation to curb anti-competitive business conduct, calling it a “long overdue reform”, a pointed swipe at Mr Abbott, who avoided the issue. But his promised plans to reform taxes remain confused. At first, his government signalled raising the goods and services (consumption) tax from its present rate of 10%, and lowering income taxes. It then seemed to drop both ideas. Mr Turnbull now says his tax plans will be revealed in the government’s forthcoming budget.

Meanwhile, despite being a social liberal, he has pulled his punches on issues he had hitherto promoted, including gay marriage, which two-thirds of Australians support. Mr Turnbull favoured a simple parliamentary vote on same-sex unions. But now he has stuck to Mr Abbott’s proposal of a plebiscite to gauge public opinion, and to hold it after the next election. One estimate puts the cost at A$525m ($399m).

He is paying the price for apparent drift. An opinion poll on March 21st gave the government just a two-point lead over the opposition Labor Party. As for Mr Turnbull’s own approval as prime minister, it has sunk to 39%, from 60% in November. His lead as preferred prime minister over the leader of the Labor Party, Bill Shorten, has also narrowed.



Daily chart: Australia struggles to bring equality to its indigenous population

Yet in the past few days Mr Turnbull has embarked on a series of canny steps designed to break the Senate logjam, set his stamp on his own party and keep the opposition off balance. On March 18th he won approval from Parliament to simplify the convoluted system of proportional representation under which Australians elect the Senate. The power of independents and so-called micro-parties has grown. They have learnt to use vote-swapping deals at elections to increase their numbers in the Senate. There they have blocked government legislation they dislike. But now the prime minister has won support from the Australian Greens, with ten senators, to push through changes that a parliamentary committee recommended two years ago. Rather than being bound in Senate elections by second-preference votes that parties allocate, voters will now be free to specify their own order of voting.

Mr Turnbull called that and related changes a “great day for democracy”, by which he really meant for the bigger parties, since smaller ones will struggle in future to muster enough votes to qualify for a Senate seat. Two micro-party senators have launched a High Court appeal against the changes, but Mr Turnbull sounds confident that it will fail.

Now to the polls

Soon after Parliament voted on the Senate changes, it adjourned. It was due to return for the government to present its budget on May 10th, ahead of an election that was widely expected for September. Yet Mr Turnbull’s next move, on March 21st, suggested that the campaign has begun already. The prime minister called a press conference to declare that he would recall Parliament three weeks early, in order, he said, to consider legislation to police the building industry and the unions that play a powerful part in it. (The industry harbours two-thirds of Australia’s industrial disputes.) He wants to re-establish the Australian Building and Construction Commission that the previous Labor government abolished. Last year in the Senate, Labor, the Australian Greens and independents defeated a move by the Abbott government to bring the commission back. A second Senate defeat would give Mr Turnbull a constitutional trigger for a rare “double dissolution” of both houses of Parliament and an election, on July 2nd.

The timing of Mr Turnbull’s move took nearly everyone by surprise, as did his September coup against Mr Abbott. In the House of Representatives, Mr Shorten declared that it was a mark of a government in “full panic mode”. But the prime minister will claim the high ground by accusing Labor of being beholden to unions. As for the Senate, the new voting rules give him a better chance than before of winning control of the chamber.

Still, it all remains a gamble for Mr Turnbull. The unresolved divisions in his party are just one symptom of what Stephen Loosley, a former Labor senator, decries as the “indulgent politics” of both sides. And should the Senate reforms work his way, then, for the second time, Mr Turnbull will need to convince Australians that he is the one to change the political culture.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695553-prime-minister-threatens-early-election-bid-stamp-his-authority-turnbulls-big-gamble/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Money laundering in the Philippines

Walls of silence

Bank thieves pick just the place for washing their money

Mar 26th 2016 | MANILA | From the print edition

Enter here, and vanish

FROM the air, rich Chinese flying into the Philippines to gamble or Filipinos flying out to work overseas for a living can see the distinctive Solaire Resort and Casino beside the murky waters of Manila Bay. It was into these auspicious premises in early February that a money-remittance company, Philrem, moved about $60m stolen from Bangladesh’s central bank, delivering over half of it in cash. The money was part of $101m taken, of which $81m ended up in the Philippines. In all, only $20m has so far been recovered.

Once behind the walls of the Solaire Resort, the swag disappeared, converted into untraceable gambling chips (other money went to an online gaming firm). “Our money trail ended up at the casinos,” the executive director of the Philippines’ Anti-Money Laundering Council (AMLC), Julia Bacay-Abad, has told a Senate committee holding public hearings into the case.

The AMLC picked up the trail behind the frosted-glass frontage of a branch of Rizal Commercial Banking Corporation (RCBC) in the country’s financial centre, Makati, in the capital of Manila. There, the Senate committee was told, the branch manager used what may have been dummy accounts to receive the stolen money and then transferred it to the remittance company. The manager refused to answer many of the committee’s questions for fear of incriminating herself, and her superiors refused to answer some because the law protects the secrecy of bank accounts—even, it seems, fake ones.

If the senators failed to get the answers they wanted, they knew why. In 2013 Congress amended the Anti-Money Laundering Act. The amendments were only tough enough to ensure that an international watchdog, the Financial Action Task Force, would not put the Philippines on its blacklist of untrustworthy countries—for that would have constricted the flow of remittances from millions of Filipino migrant workers that keeps the economy afloat. Casinos were specifically excluded from the new legislation and are consequently exempt from reporting on their operations or on specific players.

As it stands, the law suits the political establishment nicely. In her column on March 18th the editor of the Philippine Star, Ana Marie Pamintuan, described the Senate as the “upper chamber of the nation’s biggest and most successful Laundromat”—encapsulating the insalubrious entanglement of money and politics in the Philippines, as politicians take from the public purse and wash the money clean.

But as domestic and international condemnation has grown about how the stolen money was laundered through the Philippines, the country’s gaming regulator says he is amenable to the AMLC extending its reach to the casinos. The governor of the central bank also laments the Philippines’ lax regime to counter money laundering. A government spokesman, on the other hand, appeared unruffled by the disappearance of the loot. “On the whole,” he explained helpfully, “you can see the system is working.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695555-bank-thieves-pick-just-place-washing-their-money-walls-silence/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Relations between China and Taiwan

The Gambia gambit

China resumes an old diplomatic game

Mar 26th 2016 | TAIPEI | From the print edition



TAIWAN and China, which claims the independent island-nation as part of the motherland, used to play a joyless slogging game called “dollar diplomacy”. In it each side competed with lorry-loads of cash and other inducements to get small, impoverished and often ill-run nations to switch their diplomatic allegiance. It was a game that Taiwan was steadily losing until, as a gesture of goodwill on the ascension of a China-friendly president in Taiwan, Ma Ying-jeou, China suddenly suspended it in 2008. The score: Taiwan 22, China 172.

Yet on March 17th China suddenly resumed play, by establishing diplomatic ties with Gambia, once a Taiwan ally. Mr Ma was on a state visit to Belize, one of Taiwan’s surviving friends, when the news broke. He said it was very wrong. In Taiwan there was outrage. The mainland affairs ministry said China’s move ran contrary to the mutual trust that Taiwan and China had built up over eight years.

But the game is being played not against him, but rather against his successor, Tsai Ing-wen, who takes office on May 20th. So far as China is concerned, the trouble with Ms Tsai is that she heads a party, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), that unlike Mr Ma’s Kuomintang is committed, at least on paper, to Taiwan’s declaring formal independence.

No matter that Ms Tsai, a low-key former trade lawyer who won the presidential election in January in a landslide, has gone out of her way to reassure not just China but also the United States that she intends to pursue peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait. That is in stark contrast to her firebrand predecessor from the DPP, Chen Shui-bian, who was president from 2000 to 2008 (and then jailed for corruption). Under Mr Chen, cross-strait relations reached a nadir. His studiously provocative championing of Taiwan’s independence even strained Taiwan’s ties with the United States, its defender.

Yet the sticking point for China is that Ms Tsai has to date refused to concede to Chinese demands that her government-in-waiting accept that Taiwan is loosely part of China. This is often referred to as the “1992 consensus”, in which both sides agreed that there was but one China, even though each disagreed over what exactly that was. The Communist and proudly atheist government in Beijing is so in thrall to this belief system that it threatens invasion should formal independence—ie, an end to the pretence that there is only one China—ever be declared. To date, Ms Tsai has avoided even saying that a consensus was reached in 1992.

It is not certain that the diplomatic game will now resume with full intensity. Gambia, an impoverished west African dictatorship, actually severed ties with Taiwan in 2013. It was China that for three years respected the truce and turned down Gambian requests for ties. Recently Gambia got the signal and began learning the script. Shortly after its foreign minister, Neneh MacDouall-Gaye, signed the papers in Beijing with her counterpart, Wang Yi, she declared that her country looked forward to the peaceful reunification of China and Taiwan.

Now, says George Tsai, a political scientist (unrelated to the president) at the Chinese Culture University in Taipei, the Taiwanese capital, the ball is in Ms Tsai’s court. China, he says, will wait for her inauguration speech for signals about her intentions. If the speech does not, in the eyes of Chinese leaders, rehearse an acceptable catechism, the diplomatic game could fully resume, or worse. “We absolutely will not allow…national separation,” thundered President Xi Jinping recently.

A former DPP vice-minister, Tung Chen-yuan, highlights how mismatched the two sides now are. In 1992 the mainland’s GDP was 1.9 times larger than Taiwan’s. By 2014 the gap between the two economies had widened to nearly 20 times. These days China gets to set the conditions that Taiwan is expected to meet if good relations are to exist.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695563-china-resumes-old-diplomatic-game-gambia-gambit/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

South Korea and wartime sex slaves

Kindred spirits

A bestselling film on a subject shunned by most producers strikes a chord

Mar 26th 2016 | SEOUL | From the print edition

The hard road to China

“I HEARD we are all going to a shoe factory,” says one of the terrified teenage girls in the film hopefully, huddled on the floor of a train bound for north-eastern China in 1943. In pastel linen dresses, and recently taken from their homes by soldiers of the Japanese imperial army, the captive girls will soon be beaten and raped repeatedly in a “comfort station”, one of the hundreds of military brothels that were set up to cater to soldiers in Japanese-occupied territory during the second world war.

Up to 200,000 women, mainly Korean and Chinese, but also including many South-East Asians and a few Dutch and Australians, were enslaved. It remains a source of deep resentment for South Korea, and has long been at the heart of its troubled relations with Japan. There the shrill voices of historical revisionists, who dispute that women were coerced—there were, after all, also volunteers from Japan and elsewhere—have grown louder in recent years. And then not all South Koreans acknowledge that much of the recruitment was carried out by Korean community leaders and unscrupulous operators.

“Spirits’ Homecoming” is a moving portrayal of these girls’ tragic and sometimes short lives, based on testimony from survivors (44 Korean “comfort women” remain alive today). It is set against glorious (South) Korean countryside, and overlaid with the country’s best-loved folk songs. It is true that most of the Japanese soldiers are depicted as brutes, as with nearly all South Korean films about Japan’s colonial occupation of Korea. But some Japanese are treated as victims too. Gentle Tanaka comes to the brothel, but he does not touch Jung-min, the film’s battered 14-year-old protagonist. Instead he offers kind words and eventually a map to help her escape.

South Korean blockbusters typically cast Koreans with jarringly bad accents in Japanese villains’ roles. Mr Cho has used native Japanese speakers, among them zainichi, ethnic-Korean Japanese. Right-wing groups in Japan have tried to smear such actors online. The film has had over 3m viewers since it opened a month ago, a remarkable success for an independent feature film in South Korea. Having taken 14 years to make, it has been spurned by mainstream production houses and distributors because of its difficult subject matter. In the end its director, Cho Jung-rae, relied on the contributions of over 75,000 individuals for about half of his funding, including from many Japanese.

A deal struck in December between the governments of South Korea and Japan to make amends to Korean women forced into prostitution has revived interest in their plight. For others, it is all too close to the bone still. Hong Ji-yea, an office worker, says she bought a ticket to support the film but was “not brave enough” to watch it. A friend who teaches young army officers gave hers and others’ tickets to her students. Ms Hong says that she hopes they might reflect on how difficult it is to stay human in war.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695568-bestselling-film-subject-shunned-most-producers-strikes-chord-kindred-spirits/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The South China Sea

China v the rest

As the sea becomes more militarised, the risks of conflict grow

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR years China has sought to divide and rule in the South China Sea. It worked hard to prevent the countries challenging it over some or all of its absurdly aggrandising territorial claims in the sea from ganging up against it. So when tensions with one rival claimant were high, it tended not to provoke others.

Not any more. In a kind of united-front policy in reverse, it now seems content to antagonise them all at the same time. This is both encouraging closer co-operation among neighbours and driving them closer to external powers including India, Australia, Japan and, above all, America.

The latest fight China has picked is with a country with which—unlike Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam—it has no territorial dispute: Indonesia. On March 21st the chargé d’affaires at China’s embassy in Jakarta was hauled in to receive a stiff protest. A Chinese coastguard vessel had rammed free a Chinese fishing boat as it was towed into port after being caught allegedly fishing in Indonesian waters. The crew of eight was already in detention. In a similar incident three years ago, Indonesia released detained crew members when confronted by an armed “maritime law-enforcement” vessel belonging to China’s fisheries bureau.

Since that incident Indonesia has elected a new president, Joko Widodo, one of whose trumpeted policies has been to look after the interests of fishermen. To deter illegal interlopers, Indonesia now impounds and blows up foreign vessels caught poaching. In this case, it seems clear that the Chinese were in Indonesian waters. Indonesia claims that the boat was just four kilometres off the Natuna islands, well within Indonesia’s 12 nautical-mile territorial limit, let alone its 200-nautical-mile “exclusive economic zone” (EEZ).

China explicitly acknowledges Indonesian sovereignty over the Natunas. Yet instead of apologising, China’s foreign ministry demanded the fishermen’s release, claiming that they had been carrying out “normal operations” in “traditional Chinese fishing grounds”. China is a party to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), under which countries are entitled to territorial waters and EEZs. Yet the government’s implicit argument is that a self-proclaimed “tradition” trumps international law. By extension, with 5,000 years of sacred history touted ad nauseam by its Communist Party leaders, who is to deny China anything it wants?



China’s tradition-based argument also has implications for its “nine-dash line” (see map) delimiting its claim to virtually all of the South China Sea (and passing just north of the Natunas). It would suggest China believes it has rights over not just land features inside the line, and their territorial seas and EEZs, but also over all the water itself—a concept alien to UNCLOS.

Flaky claims, fake islands

China has declined to explain how its claims fit within UNCLOS parameters. Indeed it has a record of flouting the law and international agreements when it comes to the sea. In 2002 it signed a joint declaration with the ten-member Association of South-East Asian Nations, in which the parties undertook to “exercise self-restraint” in the South China Sea, and in particular to refrain from occupying uninhabited features such as reefs. That commitment is hard to square with the massive building spree on which China has been engaged for the past two years in the Spratly archipelago, turning seven uninhabitable rocks and reefs submerged at high tide into artificial islands. Vietnam and the Philippines, rival claimants, have naturally been outraged. And this month an American admiral has reported Chinese activity at Scarborough Shoal, north of the Spratlys, that suggests it might be the “next possible area of reclamation”. China bullied the Philippines away from the shoal four years ago.

The Philippines has asked an international tribunal, the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague, to rule on some of China’s claims under UNCLOS. The court is expected to announce its verdict soon. If it rules broadly in favour of the Philippines, it would have the effect of making clear that China’s nine-dash line has no legal basis. China is boycotting the case and says it will ignore the verdict. The ruling might embarrass China. But it will not stop it creating artificial islands, or indeed make it dismantle those it has already built.

It seems increasingly likely that the islands will have a military purpose. China denies that, but it is hard to see why else it needs the long airstrip it is building on the Fiery Cross reef in the Spratlys. It is in this context that the threat of building at Scarborough Shoal causes such alarm. China has controlled the whole of the Paracel chain in the north of the South China Sea since 1974, when it drove out the former South Vietnamese from part of it. It has recently installed missile batteries on Woody Island there. In the Spratlys to the south it is building what look like potential air and naval bases, complete with military-grade radars. Scarborough Shoal would complete a “strategic triangle” that would allow it to dominate the sea. China is widely expected one day to declare an “air defence identification zone” over the sea, as it has over parts of the East China Sea, including areas contested with Japan.

Aggressors rarely see themselves as such. Indeed China accuses the United States of being the driving force behind the “militarisation” of the sea. Certainly America is responding to Chinese moves. Last year it resumed naval “freedom of navigation” operations, sending warships close to disputed features. This month it sent an aircraft-carrier strike group into the sea. American naval and marine-corps commanders have been in Vietnam to explore co-operation. Worse, from China’s viewpoint, American forces have just obtained access to five Philippine bases, including an airbase on Palawan, just opposite the Spratlys. For this, China’s official news agency accused America of “muddying the waters” and “making the Asia-Pacific a second Middle East”.

China will not be deterred, confident that America is unlikely to risk a serious crisis, let alone conflict. China’s throwing its weight around in the sea erodes America’s credibility as the pre-eminent military power in the western Pacific, but does not directly threaten it. By contrast, rather than cow China, America’s enhanced military role gives it a pretext to carry on with its build-up. There is still the danger, however, of an accidental flare-up—a skirmish over illegal fishing, for example, and an ensuing escalation. Armed conflict in the South China Sea is a long way from being inevitable. But it is far from unthinkable.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695565-sea-becomes-more-militarised-risks-conflict-grow-china-v-rest/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Urbanisation: Reform’s big taboo





Articles Sections Next

Urbanisation

Reform’s big taboo

An ambitious plan for social change has run into trouble

Mar 26th 2016 | CHONGQING | From the print edition



“I LIKE it here,” says Zhang Xiaojie, as she surveys the crowds scurrying below her spick-and-span apartment. Migrant workers bend under sacks of flour or lug around huge circular saws for use on the building sites where they work. Young professionals crowd into a local restaurant. Ms Zhang, a young information-technology officer, is one of millions of people from the countryside who have flocked for work to Chongqing, a province-sized “municipality” in south-western China (its core city has the same name). She looks around at a forest of 30-storey tower blocks, all built and run by the local government, and smiles: “It’s a good place to live. The government has done a pretty good job.”

Chongqing is the setting for China’s most ambitious social reforms. They are aimed at keeping economic expansion going while ensuring that the huge social changes unleashed by growth do not perpetuate inequalities, or foment unrest. Some 250m people have moved from the countryside to cities, the greatest migration in history. Millions live in dormitories or doss down where they can. Most have no formal contracts with their employers, and are denied access to urban public services such as subsidised education and health care. As the country’s growth slows, the Communist Party hopes migrants will play an even bigger role in boosting the economy, not just by toiling in factories, but by joining the middle class and spending their new wealth. So it is looking for ways to improve their lot.

For several years, Chongqing’s efforts to achieve this have gone further than anywhere else in the country. Though called a municipality, Chongqing covers an area the size of Scotland. Around 12m of its residents are villagers; another 18m live in the core city and other widely scattered towns. As elsewhere in China, the urban population has been growing fast thanks to a rapid influx of migrants (some are pictured). To manage this better, Chongqing persuaded the central government nine years ago to let it test out new ways of handling the newcomers and of making good use of the land they leave behind. The municipality’s special political status may have helped: it ranks on a par with Beijing and Shanghai.

Under Bo Xilai, a now-imprisoned rival to President Xi Jinping, the municipality’s government touted what admirers called the “Chongqing model”. This involved three main initiatives. First, the government said it would build 40m square metres of housing in the decade to 2020 for rent to the urban poor, including rural migrants. To be eligible, tenants had to earn less than 1,500 yuan (now about $230) a month. It was a big undertaking: governments elsewhere in China are reluctant to spend money on housing migrant workers. Chongqing set the rent at about 60% of comparable private properties and allowed tenants to buy their homes after living in them for five years.

Next, the government said it would give full urban status to 10m migrants, meaning they would get access to subsidised urban health care and education (typically, these services are available only in the place of one’s household registration, or hukou—usually the place of birth of one’s mother or father). Third, the government announced changes to the urban-planning system to allow land left behind by migrants to be traded for use in building new houses and offices. That was a breakthrough in a country that still officially disapproves of selling farmers’ property.

The reforms are unique in scale and coherence. By providing housing, they aim to attract migrants and thus expand the urban labour force. By offering migrants better access to public services they aim to make life in cities fairer and thus more stable. By introducing a land market, they hope that migrants will arrive with cash in hand. If the reforms work, they should have a range of benefits, from reducing the loss of farm land to eroding age-old urban prejudice against farmers and, vitally for the economy, fuelling urban consumption.

Breaking down barriers

The most promising and controversial of the reforms involves the trading of rural land, at a price set by the market. Urban China is used to free trade in property, but in the countryside farmers are not allowed to sell their homes, nor the land they till. The idea of revising Mao’s hallowed notion of “collective” ownership of rural property remains all but taboo.

That creates problems. As people move, they often leave houses in the countryside unoccupied. Chongqing’s reform allows land used for housing in faraway villages to be converted to use for farming, and a corresponding amount of farmland near towns to be used for urban expansion. The aim is to promote urbanisation, while slowing the rate at which Chongqing loses arable land. (National self-sufficiency in food is one of the party’s obsessions.)

The reform was intended to be of particular benefit to farmers in remote areas, who would otherwise have no opportunity to benefit from land appropriations, which usually occur on city margins. Sometimes the compulsory acquisition of rural land for construction is carried out violently, with farmers receiving little or no compensation. Chongqing’s system aims to make this fairer. Farmers who want to sell their rights to their village land are given what is called a land ticket, or dipiao. Developers who want to build, say, a 10-hectare (25-acre) project on farmland, can buy 10-hectares’ worth of dipiao. They do not have to be tickets owned by farmers on that very plot. The farmers get to keep 85% of the sale price of the dipiao. Their village administrations get the rest.



This new market allowed the trading of land-use rights to rise from nothing in 2008 to over 3,500 hectares’ worth in 2011 (see chart). Since then the amount traded annually has levelled out at around 1,300 hectares, worth roughly 4 billion yuan. The market has enthused villagers. In Wulong county, about three hour’s drive from the main city, the office in charge of dipiao trading is literally knee-deep in applications from farmers who want to sell.

Chongqing’s reforms have helped its economy. Rural migrants attracted by cheap housing, health and education have provided a ready supply of labour for the municipality’s fast-growing car- and computer-making industries (Chongqing is the world’s largest maker of laptops). Doubtless the lure of good wages in these factories would have drawn many farmers into urban areas anyway. But Chongqing’s economy has performed better than many other inland cities; for the past five years its GDP growth has been about three points above the national average.

The reforms may also have helped reduce outbreaks of social unrest. China Labour Bulletin, an NGO based in Hong Kong, says there were 42 known labour-related protests in Chongqing last year, compared with 121 in Shenzhen, a coastal city with half of Chongqing’s urban population. So far, Chongqing has been able to avoid a backlash among holders of urban hukou, many of whom, as elsewhere in China, fear that already strained public services may be overwhelmed if migrants gain more rights.

And somewhere to park the car, one day

But the municipality has not fulfilled its promises. Only about 15m square metres of public housing have been built (one project is pictured), half the amount that was supposed to be finished by now. One problem has been the enormous cost. Yang Jirui of Sichuan International Studies University reckons that the municipality has spent about 50 billion yuan building public housing so far and would need another 50 billion to meet its construction target. He says the government may only be able to achieve this by encouraging private developers to do the building, and by offering to subsidise the rents of poorer tenants. The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences calculates that it costs about 100,000 yuan (in total) to provide schooling, health care and other benefits for each rural migrant who becomes eligible to use urban services. For every 1m migrants, that means another 100 billion yuan.

Another problem has been that many migrants still feel a strong sense of attachment to their rural land, even after they move into the cities. This is because of the entitlement they enjoy by law, as people from the countryside, to farm a family plot and to use a piece of land for their housing. Most farmers jealously guard that right: they see it as a form of insurance should they fail to make ends meet in the cities. Many farmers are reluctant to apply for urban hukou because they fear it would mean having to give up these rights.

Through no fault of Chongqing’s, distribution of urban hukou has thus fallen far short of the target of 10m. Around 4m migrants have opted to switch their hukou status since 2010. Most are young and better-educated people: those with the best prospects in the cities and the least inclination to keep a rural bolthole. Some families have tried to ensure they have both kinds of documents. Yang Xianlu is a 60-year-old farmer in Wulong county. He says he was offered urban hukou but turned it down. His daughter-in-law and grandson (who work in the main city) have both applied for it, however. If they succeed, he says, the family would have the best of both worlds.

To calm migrants’ fears about taking urban hukou, Chongqing has offered concessions: it has granted farmers who apply for ita three-year grace period during which they may change their minds. It has also allowed new holders of urban hukou to retain their farming rights—certainly the best of both worlds. In September 2015 it went further still, giving holders of rural hukou access to most urban social services. This sharply narrowed the formal difference between urban and rural dwellers.

Similarly the dipiao system has not taken off as initially expected. Some officials had hoped it would eventually develop into a genuine free market for rural property: if the dipiao system was seen to work on a small scale, they figured, scruples about selling collective land might be overcome. But again, through no fault of their own, the dreams of Chongqing’s reformers have not been fulfilled. That is because officials in Beijing remain nervous of big land reform. Many officials are haunted by the (unsubstantiated) notion that allowing farmers to trade their property freely might prompt millions of them to sell up and move into cities, with no place to return to if they fail to prosper.

Recently, there has been a bit of belated encouragement from on high. In January the finance minister, Lou Jiwei, said other places could try out dipiao trading. President Xi also paid a visit to Chongqing that month. It was the first by a Chinese president since the municipality’s reforms began, and was widely interpreted as a sign of his endorsement of Chongqing’s efforts. But neither men expressed full-throated support for the reforms. Mr Xi likely fears that promoting them may impose crippling financial burdens on local governments and unleash yet more uncontrollable social forces. He may be a leader of enormous power, but he is afraid to use it to make the changes China most needs.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21695556-ambitious-plan-social-change-has-run-trouble-reformu2019s-big-taboo/print





Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Oil and the Gulf states: After the party

Yemen: Fighting to a standstill

The Kurds: Containing multitudes

Apostasy and Islam: Not advised

Unrest in Ethiopia: Grumbling and rumbling

Press freedom in east Africa: Pencil blunted





Articles Sections Next

Oil and the Gulf states

After the party

The low oil price is manageable in the short term; but the Gulf states must make big changes to face the future

Mar 26th 2016 | DUBAI AND MUSCAT | From the print edition



FAST cars whizz around, malls are full of expensive luxuries and cranes dominate the skyline. But scratch the shimmering surface of the Gulf and you soon find countries hurting from the low oil price, currently around $40 a barrel. Growth is slowing and unemployment is rising. Policymakers even dare utter a three-letter “t” word until recently taboo: tax.

Oil is central to the six Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) states, which have used the windfall of the past few years to spend lavishly. Unlike many oil exporters, such as Nigeria and Venezuela, they have high foreign-exchange reserves and low debts to cover short-term gaps. But public spending is generous and the private sector is heavily reliant on oil to boot. To be sustainable in an era of lower prices, the rulers must change the structure of their economies.

The IMF reckons the lower oil price knocked $340 billion off Arab oil-exporting states’ government revenues in 2015. This year is looking worse. Moody’s, a ratings agency, this month downgraded Bahrain and Oman and put on watch the other four GCC states: Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Qatar. “It’s the end of an era for the Gulf,” says Razan Nasser of HSBC in Dubai. “And we’re only just starting to see the effects.”

Oil receipts typically account for more than 80% of GCC government revenues, rising to over 90% of Saudi Arabia’s budget before the crisis. Dubai, one of the emirates making up the UAE, is an exception, with oil accounting for only 5% of revenues. That is because it has successfully diversified: tourism and services account for most of its government revenues.

Governments are reacting to the squeeze on their incomes with a mixture of strategies, drawing down reserves and taking on debt on the one hand, and imposing spending cuts on the other. Last year they made tweaks, such as curbing benefits for public servants. This year will be tougher. Oman has told all state-owned enterprises to remove perks such as cars. Qatari companies including Al Jazeera and the Qatar Foundation, a cultural organisation, have laid off employees. With such tweaks Kuwait, the UAE and Qatar, which have small populations and high foreign-exchange reserves, can get by for a decade.



But the other three states are in a trickier position. Oman and Bahrain have relatively low reserves. Oman posted a larger than expected budget deficit in 2015, at almost 16% of GDP. By the end of 2017 Bahrain’s debt is expected to reach 65% of GDP. It needs an oil price of $120 to balance its books. The two have other concerns, too. Bahrain’s Shia-majority population bristles at being ruled by a Sunni monarchy. There is a lack of leadership in Oman; Sultan Qaboos is, again, in Germany being treated for suspected cancer.

Observers are particularly concerned about Saudi Arabia, which Barack Obama will visit to meet Gulf leaders next month. It has huge foreign-currency reserves—roughly $740 billion at the end of 2014—but is drawing them down at a clip, taking out about $115 billion in 2015. At 30m, its population is the Gulf’s biggest, and it has a sprawling royal family to pamper.

Happily, predictions that the oil price will not rise quickly are focusing minds on all sorts of structural reforms. “This is good for the Gulf; it will be a rich period for policy-making,” says Nasser Saidi, an economist in Dubai. The UAE cut fuel subsidies last year, and other states are following suit. Bahrain removed subsidies on some food items. Saudi Arabia raised the cost of electricity and water. Oman is printing the cost of the fuel subsidy on household electricity bills to prepare the population for paying the whole lot.

But with real prices now near the subsidised prices, there is less room for savings from cuts than there was a few years ago. And outgoings remain high. It is not just that the Gulf states are committed to large infrastructure projects—metros, financial centres, ports and railways. They spend billions of dollars on wages and handouts to their rapidly growing populations. The relatively young states need to spend cash on education. And they are embroiled in costly wars in the region.

Making matters worse, cuts in spending affect the nascent private sectors where, apart from the UAE and Bahrain, most activity is linked to oil, such as services to the industry; and to public spending, such as construction. Economic growth is slowing. “The lack of countercyclical measures is amplifying the pain,” says Ms Nasser. Banks are getting tougher on loans just when the state wants to encourage more small businesses. By some reckonings, the private sector in the Gulf contributes less to GDP now than in earlier decades.

The GCC countries need to do much more if the books are to balance in the future. Diversification, long talked about, has to happen now, although it is harder to do it in bad times. Plans look good on paper—encouraging tourism and logistics, for example—but more uncertain in real life. Saudi Arabia is not keen on Westerners trampling around the kingdom.

A modest value-added tax, long discussed, of up to 5%, will be introduced across the region by 2018. Oman has raised corporate tax from 12% to 15%. Other states are considering taxing expatriates’ incomes. But above all, the public sector has to stop acting as the main employer. That would be a big shift. Gulf citizens have got used to earning without doing much. Private firms are not creating enough jobs to keep up with the number of young people graduating from university, and large expatriate workforces provide tough competition. Gulf rulers fear that cutting spending would alter the social contract in which largesse buys their people’s quiescence.

But they have no choice. A new generation of younger leaders, such as Saudi Arabia’s Muhammad bin Salman and Muhammad bin Zayed in the UAE, are more willing to make tough changes. The GCC states have had an amazing few years in which they built up infrastructure and saved. But they did too little to prepare for a post-oil future. Now they must catch up.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695539-low-oil-price-manageable-short-term-gulf-states-must-make/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Yemen

Fighting to a standstill

But talk of a ceasefire proves premature

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

Little left to save

AS IS the way of the Middle East, when a ceasefire beckons the fighting intensifies, as the fighters try to press their advantage before the jaw-jaw begins. No sooner had Saudi Arabia talked last week of halting the year-long bombardment of its much poorer neighbour than its air strikes on Yemen resumed. The UN mediator, Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, could barely scramble from Sana’a before the capital was struck. Another hundred Yemenis were killed when bombs struck a market in Hajja, a town near the Saudi border. Further south, the armed Shia group known as the Houthis, which seized the capital along with much of the country in 2014, continued shelling Taiz, a predominantly Sunni city.

The deaths will probably change little. The battle lines have stayed stubbornly fixed for months. Both sides seem aware that a military victory is out of reach. After a year of bombings, bombs lose their impact. “We forget them in minutes,” says a nonchalant Yemeni. In Sana’a the old city’s once-empty alleyways are crowded again. Somehow markets are full. The electricity grid is entirely down, but a surfeit of solar panels has entered the country. Saudi-backed fighters claim to have lifted the Houthis’ siege of Taiz, but coalition ground-forces seem loth to advance on the capital or the Houthi strongholds further north. And the administration the Saudis have tried to re-establish in Aden, the southern port, is dysfunctional and prone to attack from al-Qaeda. The Emiratis, who play second fiddle to the Saudis, are said to have stopped their patrols.

Still, preliminary talks are stumbling on. The warring parties are now negotiating directly in Saudi Arabia. Some ten days of meetings led by the Houthi spokesman, Muhammad Abdelsalem, have so far resulted in a cessation of cross-border fighting and Houthi shelling of Saudi border towns, as well as a prisoner swap. Saudi advisers speak of following Russia’s example by grounding most of their warplanes.

The broad outlines of a political deal, too, seem to be slowly taking shape. The Houthis could offer the government in Aden a refuge in Sana’a, where it would be safe from al-Qaeda. In return the Houthis would gain several key ministries and see their militiamen taken onto the government payroll. The Saudis could claim that they have stopped another neighbouring capital from falling into the hands of Iranian clients,while the Houthis could formalise their presence at the heart of government, much like Hizbullah in Lebanon.

Such, at least, is the road map. In reality, Yemen is too battered for anything resembling coherence or functioning central government to be quickly re-established. So the population will continue to suffer. In the Arab world’s poorest state, war has cut incomes by almost half. Some 2.5m people have been displaced; around 6,000 killed. The UN says a third of the country’s 21m people are in severe need of food. Other than spur Yemeni loathing for Saudi Arabia, the war has achieved little.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695541-talk-ceasefire-proves-premature-fighting-standstill/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Kurds

Containing multitudes

The Kurds have taken advantage of chaos in the region, but remain divided

Mar 26th 2016 | ERBIL AND GAZIANTEP | From the print edition



AFTER defeating Zuhak, an evil king with serpents sprouting from his shoulders, the Kurds celebrated by lighting the hillsides with fire. The fable is remembered each Nowruz, a holiday marking the start of spring and the new year in late March. The Kurds still celebrate by lighting fires—and, in the case of Kurdish soldiers near Mosul, sending flaming tyres down the hillside toward the trenches of Islamic State (IS).

The Kurdish forces in Iraq (where they are known as peshmerga) and Syria are the West’s most reliable allies in the fight against IS. They have won important victories in the towns of Kobane, on the Syrian border with Turkey, and Sinjar in northern Iraq. In the process, they have increased and consolidated the territory under their control. Thanks to the chaos created by IS, the Kurds in each country are closer than ever to achieving self-determination.

Yet a unified Kurdistan spanning the region’s borders is not in the offing. Last month Masoud Barzani, the president of Iraq’s autonomous Kurdistan region, called for a non-binding referendum on independence by the end of the year. Statehood could eventually follow. But in Syria the Kurds’ declaration of a federal region, called Rojava, on March 17th, was framed as a way of holding the country together, not splitting it. Though left out of peace talks, Kurdish leaders say Rojava could act as a model for a decentralised Syria.

Syria’s Kurds may of course merely be a step behind their Iraqi counterparts on the way to independence. But that would belie the rivalry between the dominant Kurdish parties in each country. The Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP), led by Mr Barzani, accuses the Democratic Union Party (PYD) in Syria of lacking commitment to Kurdish nationalism. The PYD has close ties to the Turkey-based Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) of Abdullah Ocalan, who believes in a confederation of Kurds, not full independence, within current borders. The PYD and the PKK shun capitalism, while the KDP embraces it, in theory at least.

The tension is exacerbated by the KDP’s co-operation with Turkey, home to a large and restive Kurdish population. Turkish leaders see the KDP as a palatable alternative to the PKK, which they blame for recent attacks inside Turkey. Mr Ocalan sits in prison, but fighting between the government and Kurds in south-eastern Turkey has reached a bloody peak. By extension, the government takes a dim view of the PYD, which it has prevented from forming a contiguous entity along the border in Syria by bombing Kurdish fighters—and by tacitly helping IS, claims the PYD.

The PYD portrays Rojava as a democratic and pluralistic place, but the party is accused of monopolising power and, in some towns, of kicking out Arabs. Other Kurdish groups, such as the local affiliate of the KDP, have been sidelined and critics repressed. While maintaining an uneasy truce with the regime of Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s embattled president, the PYD’s soldiers have attacked other rebels, including other Kurds. “For the PYD, everyone is the enemy,” says Sultan Jalaby, a Kurdish journalist who fled Syria for Turkey.

The KDP has done its share to alienate the PYD, including digging trenches on the Iraqi side of the border with Rojava. Mr Barzani also has critics at home. Over the objections of political rivals, the president’s term in office has been extended indefinitely due to the fight against IS. Many believe his call for a referendum was timed to distract from more pressing problems. The region has been cut off by Baghdad for failing to send oil revenue to the central coffers. Low oil prices, a bloated budget and the influx of nearly 2m refugees and displaced persons have it drowning in debt.

The Kurds in Iraq and Syria are tightening their grip on disputed territories, such as oil-rich Kirkuk in Iraq. But there is little appetite abroad for the break-up of Iraq and Syria. The declaration of a federal Rojava was rejected by America. The Kurds may be winning ground; but peace among them may prove to be more elusive.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695540-kurds-have-taken-advantage-chaos-region-remain/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Apostasy and Islam

Not advised

The penalties for turning away from Islam can be quite stringent

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

No turning back

“IF THERE is a God, atheism must seem to Him as less of an insult than religion,” Edmond de Goncourt, a French writer, once said. He would not find much agreement in most of the Islamic world. In late February a Saudi Arabian man in his 20s was sentenced to ten years in prison, a hefty fine and 2,000 lashes for professing his atheism on Twitter. He could well have fared even worse. In 2014 Saudi Arabia passed a law equating atheism with terrorism. When last year another young man uploaded an online video of himself tearing up a Koran, Saudi courts sentenced him to death.

According to the International Humanist and Ethical Union, a pressure group, Saudi Arabia is one of only 19 countries in the world that criminalises apostasy, the turning away from one religion to another one, or to none; it is one of 12 countries where it is punishable by death. All but two of the latter group are in the Middle East and Africa. In practice, the death sentences are rarely carried out; more commonly, apostates are merely thrown in jail and tortured.

Even countries with civil laws that do not expressly outlaw apostasy still find creative ways to crack down on religious deviation. In Oman, Kuwait and Jordan Islamic courts can annul the marriages of apostates or prevent them from inheriting property. In Pakistan couples who convert from Islam risk having their children taken away.

Where laws against apostasy do not exist, blasphemy laws are often applied instead. In Egypt, a 21-year-old student, Karim Ashraf Muhammad al-Banna, was sentenced to three years in prison last year after he broadcast his atheism on Facebook. Atheism itself is not illegal in Egypt; instead Mr al-Banna was charged with insulting religion. Blasphemy laws were famously applied in Pakistan too, when, Asia Bibi, a Pakistani Christian, was sentenced to death in 2010 after a confrontation with a group of Muslim women in which she supposedly defamed the Prophet Muhammad. Salman Taseer, the governor of Punjab, who defended Ms Bibi and railed against the blasphemy laws, was murdered by his own bodyguard in 2011.

Not everyone in the region is so ardent. Despite the great risks associated with religious doubt in the Islamic world, curiosity about atheism seems to thrive. According to Google Trends, all of the seven countries most interested in the term “atheism” are in the Middle East. Still, a survey by WIN/Gallup International in 2012 suggested that Brazilians were more religious than Afghans and Armenians more zealous than Iraqis. Perhaps not wholly surprisingly, the proportion of Saudis reporting themselves to be “convinced atheists” was about the same as for Americans.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695542-penalties-turning-away-islam-can-be-quite-stringent-not-advised/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Unrest in Ethiopia

Grumbling and rumbling

Months of protests are rattling a fragile federation

Mar 26th 2016 | ADDIS ABABA | From the print edition



AN OUTBREAK of public protest unprecedented in its duration and spread since the ruling party took power in Ethiopia in 1991 is stirring a rare cocktail of discontent. Demonstrations started in November mainly by members of the Oromo ethnic group, which accounts for about a third of Ethiopia’s 97m-plus people, have refused to die down. Indeed, they have spread. The government has dropped its plan, the original cause of the hubbub, to expand the city limits of Addis Ababa, the capital, into Oromia, the largest of the federal republic’s subdivisions of nine regional states and two city-states. But the protests have billowed into a much wider expression of outrage. People are complaining about land ownership, corruption, political repression and poverty. Such feelings go beyond just one ethnic group.

Human-rights advocates and independent monitors reckon that at least 80 people and perhaps as many as 250, mostly demonstrators, have been killed since the protests began. The government says the true figure is much lower and instead lays stress, as it always does, on terrorist and secessionist threats to the country’s stability. It points out that foreign-owned factories have been attacked, churches burnt down and property looted by organised gangs during the protests. Last month seven federal policemen in the south were killed by local militiamen during a particularly violent wave of disturbances.

All the same, most of the protests have been peaceful. The Oromo particularly resent the sale or lease of land (almost all of which is state-owned) by the government to foreign investors. The government’s decision to shelve its master plan to expand Addis Ababa is regarded by the assorted opposition as a rare step in the right direction. But the protesters say the government must now allow Ethiopians to exercise their constitutional right to express dissent, or discontent could escalate.

The army was deployed to bolster the federal police in the south. Both are regularly accused of brutality and are generally deemed able to operate with impunity. Shooting at protesters and arbitrarily arresting them, especially if they are students, has a long tradition in Ethiopia, going back to the military dictatorship that ran the country from 1974 until its downfall in 1991.

The government is particularly suspicious of the Ethiopian diaspora, especially its representation in America, which fled abroad during that period. The foreign-based opposition, bolstered by social-media campaigners in America, is stirring things up for its own malign purposes, says the government. That, argues the opposition at home and abroad, is what it always says when seeking to discredit peaceful dissent.

In any event, tension is bound to persist because the ruling Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front, which takes China’s top-down style of authoritarian government as a model, is loth to loosen controls at the centre, despite the federal constitution. For their part, critics of the government cannot escape from the fact that it has until now succeeded in holding together a diverse collection of ethnic groups. Moreover, under the current government the economy has boomed and poverty has fallen sharply, though a severe recent drought is causing new problems. Neither the government nor the federal system, however imperfect, is under immediate threat.

Meanwhile Western governments, with America and Britain to the fore as large donors of aid to Ethiopia, have been notably silent about the turmoil. In a region battered by terrorism and violence in such nearby places as Yemen, South Sudan and Somalia, Ethiopia is still regarded as an anti-terrorist bulwark.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695402-months-protests-are-rattling-fragile-federation-grumbling-and-rumbling/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Press freedom in east Africa

Pencil blunted

A celebrated cartoonist loses his strip

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



GADO has had no qualms about skewering politicians of all persuasions in 23 years as a cartoonist for a host of east African newspapers. But his unsparing caricatures were apparently too close to the bone for the Kenyan government: Gado claims he was sacked from the Nation Media Group (NMG), the region’s largest private media company, after pressure from the very top.

The satirist, whose real name is Godfrey Mwampembwa, agreed to take a sabbatical in March 2015 after Tanzania banned the EastAfrican, an NMG newspaper, ostensibly because it wasn’t properly registered (despite having been sold in the country for two decades). The real problem, Gado was led to believe, was a drawing of then-president, Jakaya Kikwete, half-naked, attended to by buxom women named Incompetence, Corruption and Cronyism. In November he was told his contract wouldn’t be renewed.

The termination came after a dispute closer to home. Gado says that in February 2015 the office of William Ruto, Kenya’s deputy president, complained about his depiction in connection with a controversial “land grab”. Gado says NMG also put pressure on him to stop drawing Mr Ruto wearing a ball-and-chain (representing a case brought against him by the International Criminal Court for violence in 2007-8). President Uhuru Kenyatta’s shackles disappeared when the ICC dropped charges against him.

“One thing I will never allow is politicians to dictate what I draw,” says Gado, who is suing NMG and penning cartoons. The company denies bowing to government demands and says Gado’s contract came to “a natural end”. But the incident comes amid a clampdown on Kenya’s media, long seen as the continent’s liveliest after South Africa’s. A string of repressive laws has been passed of late. Recently a counter-terrorism bill was used to arrest bloggers who posted photos of Kenyan soldiers killed in Somalia.

NMG is not the only media company ridding its pages of outspoken journalists. But if Gado’s claims are right it would be disappointing because of its previous history of fearless reporting. It also fired a managing editor, Denis Galava, in January, supposedly for publishing an editorial without getting proper approval from the editor in chief. The article was headlined: “Mr President, get your act together this year”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21695400-celebrated-cartoonist-loses-his-strip-pencil-blunted/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




Brussels bombings: Not again

Terrorism and France: The end of insouciance

Turkey and the EU: Refugees and terror

Spain without government: Stuck in the centre

What Europeans think of each other: Green-eyed continent

Charlemagne: A terrible problem is born





Articles Sections Next

Brussels bombings

Not again

After a top fugitive is arrested, jihadists strike once more

Mar 26th 2016 | BRUSSELS AND PARIS | From the print edition



WHEN the leaders of Belgium and France announced the arrest of Salah Abdeslam on March 18th, they made sure not to sound too triumphant. Mr Abdeslam was Europe’s most-wanted terror suspect; he is believed to have been the Islamic State (IS) logistics chief behind the attacks that killed 130 people in Paris in November. But he had evaded a police dragnet in Brussels’ Molenbeek district for four months. That suggested shoddy Belgian police work and a deep and dangerous IS network. On March 21st Jan Jambon, Belgium’s interior minister, warned that terrorists might strike in response. The next day they did, carrying out suicide attacks at Brussels’ Zaventem airport and in a downtown metro station.

The strikes showed the same worrying sophistication as those in Paris. At the airport two jihadists, later identified as brothers, set off bombs in the departure lounge, killing at least 11 people. (Police found and neutralised another bomb; as The Economist went to press, they were searching for a third attacker identified as Najim Laachroui, also linked to the Paris attacks.) The bomb an hour later in Maalbeek metro station killed at least 20 people, forcing the evacuation of nearby EU headquarters buildings.

The timing of the attacks is unlikely to have been coincidental. Mr Abdeslam’s arrest may have triggered another cell to act on an existing plan. Or perhaps he planned to take part himself, and his capture forced co-conspirators to bring the attack forward. Either way, the sophistication of the attacks suggests that Europe must prepare for a “new normal” of periodic terrorism. On Brussels’ Place de la Bourse, where locals gathered after the attacks to light candles and lay flowers, the mood was sombre. “We thought it was over because they caught the terrorist,” said one mourner. “Now we know it is not.”



Authorities remain optimistic over Mr Abdeslam’s arrest because it provides a rare chance to interrogate a prominent living jihadist. France has asked for his extradition, hoping he will fill gaps in what is known about the Paris and Brussels attacks. But what French investigators have learned so far is disturbing. For at least the past three years, IS appears to have been building a network across Europe to carry out terrorist outrages in different cities. Currently 18 people detained in six countries are suspected of helping the Paris attackers. That may be the tip of the iceberg. This week Belgian police identified yet another suspect whom they believe was in telephone contact with the Paris attackers. French investigators have been taken aback by the sophistication of IS operatives. The group’s bomb-makers in Europe are apparently able to make explosives using triacetone triperoxide, or TATP, whose precursors can be found in common products such as nail polish remover. Another sign of competent tradecraft is the discipline of their communications. The French authorities had no clue of what was to unfold on November 13th, and there seems to have been no actionable intelligence before the attacks in Brussels. The terrorists apparently use encryption for all their electronic communication. And IS increasingly carries out multiple, sequenced attacks against soft targets to spread confusion and stretch emergency services thin.

The most critical problem European security agencies face in responding to this threat is failure to pool information. In linguistically divided Belgium, inter-agency co-operation is known to be dire. At the European level, Europol, the law enforcement agency of the EU, does a useful job in facilitating information exchange, but it has no executive powers to carry out investigations. And intelligence co-operation had been slowed by the legacy of totalitarianism, which has left many Europeans, the Germans in particular, with a deep aversion to the surveillance state. France has been pushing hard for a common European registry of passenger names to help track terror suspects’ movements ever since the Charlie Hebdo attacks in early 2015; the European Council agreed to the measure in December. Yet the European Parliament, concerned over data privacy, has failed to ratify it.

A terrorist strike just metres from their own offices may help EU legislators see the urgency. Yet better security will not heal the social and ethnic divisions that have made Europe fertile ground for Islamic extremism. In the hours after the attacks, the capital transformed into a diorama of these tensions. In the city centre EU bureaucrats in suits and ties were trapped in their gleaming steel-and-glass offices as police cleared the streets.

Among the run-down brick apartments of the Vierwindenstraat in Molenbeek, meanwhile, where Mr Abdeslam was arrested last week, no one would talk about the bombings. A middle-aged resident named Mehmet said he understood why local youth turn to extremism: “It’s a poubelle (dustbin) here.” On a nearby garage door, someone had scrawled the words mort aux keuf (death to the police).



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695566-after-top-fugitive-arrested-jihadists-strike-once-more-not-again/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Terrorism and France

The end of insouciance

France is realising that its state of emergency may last a long time

Mar 26th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



FRESHLY painted in pale turquoise, “La Belle Equipe”, a bistro in eastern Paris, reopened this week after months of anguish. During last November’s terrorist attacks, 20 people were shot dead there. Four months on, the French are trying to turn the page after the worst-ever terrorist attack on their soil. But the latest carnage in Brussels is a bloody reminder that France, and all of Europe, will have to learn to live with terrorism.

After two deadly terrorist attacks in 2015, France, home to Europe’s biggest Muslim minority, has been more alert to the threat than any other European country. Manuel Valls, the prime minister, frequently takes to the airwaves to remind the French of their vulnerability. In Munich last month he warned fellow Europeans: “We have entered a new era, marked by the long-term presence of hyper-terrorism.” It was the end, he said, of “insouciance”.

As in America after the September 11th attacks, the French response has been to shift the balance between civil liberties and security firmly towards security. In November France became the only European country to declare a state of emergency over terrorism; it remains in place until May 26th. This grants the police sweeping powers to put suspects under house arrest and search premises without judicial warrants. The Socialist president, François Hollande, says the country is “at war”. Under “operation Sentinelle” 10,000 soldiers have been deployed on French streets. This week Bernard Cazeneuve, the interior minister, added another 1,600.

The French seem to have accepted without much complaint the disruption to daily life that this has imposed. Bags are routinely checked at the entrances to shops on the Champs-Elysées or other busy streets. Queues for concerts can snake down the pavements due to security controls. Passengers for high-speed trains from Paris to Brussels and Amsterdam must now pass through scanners, as those between Paris and London have for years. With border checks reinstated, car journeys in and out of France can be delayed, too. Such nuisances are tolerated: a poll earlier this year showed 79% approved of extending the state of emergency.

Yet settling into a long-term alert raises two difficulties. The first is getting the management of public anxiety right. After the November attacks, a spirit of solidarity prevailed in Paris, with photos defiantly shared on social media under the hashtag “#Jesuisenterrasse” (I’m at a pavement café). Nonetheless, over a third of Parisians told a recent poll that they have changed their behaviour, going less often to theatres or football matches.

Visitors are also nervous. Last month Anne Hidalgo, the Socialist mayor of Paris, and Valérie Pécresse, the centre-right president of the Paris region, took an unusual joint trip to Tokyo to reassure Japanese tourists, whose number plunged 66% in December from the previous year’s level.

Yet it is awkward for the government to reassure visitors while telling its own citizens to prepare for another attack. Public buildings are festooned with public-information posters entitled “How to react after a terrorist attack”, instructing people to turn off their mobile phones, keep away from windows and lie flat on the ground. Schools must carry out compulsory “confinement” exercises, in which pupils are quarantined in a classroom while windows and doors are sealed with wet towels or tape. “It’s terrifying for the children,” says one primary-school teacher.

Equally difficult is meaningfully improving the security of soft targets, such as the public areas of airports, train stations and busy streets. Now that security around boarding areas is tight, the focus has shifted to the outer zones, where friends and family linger with passengers. Mr Cazeneuve this week announced that access to the entrance halls of French airports and main transport hubs will be allowed only for those with tickets—a first for Europe. Yet even this policy is unlikely to be applied consistently. Passengers taking trains to Brussels and Amsterdam are scanned before boarding in Paris; but not those leaving for Lyon or Marseilles. Access to the Paris Metro and buses will continue to be open.

Perhaps the trickiest thing about a state of emergency is judging when to exit. Already, there is talk of another extension in June to cover France’s hosting of the European Championship football tournament. Yet prolongation has its own problems. One Paris official confesses that Japanese tourists seem more worried than reassured by France’s state of emergency. The extraordinary measures it allows were intended as just that, not a permanent response to a persistent threat.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695562-france-realising-its-state-emergency-may-last-long-time-end-insouciance/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Turkey and the EU

Refugees and terror

Just as the EU declares Turkey safe for refugees, Istanbul is hit by a bomb

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



ON MARCH 18th the European Union, seeking to stem the influx of refugees from the Middle East, struck a deal to return asylum-seekers who cross the Aegean illegally to Turkey, in exchange for promises of aid and other concessions. The following day, a suicide bomber killed at least five people, including himself and four foreigners, on Istanbul’s most popular pedestrian shopping street (pictured). Turkey has endured five big terror attacks since October, at a cost of nearly 200 lives; its war against Kurdish militants has left hundreds more dead. But after a disastrous year, the deal with the EU may offer at least a tentative promise of something better.

No group has stepped forward to claim responsibility for the latest bombing. The day after the attack, officials identified a Turkish member of Islamic State (IS) as the perpetrator. IS has been quick to take credit for atrocities elsewhere, from Jakarta to San Bernardino. But it has yet to do so for any attack by its sympathisers in Turkey, including a double bombing that killed 102 people in October.

Distressingly, the list of other possible suspects has grown longer over the past year. In neighbouring Syria, Turkish-backed proxies are fighting the regime of President Bashar al-Assad, his Russian allies, and the People’s Protection Units (YPG), Kurdish fighters associated with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) with which Turkey is once again at war. Turkish forces have shelled the YPG directly. As the terror attacks continue, officials in Ankara, the Turkish caital, have pointed to all of the above as possible culprits. A Turkey that once tried to play firefighter in Syria is slowly being consumed by its flames.

Yet the biggest threat to Turkey’s security is homegrown. An urban insurgency waged by the PKK across the country’s southeast, accompanied by a ruthless crackdown by Turkish security forces, has left more than a thousand people dead, including some 300 civilians. With the army deploying tanks and artillery against rebels armed with rocket-propelled grenades and machine guns, entire neighbourhoods have been blasted apart.

Losing ground in the southeast, the PKK appears to be turning its firepower on soft targets, including civilians, in the country’s west. In the past two months, terrorist attacks claimed by one of the group’s offshoots have killed 66 people in Ankara. A senior PKK commander has warned that “at this point in the struggle” his militants are poised to fight by any means necessary. Amid the blowback from Syria, the increasingly radicalised Kurdish insurgency and a mounting crackdown against academics, journalists and politicians suspected of PKK sympathies, Turkey risks sinking further into a cycle of repression and violence.

The best (if still fragile) hope of escaping chaos may lie in the new deal with Europe. In exchange for a commitment to accept migrants sent back from Greece and seal off a smuggling route used by over a million people since the start of 2015, Turkey has wrested a string of concessions from the EU. One, a promise to inject some fuel into the country’s stalled membership talks with the EU, is mere window dressing. The opening of a new chapter in the negotiations will keep the accession process running in low gear, but with little real hope of reaching its destination. Another, a pledge of €6 billion ($6.8 billion) in aid for the refugees Turkey harbours, is more appealing, especially for a country that ran a $33 billion current account deficit in 2015.

The most important, at least in political terms, is an offer of visa-free travel by June. Even for those Turks not forced to endure long waits in front of European consulates, the issue is a matter of national pride. For their president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, it is a vote-winner. Optimists argue that the strong conditions attached to the promise of visa liberalisation will bring Turkey back into the European fold and help stem its descent into authoritarianism. There is at least a chance that rebuilding bridges with Europe may rein in the authoritarian instincts of Mr Erdogan and embolden the few reformists left in his government.

Yet the EU’s new openness cannot undo the damage done by the recent violence, which may strike a crippling blow to Turkey’s tourism industry by scaring Europeans away. The deal itself still faces legal, political and logistical challenges that could cause it to unravel. Greece will find it hard to set up the infrastructure needed to ensure orderly mass returns. Turkey will struggle mightily to meet the exacting conditions required for visa liberalisation by the summer. Even if it succeeds, EU governments, which have a final say in the matter, may bow to domestic pressure and torpedo the visa agreement at the last minute.

Pessimists fear that Mr Erdogan, who once boasted of being able to flood Greece and Bulgaria with refugees, may use his leverage over the EU to press for still more concessions. The president does not seem terribly malleable; he will heed the advice of international bodies only “as long as it is fair,” he said recently. “If it is not, sorry.” Rather than change course, he could keep ratcheting up military action in the southeast and putting the squeeze on any domestic opponents who get in the way. Nevertheless, the renewal of a European connection may be the best chance of keeping the country from going off the rails. “Even some limited engagement has an upside,” says Atilla Yesilada, a political analyst. “Leaving Turkey out in the cold has no benefits.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695236-europe-approves-critical-deal-send-asylum-seekers-back-turkey-just-terrorism-reaches/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Spain without government

Stuck in the centre

While regional parties collaborate, national ones remain at odds

Mar 26th 2016 | VALENCIA | From the print edition



ONCE a stronghold of the conservative Popular Party (PP), led by the prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, Valencia fell to a broad coalition of anti-austerity left-wingers in regional elections in May. Some now see that as a potential model for a national coalition government—a goal that has eluded Spain’s politicians since the general election in December.

Spain’s voters created the three-month impasse by scattering their votes among four large parties and a smattering of small ones. The PP, which struggled with sky-high unemployment and corruption scandals, lost a third of its support. It can govern only in unlikely alliance with its arch-rival, the Socialist party. Likelier would be a broad left coalition headed by the Socialist leader, Pedro Sánchez, and backed by some of the parties—like the left-wing populist insurgents, Podemos—who prop up Valencia’s current government.

In Valencia, that coalition is governing with a programme in which pragmatism trumps radicalism. “We run things better, and don’t steal,” says the region’s deputy president, Mónica Oltra. She helps lead Compromís, a local leftist party that allied with the Socialists and others to form the government. It also stood jointly with Podemos at December’s general election, claiming second place in the region.

High public debt has prevented Ximo Puig, the region’s Socialist president, from pursuing many anti-austerity policies; he has raised taxes slightly and paid for some social welfare projects. But for voters tired of corruption scandals, it is enough for the government to appear clean and calm. The financial crisis revealed murky links between politicians, collapsed construction firms and failed savings banks; many of the local PP’s former leaders now face court cases. Most deny wrongdoing, but Marcos Benavent, a former official known for his expensive designer jackets, appeared in court last year sporting a bushy white beard, earrings and hippy bangles, apologising and vowing to “try to pay back all I stole.”

Though the Socialists have co-operated closely with Compromís in Valencia, they have clashed repeatedly with Podemos in Madrid. In one of his first parliamentary appearances Podemos’s leader, Pablo Iglesias, accused the former socialist prime minister, Felipe González, of being stained with quicklime—a reference to the way in which state-sponsored death-squads disposed of the bodies of Basque separatists they murdered in the 1980s, when he was in office. Many Podemos members would prefer fresh elections to forming a coalition with the Socialists. And Mr Iglesias exercises direct control over only two-thirds of his party’s parliamentary tally; the rest actually belong to local coalitions led by partners like Compromís.

If the Socialists and Podemos do team up—indeed, even if they gain the help of the communist-led United Left—they will still lack a majority. For that, they would need the support of a mixed group of Catalan and Basque nationalists, some of them right-wing. Many politicians, tiring of coalition-building efforts, are already preparing for new elections. Yet that may not solve the stand-off; voters look set to elect another fractured parliament if they are called back to the polls. Spain may have to wait till autumn for its next government.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695575-while-regional-parties-collaborate-national-ones-remain-odds-stuck-centre/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

What Europeans think of each other

Green-eyed continent

Europeans have warped views of their neighbours—and themselves

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



“THE grass is always greener on the other side of the fence” originates from a Latin phrase, quoted by Ovid, to do with envying another man’s fruitful harvest. Fittingly, modern day Italians also have a chlorophyll-tinted view of their neighbours. According to new data from Livewhat, a Geneva-based survey, Ovid’s successors tend to believe that life is better in other countries than the locals do. Over 70% of Italians imagine life to be good in France, when asked to rate it on a scale from one to ten, whereas only 43% of the French have the same opinion.

The Italians are a self-critical bunch, but romanticised views of other countries are widely held in Europe. In all of the countries surveyed, more people believe that life in France, Germany, Italy, Sweden and Switzerland is better than those countries’ own citizens reckon.

This creates odd perceptions, built on mutual jealousy. The Swiss think that the Swedes fare best in Europe; Swedes are quite certain that the Swiss are the truly enviable ones.

By contrast, Europe’s poorer countries are cast in a dim light: many think life in Greece and Poland is unhappier than it is. Other Europeans view Poland poorly, while Poles have the most favourable view of their neighbours. This may explain why 0.1% of Poland’s population—among the lowest rates in Europe—is made up of people from elsewhere in the EU, and why there are 1.5m Poles living in Germany and Britain alone.

Alas, some intra-European crushes go unrequited. According to a survey by Lord Ashcroft, a British pollster, Scandinavian countries tend to be the best-liked in Europe. Within this select clique, the Swedes are the most popular of all, with 84% of respondents holding a favourable view of the country. Poor Romania, meanwhile, has the fewest fans on the continent, with less than a third of Europeans rating it positively. And the countries that like Romania the least? Croatia… and Sweden.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695581-europeans-have-warped-views-their-neighboursand-themselves-green-eyed-continent/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

A terrible problem is born

Britain’s membership of the European Union suits Ireland perfectly. Brexit would open old wounds

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



AS A small, cosmopolitan European capital, Dublin is a delight to visit. Georgian mansions recalling its role as the second city of the British Isles alternate with boutiques and cafés, buzzing with chatter in Spanish or Polish. And in the smart centre, the economic upturn is now palpable. On paper at least, the country has rebounded from recession and bail-out, posting GDP growth last year of 7.8%, five times the euro-zone average.

But there is something else in the spring air. Adorning many handsome facades there are sepia posters of men bearing rifles. Over Easter weekend, the bustle will cease as Ireland commemorates a founding moment: the weeklong uprising in 1916, during the first world war; it is recalled in British annals as a stab in the imperial back and in Irish ones as a heroic self-sacrifice.

The execution of its leaders, as much as the Easter Rising itself, triggered a maelstrom of events: a surge of anti-British rage and harsh counter-repression; a treaty in 1921 establishing two Irish parliaments (a northern one inside the United Kingdom, a southern one outside); and a civil war between supporters and opponents of that compromise.

Those wounds still fester. In other countries, historical ceremonies help transcend domestic squabbles. Not in Ireland, stuck in a deep political impasse, only explicable via the feuds of the past. Fine Gael, a centre-right party whose forebears backed the 1921 accord, has just lost control of the legislature after an election in which its vote slumped to 25.5%. Nor was there a triumph for its rival, Fianna Fail, a party of pragmatic centrists who descend from opponents of the 1921 deal. It improved its score but only to 24.3%. Neither can easily form a government and each mistrusts the other.

With the combined tally of the civil war-based parties now below 50%, is Ireland exorcising old demons and looking ahead? No such luck. The next biggest parliamentary bloc is Sinn Fein, with a 13.8% share; it claims to be the main moral heir of the 1916 insurgency (and will stage separate commemorations next month). Far more fiercely than Fianna Fail, Sinn Fein views all the political arrangements which followed the 1916 rising as a betrayal. Although it now shares power in Northern Ireland’s government, it also insists that its military wing, the Irish Republican Army, was justified in its 25-year war, ending in the mid-1990s, to end British rule in Ulster.

Since the Northern Irish deal of 1998, Sinn Fein has vowed to pursue a united, socialist Ireland peacefully. But some hardliners think the 1998 compromise, too, was shabby, and are fighting on. One such group killed a prison officer in Belfast this month.

Thus Ireland’s prime minister, Enda Kenny, may feel uncomfortable as he watches this weekend’s parades. His Fine Gael party represents the country’s most anglophile camp, and it abhors irredentists who call the rising unfinished business. Some in Fine Gael believe the rising was unnecessary; they think independence was won not by force but by Irish parliamentarians in London who operated peacefully and could have prevailed.

For all their intensity, Ireland’s internal arguments would be manageable, were it not for another spectre. That is Brexit, and the risk that Ireland might again have to choose between continental Europe and a non-European Britain. In Mr Kenny’s cautious words, this outcome could cause “serious difficulty” for Northern Ireland, whose peace deal is predicated on the United Kingdom and the Irish republic (and thus both bits of Ireland) being in the union and working together to get European benefits.

To see, at a deeper level, why Brexit is unwelcome, take another history lesson. In centuries past, England, Ireland and the continent made an ugly triangle. England saw Ireland as a soft underbelly which continental foes might exploit; Irish patriots looked to the continent for succour. In 1798, Irish rebels defied the Crown, aided by France; the insurgents of 1916 took help from Germany.

When Britain and Ireland both joined the then European Economic Community in 1973, a prettier shape emerged. As formally equal partners, the two Anglophone lands collaborated in Brussels. Ireland was keener on farm aid than Britain; but over trade and regulation, British and Irish eyes often met. Ireland gained continental links without sacrificing its ties to Britain. This happy alignment will end if Britain marches out, leaving Ireland lonely. Some wonder if it might feel pressured to leave the EU, too. Irish manufacturers fear paying duties on British-made inputs; and if Britain eased regulations on its own businesses, their Irish competitors, following European rules, would howl.

Brits not out

Horror of Brexit unites politicians in opposite corners. Ask two youngish members of the new legislature. Paschal Donohoe, the Fine Gael transport minister, says he has enjoyed working with Britain in Europe, for example to support liberal aviation regimes; but with or without Britain, Ireland will stay in the EU. Despite Britain’s absence, Ireland has benefited from the “competitive rigour” of the single currency, he believes. Eoin O’Broin, newly elected to parliament for Sinn Fein, loathes the idea of an EU external frontier running through Ireland. But whatever Britain does, he wants to be in the heart of European politics, fighting Mr Donohoe’s liberal ideas alongside leftist allies such as Syriza of Greece, or Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour Party in Britain.

For centuries, Irish people have found ingenious ways to divide their lives between the two islands, even when relations were frosty or worse, as they were in 1916. Britain and Ireland have long used different currencies: that has been a nuisance, not a catastrophe. The reappearance of a customs and security border between north and south would be more serious. Geography and kinship mean the two countries must muddle along. But even for Irish anglophiles, choosing Britain over Europe would be almost unthinkable. That is the newest lesson of Easter 1916.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695567-britains-membership-european-union-suits-ireland-perfectly-brexit-would-open-old-wounds/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




Fiscal policy: In it together?

Brexit brief: Unfavourable trade winds

Religion: Northward Christian soldiers

Ministry of Silly Names: Name that boat

Education reform: Starbucksification of schools

The Baltic Exchange: Nordic noir

Devolution: City united

Bagehot: E pluribus unum





Articles Sections Next

Fiscal policy

In it together?

The balance of tax and welfare changes is tilting further in favour of the rich

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



THE Conservative government was elected last year on a promise to fix Britain’s public finances. In coalition with the Liberal Democrats in 2010-15, the Conservatives had shrunk the budget deficit from 10% of GDP to 5%. Now freed of the need for a coalition partner, they want to eliminate the deficit entirely by 2020. In the quest to balance the books, they maintain that “we are all in this together”, pushing back against the popular perception that the Conservatives are the party of the rich.

Their claim has been undermined by a controversy over disability benefits. To save about £1 billion ($1.4 billion) a year by 2020, in the budget on March 16th the government unveiled plans to cut the personal-independence payment (PIP), which helps disabled people with their higher costs of living. The amount awarded to those who use an “aid or appliance” (such as a magnifying glass or a ceiling hoist) would fall. Though the proposal was subsequently withdrawn, Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, resigned on the grounds that it epitomised the government’s regressive approach to deficit reduction. Mr Duncan Smith’s true motives are less noble (see article). But he points out an uncomfortable truth: since returning to office last year, the government has been increasingly hard on the poor.

Benefit cuts under the coalition government of 2010-15 hit the needy hardest. That is unsurprising: for a working-age household in the bottom income quintile, benefits are worth about 45% of gross income, compared with just 2% for one in the top quintile. And many reforms were reasonable: for instance, the number of claimants of disability living allowance (DLA), which offers cash for disabled folk, tripled in 1992-2010, with a 369% real-terms rise in spending on people claiming for back pain. The government says that 70% of those on DLA were receiving indefinite awards, meaning they continued to receive money even if they got better. The phasing in of the PIP from 2013 toughened eligibility criteria.

What’s more, the labour market came to the rescue of many of those who lost most from tax and benefit changes. By 2015 there were 1m fewer unemployed people than four years before. The employment rate was at the highest level since records began. Increasing work incentives through reform of the welfare state may have been partly responsible. But improving economic conditions, largely beyond the government’s control, undoubtedly helped.

Thanks to the jobs boom, the living standards of the poorest did not fall as much as the tax and benefit changes alone implied. As bankers took smaller bonuses, there were big income falls at the top of the income distribution. The effect was that a household at the tenth percentile of the income distribution (ie, among the poorest) saw its income rise by 8% from 2007-08 to 2015-16, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), a think-tank, compared with a 3% fall for one at the 90th percentile. By the end of the coalition government, incomes were more equal than before the recession. The “we are all in this together” dictum stood up.

Not any more. In its manifesto last year the Conservative Party pledged to take £12 billion out of the working-age welfare bill by 2017-18 (later postponed to 2019-20), which has forced it to make some painful decisions. A four-year freeze on things like tax credits (wage top-ups for the low-paid) and housing benefit will start next month. In-work benefits will get less generous. On March 22nd George Osborne, the embattled chancellor, said there were “no further plans” to cut welfare. Still, spending on working-age benefits will fall three times as fast in this parliament as in the last one.

The poor will be hit harder by these policies than those of the coalition (see chart). Not only are the cuts deeper, but forthcoming changes seem more to do with penny-pinching than real reform. The abolition from next year of some child benefits for the third sprog onwards has little economic rationale. Making unemployment benefit stingier (Reform, a think-tank, reckons it will be worth £550 a year less in 2020 than in 2010) may do more to reduce the living standards of the jobless than make them likelier to find work.



By comparison, the proposed cuts to PIP, now scrapped, were not so dreadful. The number receiving extra money solely as a result of needing aids or appliances has tripled in the past 18 months. Court rulings have broadened the scope of “aids and appliances” to include things like beds and chairs, which are needed by everyone. Even if the reform had gone ahead, spending on disability benefits would barely have changed from its level last year.

Whatever the merits of particular cuts, Mr Duncan Smith is right to complain that targeting them at working folk is unfair when oldies are so coddled. The government has promised to protect state pensions, which will rise yet again this year by 3%. Rich folk, meanwhile, are doing well. In the budget the threshold for the higher rate of income tax was increased from £42,385 to £45,000. The median full-time employee, who earns £28,000 a year, will not benefit. Even the pledge to raise the personal allowance for income tax, from £10,600 to £11,500, is not especially pro-poor because over 40% of adults do not earn enough to pay any income tax.

Conservatives point out that they have trimmed the incomes of the very richest through measures like greater restrictions on tax relief on pension contributions. The plan to raise tax thresholds was spelled out in their manifesto. But a move to cut the rate of capital-gains tax (CGT), which will most benefit the asset-rich, was not. Of the £30 billion of capital gains subject to CGT in 2013-14, half went to 35,000 individuals with incomes of £100,000 a year or more, according to the Resolution Foundation, a think-tank.

The labour market is unlikely to offset the regressive effects of the Conservatives’ latest welfare changes, as it did in 2010-15. Unemployment cannot fall much lower. Wages are looking shaky, with growth-projections recently revised downwards. The government counters that a new “national living wage”, which will rise to 60% of median earnings by 2020, makes up for the welfare cuts. In fact, many of the very poorest are not in work; middle-income households will be the biggest winners, because many of those on the minimum wage are second earners in higher-income families. A household in the seventh decile will benefit three times more from the living wage than one in the bottom.

The government talks a good game on sharing the pain around; during the coalition with the Lib Dems it was broadly true. But under current plans, the slogan is looking increasingly empty.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695538-balance-tax-and-welfare-changes-tilting-further-favour-rich-it-together/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit brief

Unfavourable trade winds

It would be hard for Britain to negotiate good trade deals post-Brexit

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



TRADE is at the heart of the European Union. Indeed, many Brexiteers claim that in 1973 Britain joined a free-trade area that only later morphed into political union. Leaving the union would not interrupt trade with the continent for long, they suggest, since a new free-trade deal could be swiftly agreed. Yet the EU’s single market is deeper than a free-trade zone. It dismantles both tariffs and non-tariff barriers involving standards, regulations or rules of origin. That explains why joining the EU boosted Britain’s exports so much—as the chart shows for former West Germany.

The EU is clear that non-members like Norway can have full access to the single market only if they accept most of the rules, including the free movement of people, and contribute to the EU budget. Switzerland has less access (its banks, for instance, are restricted in the services they can offer within the EU), yet it still accepts most rules and pays into the budget.

Brexiteers argue that Britain, as Europe’s second-biggest economy, would use its clout to get a better deal. They say Britain’s big trade deficit with the rest of Europe means the EU needs the British market more than the other way round. And if no deal were done on single-market access, they reckon relying on World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules or having a free-trade deal like Canada’s would be good enough.

Yet the atmosphere post-Brexit would be frosty. The EU would have a big incentive to be unhelpful, for fear that other countries might copy Britain in leaving. Even at the best of times, the EU finds it easier to deal with small countries; protectionist interests within Europe resist deals with bigger ones. Any trade offer from the EU requires the approval of all 27 other member countries, plus the European Parliament.



As for the trade deficit, what matters is the share of exports: some 45% of British exports go to other EU countries, whereas only around 7% of their total exports come to Britain. It is true that German carmakers would want to sell to the British market. But several other countries run bilateral deficits with Britain or barely trade with it at all; a deal would not interest them.

The WTO option would not remove non-tariff barriers, nor even tariffs on many products, such as cars (which attract a levy of around 10%). The Canadian deal does not cover all goods. And both the WTO and Canadian options omit most services, including financial ones, which make up Britain’s biggest exports to the EU. Rival financial centres such as Paris, Frankfurt and Dublin would seize the chance to win back business following Brexit.

Hopes of easy trade deals with the rest of the world also look illusory. Lawyers say Britain would have to replace all the EU’s 53 free-trade pacts, which would be hard with tough negotiators like South Korea or Mexico. Several big countries, including America, China and India, are negotiating new deals with the EU, from which a post-Brexit Britain would be excluded.

A free-trading Britain, say Brexiteers, would no longer be held back by protectionist EU members. But other countries’ trade negotiators might find the British market of 65m consumers less alluring than the EU’s 500m. The top American trade envoy, Mike Froman, has said his country would not be interested in a bilateral deal with Britain. Agreements that China has signed with Iceland and Switzerland are lopsided towards the Chinese.

There are also practical problems. Because Britain has been in the EU for over 40 years, it has little experience of bilateral trade negotiations. The rules for exit say a trade deal with the EU should be done in two years, yet this is optimistic—the Canada deal took seven years and is still not ratified. Uncertainty over future trade pacts is a big reason why economists think Brexit would damage the British economy.

A former EU trade commissioner, Lord Mandelson, says free-trade agreements “do not come free, do not cover all trade and take ages to agree.” He adds that trade deals are “started by liberals but finished by protectionists”. His conclusion is that a post-Brexit Britain would end up with fewer and worse trade deals than it has now.



Talk of taking back power may be delusional, but more democracy is not



The campaign to leave the European Union is still behind, but picking up speed



Why Britons are warier than other Europeans of the EU



A twelvefold rise in attempted illegal entries inflames Eurotensions



Conservative splits on Europe belie the reality: Eurosceptics have already taken over the party





More Brexit coverage



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695544-it-would-be-hard-britain-negotiate-good-trade-deals-post-brexit-unfavourable-trade-winds/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Religion

Northward Christian soldiers

Britain’s Christians are clustered in the north-west, but that may change

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



“THIS is a Christian country,” David Cameron declared valiantly, during an Easter speech in 2015. Not, perhaps, for much longer. In 2001 40.1m Britons declared themselves Christian on the census form; in 2011, the figure was just 36.1m, or 59% of the population. Yet some places are resisting the tide of godlessness. According to a new analysis* of census data, Britain’s bastions of Christianity tend to be urban (“but not too urban”) and mostly in north-west England. In Knowsley, an otherwise unremarkable borough on the outskirts of Liverpool, four out of five people were self-professed Christians in 2011; in nearby Chorley, Halton and West Lancashire, about three out of four were.

Catholics originally hailing from Ireland account for much of the concentration in England’s north-west, says Peter Brierley, a church statistician. This group tends to pass religion on to its children, and to identify with it strongly enough to tick the optional box on the census. Like most second- or third-generation immigrants, he says, they tend to live just outside cities. Between 2001 and 2011 the north-west saw relatively little change in the number of Christians: Irish immigrants tend to be traditionally working class, says Mr Brierly: “They move, at most, one street over” and, like Britain’s Muslim and Jewish populations, Catholics cluster rather than spread.

Christians are scarcest in London, particularly north of the Thames, where fewer than 50% declared themselves Christian in 2011. Here, other religions crowd in: 34.5% of people in Tower Hamlets, and 32% in Newham, are Muslim (against a national figure of 4.8%); 25.3% of those in Harrow, and 17.8% in Brent, are Hindu (versus just 1.5% nationally).



Between the two censuses, Christianity underwent steep decline in some areas: parts of Cornwall and Dorset, as well as South Wales, for instance, all saw drops of more than 14% in the number of Christians. In these places the number of people saying they have no religion increased (in South Wales by more than 14%; in Cornwall, by more than 12%). “Church life in Cornwall is pretty dire,” says Mr Brierley. “If you started out a Christian, you might change your mind.”

According to David Goodhew of Cranmer Hall, a theological college in Durham, patterns of church attendance tell a different story to the one outlined in the census. London may have relatively few who identify as Christian, but they are particularly enthusiastic: the capital’s weekly churchgoers, many of them immigrants, have increased by 16% since 2005. In the avowedly faithful north-west, meanwhile, church attendance is falling.

With Christian identity fading almost everywhere, Mr Cameron’s description of a “Christian country” is ever more doubtful. What the census results really show, says Danny Dorling, one of the study’s authors, is “a map of history—and who is trying to forget their history quicker”.

*“People and Places: A 21st-Century Atlas of the UK”, by Danny Dorling and Bethan Thomas.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695531-britains-christians-are-clustered-north-west-may-change-northward-christian/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Ministry of Silly Names

Name that boat

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) has launched an online poll to name a new polar research ship which it says will put Britain at the forefront of ocean science. The NERC said it was seeking something inspirational that would exemplify the work of the £200m ($288m) vessel: Endeavour, perhaps, or Falcon. So far the runaway winner in the online vote, yet to be confirmed by the NERC: Boaty McBoatface.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695527-name-boat/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Education reform

Starbucksification of schools

The government plans to expand chains of academies

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



NICKY MORGAN, the education secretary, was billed as a steady hand when she took office in 2014. Her predecessor, Michael Gove, had enraged teachers and their unions (which he christened the “blob”, after a monster from a 1958 science-fiction film) with his shake-up of the education system. By the end of his four years in office there were around 4,000 academies, state-funded schools that are mostly free from government control, nearly 20 times the number at the start of his stint. It was expected that the pace of change would slow under Ms Morgan.

Instead, she has proposed what some reckon to be the most radical reform of school governance in decades. Under plans outlined on March 17th, all schools would become academies by 2022, giving them the freedom to decide their own curriculum, pay teachers what they want and set shorter holidays. It would be a big, rapid change: currently 59% of secondary schools and only 17% of primary schools are academies.

And the proposals are more than just an extension of existing policy. There has been a distinct change of tone from the Gove era, says Jonathan Clifton of the Institute for Public Policy Research, a think-tank. Whereas Mr Gove sought to release schools from the constraints of localauthority control before leaving them free to flourish or flounder, Ms Morgan is pushing education in the direction of a more closely managed system.

Under her plans, schools (particularly those in struggling areas) would get more hand-holding from officials. And the government expects that the “vast majority” will join “multi-academy trusts”, charitable bodies which run chains of schools. It wants to encourage such chains on the basis that they allow the most successful managers to run more schools and enable good practice to spread. Chains often have far greater control over their schools than do local authorities, many with distinct cultures, brands and teaching methods. Some, for instance, focus on pupils in deprived areas; others seek to spread a religious ethos. The government plans to introduce league tables to rank chains.

Supporters of the reforms argue that running a dual system, made up of both academies and local-authority schools, is expensive and confusing. But so far there is little evidence to suggest that chains are more adept than local authorities at supervising schools. Last year a report by the Sutton Trust, an education charity, found a wide range of performance in existing chains—and that the gap between good and bad ones was growing. It suggested that new chains should not be allowed to expand until they have demonstrated good results.

Many doubt that the government will be able to spur the creation of sufficient numbers of high-performing chains. The impact of the shortage of good chains is likely to be particularly severe among primary schools, which tend to be smaller than secondaries and more reliant on administrative support from local authorities. It may also be tricky in rural areas, where chains have been slower to take off. “Once people accept the government position, the system will respond. But it will be incredibly difficult to make it work,” says the head of one academy chain.

One potential salve, promoted by educationalists on the left and right and hinted at in Ms Morgan’s plans, would be to allow local authorities in effect to form their own chains. This would enable the best authorities to retain a role in the running of the schools, while also taking on schools in other areas. Some London boroughs are thought to be drawing up such plans.

Even if the government gets the technical details right, the reforms will cause a rumpus. Many doubt that the Department for Education will be able to convert around 16,000 schools to academy status in just six years. There are plenty of good academies, and a few good chains. But forcing the expansion of the system at such a pace is unlikely to improve standards—which in turn could undermine the argument for academies in the first place.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695543-government-plans-expand-chains-academies-starbucksification-schools/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Baltic Exchange

Nordic noir

Ownership of an old City institution could be heading east

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



THERE are few more venerable institutions in the City of London than the Baltic Exchange, a cornerstone of Britain’s maritime industry for nearly three centuries. It started as a coffee house where merchants and seamen could meet and do business, changing its name in 1744 from Virginia and Maryland to Virginia and Baltick. The Baltic has gone through several permutations since the Georgian era, surviving an IRA bomb that demolished most of its premises in 1992. Throughout, it has remained proudly independent—until now.

The Baltic has revealed that it is looking at several offers to buy it, and the likelihood is that if it is sold, the new owners will be Asian. That will be a decision for the 370 or so of its 600 member-companies that hold shares in the organisation.

The elegant old trading floor shut down in 2001, giving way to digital, but it is still the world leader in setting the freight rates for “dry cargo” (such as iron ore, coal and scrap metal) as well as tanker products, such as oil. It also produces indices on an impressive variety of shipping information, used for freight derivative trades. It does not make vast profits, but fills an important niche in the maritime industry.

The front-runner to buy the Baltic is said to be the Singapore Exchange, but others that have been mentioned include China Merchants Group, a state-run trading corporation based in Hong Kong. The London Metal Exchange is also believed to have talked to the Baltic, as are some American-based exchanges.

However, it is the Singaporean and Chinese interest that is most significant, as both countries, particularly the former, have been trying for a while to knock London off its perch as the centre of the world’s maritime services industry. Britain long ago gave up building merchant vessels, or even manning them, but London has retained a claim to be the pre-eminent place for marine insurance, chartering, brokering and more. Altogether, this cluster generates about £8.5 billion ($12.1 billion) a year.

Some worry that letting such a stately body as the Baltic pass into Singaporean ownership, even if it physically remained in Britain, would be evidence of London’s role slipping in favour of the East. There was a minor furore last year when it was revealed that Britain’s shipping register accounted for only 1.1% of the world’s merchant fleets. Some users of the Baltic, such as Freight Investor Services, have also warned that new owners could restrict access to the vital Baltic indices, disrupting the market.

Yet the UK Chamber of Shipping, a trade organisation, is relaxed about any possible deal, arguing that London is successful as a maritime centre precisely because of its global approach. “If we lose interest in global investment we lose interest in being a global player,” says the chamber. Watch this bulkhead.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695545-ownership-old-city-institution-could-be-heading-east-nordic-noir/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Devolution

City united

Manchester becomes the first city to run its own health system—and perhaps more

Mar 26th 2016 | MANCHESTER | From the print edition

Work in progress: from Whitehall to the Town Hall

EVER since the government in Westminster stepped up the devolution of powers to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, some in England have grown envious of the freedoms enjoyed by their neighbours. David Cameron’s government has been juggling these demands for autonomy with another difficult task: drastically trimming public spending, hoping to close by 2020 a spending deficit worth 10% of GDP when it entered office in 2010.

Next month will begin an experiment that aims to deal with both of these difficulties. On April 1st the Greater Manchester Combined Authority, made up of ten adjoining boroughs, will take control of the city’s £6 billion ($8.6 billion) health and social-care budget. The hope is that a locally managed health-care system will improve services while saving money.

Britain is the most centralised country in Europe, with Westminster raising more than 90% of taxes and carrying out about 75% of spending. No organisation better epitomises this than the National Health Service (NHS) in England, run from London and funded by general taxation. The NHS also exemplifies the financial straits the country is in. Although the government has promised to protect its £116 billion annual budget, rising demand from an ageing public means it is having to squeeze more out of its doctors, who this year have gone on strike over pay and conditions.

The Manchester model will integrate health care with social care. Whereas the former is provided by hospitals and primary-care organisations (such as doctors and dentists), run centrally by the NHS and free at the point of use, social care (which includes old folks’ homes and social workers) is run and paid for by local government, which funds a heavily rationed service partly through user charges.

Both systems are in crisis across England. The NHS is halfway through the most austere decade in its history. Public spending on health as a proportion of GDP is projected to fall to 6.7% by 2020-21, pushing Britain into the bottom half of the OECD club of rich countries. Waiting times are rising and performance targets are being missed. It is “a system built for acute illness, dealing with an epidemic of chronic conditions,” says Phillip Blond of ResPublica, a think-tank.

Those with chronic problems such as heart disease account for 70% of NHS spending and 70% of NHS bed-days. For many, social care would be better. Yet a squeeze on social-care budgets means that old people’s homes are closing, pushing the elderly into pricier hospital beds. Local-authority spending on social care for the elderly has fallen by 17% in real terms since 2009-10, even as the population has aged. If nothing changes, within five years care homes will lose 37,000 beds—one in ten of the total—according to ResPublica. The number of hospital “bed blockers” is likely to rise. In the past five years the NHS has spent £2 billion caring for patients in hospital who are medically fit to leave.

Devolution or delegation?

Greater Manchester’s 2.7m people make good guinea pigs for the experiment in combining health and social care. Life expectancy is below average, unemployment above it. “The current system isn’t working,” admits Ian Williamson, the city’s head of health devolution.

Until now, most big decisions about NHS spending in Manchester have been taken in London. Under the devolved system the leaders of the ten boroughs, along with the heads of the city’s hospitals and primary-care organisations, will co-ordinate planning and funding through a “strategic partnership board”. In the past, they rarely interacted officially.

One of the boroughs, Stockport, has an annual budget of about £200m, of which £85m is for social care, says the council’s leader, Sue Derbyshire. It will now pool that with more than £100m from Stockport’s primary-care budget, she says, with the aim to treat more old people at home, which is cheaper than hospital. The other boroughs will take similar measures. Meanwhile, the number of hospitals offering some specialist services, such as emergency surgery, will decrease, reducing duplication. “The current system is very fragmented,” says Ms Derbyshire.

Richard Humphries of the King’s Fund, a health think-tank, believes things are moving in the right direction. But he points to several reports that say integration does not reduce costs, though it can improve care. Furthermore, “What we are seeing is more delegation than devolution,” he says. In Manchester, final accountability lies with Mr Williamson, an employee of the NHS. If Manchester’s plans went against national priorities, it would soon be reined in, believes Mr Humphries. Ms Derbyshire of Stockport council agrees, but adds that “just because it is delegation does not mean that it is insignificant”.

The devolution of health may be a model for other services. On March 16th the government announced that Manchester would gain control of parts of its criminal justice system. Decisions on offender management and work with wayward youths will be made locally. Like hospitals, prisons are clogged up by those who might be treated better and more cheaply in the community. Reformers believe that co-ordination in areas such as drugs and mental-health programmes could keep more out of prison, just as joined-up health and social care keeps people out of hospital.

Each year Manchester spends £22 billion of public funds. It eventually wants control of it all. First it must prove that it can improve people’s health and save money. The revolution has only just begun.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695550-manchester-becomes-first-city-run-its-own-health-systemand-perhaps-more-city-united/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

E pluribus unum

The split between Iain Duncan Smith and George Osborne epitomises their party

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS dubbed the “Easterhouse epiphany”. In 2002 Iain Duncan Smith was shown around that Glasgow housing estate. The then Conservative Party leader wept at the hopelessness he encountered on its litter-strewn streets and returned to London determined to do something for those who had lost out under Thatcherism. He was booted out of his job the following year, but pursued his vision (a socially conservative, globalisation-sceptic sort of Toryism) afterwards and in 2010 became work and pensions secretary under David Cameron. In a party striving to shake off its reputation for nastiness, his “Easterhouse modernisation” contrasted with the more metropolitan brand of renewal on offer: the “Soho” modernisation devised by well-heeled London Tories like Mr Cameron and George Osborne, now chancellor of the exchequer. This blended libertarian social policies with an interest in quality of life and environmentalism.

Since then the differences between the Easterhouse and Soho schools have sundered Mr Cameron’s government; never more so than on March 18th when Mr Duncan Smith resigned as work and pensions secretary. He blamed the government’s planned cuts to disability benefits: the culmination, he argued, of years of unreasonable demands by the Treasury. In truth his motives went deeper, concerning the EU referendum (he supports Brexit, unlike the party leadership) and even styles of working, thus exposing the tensions in a Conservative Party that spans multiple classes, age groups, social circles and ideological camps.

Indeed, this is just the latest chapter in the party’s long history of infighting. The Osborne-Duncan Smith split can even be compared to those over the protectionist Corn Laws in the 1840s (a wider argument which gave birth to this newspaper) or over European integration in the early 1990s. Which points to an awkward truth: were it not for Britain’s first-past-the-post electoral system, which rewards large, broad parties, the Conservatives would not sit together in Parliament at all. Under a proportional system, Mr Osborne might work with Blairites from Labour and free-market Lib Dems in a liberal party. Mr Cameron might join him, or lead his own Christian Democrat party. Mr Duncan Smith might club together with conservative Labourites like Andy Burnham. Other Tory MPs, like Priti Patel, might join figures from the anti-EU UK Independence Party in a new right-populist outfit.

Such divisions have always existed in Tory politics, but Mr Duncan Smith’s resignation—like the ongoing wars over the EU—crystallised them. Its aftermath saw his allies, like Ms Patel, clash with Mr Osborne’s, like Ros Altmann, a pensions minister who had worked under the welfare secretary. Word got out of Downing Street that Mr Cameron had called his predecessor-but-one a “shit” and blamed his ally, the chancellor of the exchequer, for making a mess of what had been supposed to be a boringly safe budget ahead of the EU referendum in June. The fray even generated glimpses of the leadership contest to come when the prime minister steps down: Boris Johnson, London’s mayor, using an appearance on a chat-show to declare Mr Osborne’s cuts unfair. Local Conservative associations are furious about the prime minister’s support for EU membership (and thus sympathetic to Mr Duncan Smith’s flounce) and there is dark muttering among MPs about a bid to oust Mr Cameron after the referendum.

So it remains possible that the Conservative Party will disintegrate over its culture wars. The next leadership election could exacerbate the splits, prompting Eurosceptics to peel away from pro-globalisation, Europhile colleagues. The associations may rise up against their own MPs. The Labour Party’s current hard-left torpor could give some Conservatives a dangerous sense of electoral immunity.

But therein lies the case for caution: the corollary of Tories bickering when the going is good is that (much more so than Labour) they generally pull together if up against it. When Mr Osborne went before Parliament to defend his budget on March 22nd, for example, an expected drubbing turned into a triumph as Conservative MPs bobbed up and down with friendly questions, cheering him when he answered. The same was true in the previous parliament: despite violent eruptions over proportional representation, House of Lords reform and gay marriage, the party knuckled down in the months before the election and helped the leadership win an unexpected majority at the polls.

It pays to disagree

In other words, the Conservative Party is a faithful product of first-past-the-post. It is a strikingly wide coalition spanning much of British society, but one with the will to power that is needed to subsume its differences in the cause of winning elections. Mr Cameron encapsulates this. He is rooted in his own tribe, the posh Berkshire set, which can make him blinkered and get him into trouble. But he succeeds by being studiously vague and obsessively competitive (advisers avow that he even takes pub quizzes much too seriously); when presented with bad polls last year he told aides to “physically attack me with the right words” to improve things. This mix of constructive ambiguity and energetic pragmatism is the route to victory in the British system.

Thus the Tories are still the party most likely to win the next election. When Mr Cameron goes they will probably pick a similarly mainstream replacement: Mr Osborne (down but not out following the recent dramas), Mr Johnson (who is only disingenuously Eurosceptic), Theresa May (the underestimated home secretary) or Stephen Crabb (Mr Duncan Smith’s dynamic replacement). Bridging such a wide part of the electorate will keep causing arguments, but it will also continue to give the Conservatives a greater reach than Labour; the reason they ran Britain alone for 47 years in the 20th century to Labour’s 22. In a country where people are growing farther apart, internal differences may prove as much an asset as a curse.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21695533-split-between-iain-duncan-smith-and-george-osborne-epitomises-their-party-e-pluribus-unum/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




Vaccination: A jab in time

HPV vaccines: The cost of embarrassment





Articles Sections Next

Vaccination

A jab in time

Some Western countries have lower vaccination rates than poor parts of Africa. Anti-vaxxers are not the main culprits

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



ERADICATING a disease is the sort of aim that rich countries come up with, and poor ones struggle to reach. But for some diseases, the pattern is reversed. These are the ailments for which vaccinations exist. Many poor countries run highly effective vaccination programmes. But as memories of the toll from infectious diseases fades across the rich world, in some places they are making a comeback.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) reckons that vaccines save 2.5m lives a year. Smallpox was eradicated in 1980 with the help of a vaccine; polio should soon follow. In both cases, rich countries led the way. The new pattern looks very different.

The trend is most evident for measles, which is highly contagious. At least 95% of people must be vaccinated to stop its spread (a threshold known as “herd immunity”). Although usually mild, it can lead to pneumonia and cause brain damage or blindness. The countries with the lowest vaccination rates are all very poor, but many developing countries run excellent programmes (see chart). Eritrea, Rwanda and Sri Lanka manage to vaccinate nearly everyone. By contrast several rich countries, including America, Britain, France and Italy, are below herd immunity.



Last year Europe missed the deadline it had set itself in 2010 to eradicate measles, and had almost 4,000 cases. America was declared measles-free in 2000; in 2014 it had hundreds of cases across 27 states and last year saw its first death from the disease in more than a decade. The trends for other vaccine-preventable diseases, such as rubella, which can cause congenital disabilities if a pregnant woman catches it, are alarming, too.

This sorry state of affairs is often blamed on hardline “anti-vaxxers”, parents who refuse all vaccines for their children. They are a motley lot. The Amish in America spurn modern medicine, along with almost everything else invented since the 17th century. Some vegans object to the use of animal-derived products in vaccines’ manufacture. The Protestant Dutch Reformed Church thinks vaccines thwart divine will. Anthroposophy, founded in the 19th century by Rudolf Steiner, an Austrian mystic-cum-philosopher, preaches that diseases strengthen children’s physical and mental development.



INTERACTIVE: Explore vaccination coverage and measles cases worldwide from 1980 to 2014

In most countries such refuseniks are only 2-3% of parents. But because they tend to live in clusters, they can be the source of outbreaks. A bigger problem, though, is the growing number of parents who delay vaccination, or pick and choose jabs. Studies from America, Australia and Europe suggest that about a quarter of parents fall into this group, generally because they think that the standard vaccination schedule, which protects against around a dozen diseases, “overloads” children’s immune systems, or that particular vaccines are unsafe. Some believe vaccines interfere with “natural immunity”. Many were shaken by a claim, later debunked, that there was a link between autism and the MMR vaccine, which protects against measles, mumps and rubella.

In America, some poor children miss out on vaccines despite a federal programme to provide the jabs free, since they have no regular relationship with a family doctor. Some outbreaks in eastern Europe have started in communities of Roma (gypsies). Members of this poor and ostracised minority are shunned by health workers and often go unvaccinated.

Several governments are trying to raise vaccination rates by making life harder for parents who do not vaccinate their children. A measles outbreak last year that started with an unvaccinated child visiting Disneyland and spread from there to seven states prompted California to make a full vaccination record a condition of entry to state schools. The previous year, in a quarter of schools too few children had been vaccinated against measles to confer herd immunity. A dozen other states are considering similar bills. After a toddler died from measles last year, Germany recently started to oblige parents who do not wish their children to be vaccinated to discuss the decision with a doctor before they can enroll a child in nursery. Australia’s new “no jabs, no pay” law withdraws child benefits from parents who do not vaccinate, unless they have sound medical reasons.

Persuasion, a fine art

There is, however, surprisingly little evidence that tough laws make a big difference to vaccination rates. European countries that are similar in most respects (such as the Nordics) may have similar rates for jabs that are mandatory in one country but not in another—or very different rates despite having the same rules. Rates in some American states where parents can easily opt out are as high as in West Virginia and Mississippi, which have long allowed only medical exemptions.

And strict rules may even harden anti-vaccination attitudes. Australia had previously made exemption conditional on speaking to a doctor or nurse about the benefits of vaccines. The new rules mean fewer chances to change parents’ minds. Research suggests that making it harder to avoid the most important vaccines may make it more likely that people who strongly oppose vaccination in general shun optional ones, says Cornelia Betsch of the University of Erfurt.

More important, say public-health experts, is to boost confidence in the safety of vaccines and trust in the authorities that recommend them—both badly damaged in many European countries by pastpublic-health mis-steps, such as a scandal with contaminated blood supply in France from the late 1990s. The best way to handle a vaccine scare is to express empathy and promptly share the results from investigations of alleged adverse reactions, says Heidi Larson of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. British authorities’ dismissive response to the MMR scare failed to reassure worried parents.

One promising new approach is to keep track of the vaccine myths circulating in cyberspace and rebut each one as it appears. This requires tracking information from search engines and following anti-vaccination websites and parents’ forums. On one such forum, worriers say they have scoured government and vaccine-manufacturer websites but feel overwhelmed by information that they regard as inconclusive or contradictory. One mother seeks advice on how to get around California’s “fascist” new rule. Another casts doubt on a study on severe allergic reactions to vaccines: 33 cases from 25m jabs, she says, seems “fishily low”.

Some countries are starting information campaigns that treat such concerns with respect. A parents’ organisation in Bulgaria launched one recently, under the auspices of the ministry of health and the national association of paediatricians. Its website is jargon-free and easier to navigate than unwieldy official hubs. France is launching a national dialogue on vaccines this spring, with a website where citizens can swap gripes, worries and advice.

Although vaccine-hesitant parents often search for answers on the internet, their most trusted sources are doctors and nurses. The WHO recently developed guidelines to help health workers figure out, through a questionnaire, which type of worrier a parent is—and how to alleviate specific concerns. But recent research from several European countries shows that many doctors and nurses are also hesitant about vaccines, for much the same reasons as their patients. In a survey conducted in 2014, 16-43% of French family doctors said they never or only sometimes recommended some of the standard vaccines.

An additional problem is that many adults were not immunised as children and have not caught up since. In the 1970s and 1980s, when the measles vaccine was new, many children did not receive it, or got just one shot, which is now known not to be reliable in conferring immunity. Some countries offer free catch-up jabs to some adults when outbreaks flare up—usually parents with small children and health workers in affected areas.

But such efforts have, on the whole, been too little, too late. The return of easily preventable diseases that had all but disappeared is a shame. A bigger shame would be for governments to continue blaming it all on ignorant parents.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21695387-some-western-countries-have-lower-vaccination-rates-poor-parts-africa-anti-vaxxers/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

HPV vaccines

The cost of embarrassment

A jab to ward off cervical cancer is standard for girls. Should boys have it, too?

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

THE causes of many cancers are mysterious. Not so for cervical cancer: in nearly all cases the villain is the human papillomavirus (HPV), a common sexually transmitted infection. In more than 60 countries girls are routinely vaccinated against the strains that cause the majority of cases. But in only a handful, including Austria, Australia, America, Switzerland, and some regions of Canada and Germany, are boys vaccinated, too.

To decide who should get the jab, health authorities use mathematical models that tally the costs of various vaccination protocols and expected benefits. Vaccinating boys means that fewer will catch the virus and transmit it to girls; whether that is worth the cost depends on how many of those girls have already received the vaccine. A high vaccination rate among girls alone does much more to protect girls than a lower one among both girls and boys, says Paulus Bloem from the World Health Organisation (WHO). An analysis of America’s programme, published in 2011, concluded that gaining an extra year of healthy life by vaccinating boys cost eight times more if three-quarters of girls are covered than if only a fifth are.

Unsurprisingly, the price of the HPV vaccine also influences the result of cost-benefit analyses. A price break was reportedly influential in Australia’s decision to include boys in the national programme. Price negotiations are usually confidential, but the WHO is trying to strengthen governments’ bargaining positions by publishing what some say they paid. Also helping to bring costs down is recent research showing that two doses at age 9-14 are as good as the standard three at age 16-25. Several countries have already switched.

The most recent cost-benefit analyses also include the rarer cancers that HPV causes in men, including of the penis, anus and throat. These are much more common in gay men: their rate of anal cancer is the same as the rate of cervical cancer for women who are not screened for it. Tests that spot precursors to cervical cancer have saved many lives by catching cases early; there are no such tests for some of HPV’s male cancers.

Some gay-rights activists lament that this argument for giving the jab to boys is ignored because even liberal politicians prefer not to talk about the realities of gay sex. Women had to campaign hard to break through the embarrassment that meant cancers of the breast and reproductive organs often went undiagnosed. The lesson is that such silence can kill.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21695389-jab-ward-cervical-cancer-standard-girls-should-boys-have-it-too-cost/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Special report: Technology and politics




Technology and politics: The signal and the noise

Election campaigns: Politics by numbers

Tracking protest movements: A new kind of weather

Online collaboration: Connective action

Local government: How cities score

Living with technology: The data republic





Articles Sections Next

Technology and politics

The signal and the noise

Ever easier communications and ever-growing data mountains are transforming politics in unexpected ways, says Ludwig Siegele. What will that do to democracy?

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

DONALD TRUMP, THE Republican front-runner for the American presidency, is clearly riding a wave of anger—but he is also wielding a huge virtual megaphone to spread his populist messages. “@realDonaldTrump”, the Twitter account of the property magnate turned politician, has more than 7m followers and the number is rising by about 50,000 every day. Moreover, since each of his tweets is re-tweeted thousands of times and often quoted in mainstream media, his real audience is much bigger. And if he does win the Republican nomination, it will be hard to tune him out. “How do you fight millions of dollars of fraudulent commercials pushing for crooked politicians?” he tweeted in early March. “I will be using Facebook & Twitter. Watch!”

If Ted Cruz, his fellow Republican, were to clinch the nomination, the campaign for America’s presidency would be quieter—but no less digital. Mr Cruz’s victory in the Iowa primaries was based on effective number-crunching. He bombarded potential supporters with highly targeted ads on Facebook, and used algorithms to label voters as “stoic traditionalists”, “temperamental conservatives” or “true believers” to give campaign volunteers something to go on. He also sent official-looking “shaming” letters to potential supporters who had previously abstained from voting. Under the headline “Voting Violation”, the letters reminded recipients of their failure to do their civic duty at the polls and compared their voting records with those of their neighbours.

The way these candidates are fighting their campaigns, each in his own way, is proof that politics as usual is no longer an option. The internet and the availability of huge piles of data on everyone and everything are transforming the democratic process, just as they are upending many industries. They are becoming a force in all kinds of things, from running election campaigns and organising protest movements to improving public policy and the delivery of services. This special report will argue that, as a result, the relationship between citizens and those who govern them is changing fundamentally.

Incongruous though it may seem, the forces that are now powering the campaign of Mr Trump—as well as that of Bernie Sanders, the surprise candidate on the Democratic side (Hillary Clinton is less of a success online)—were first seen in full cry during the Arab spring in 2011. The revolution in Egypt and other Arab countries was not instigated by Twitter, Facebook and other social-media services, but they certainly helped it gain momentum. “The internet is an intensifier,” says Marc Lynch of George Washington University, a noted scholar of the protest movements in the region.

In the course of just a few years digital technology has become an essential ingredient in any protest movement. The Arab spring is just one example of how the internet has facilitated political mobilisation. Others include the civil unrest in Istanbul’s Taksim Gezi Park, the Maidan protests in Ukraine and the Umbrella Movement in Hong Kong, all in 2013 or 2014. In America the main instances have been Occupy Wall Street in 2011 and more recently Black Lives Matter, a campaign drawing attention to violence against African-Americans. In Europe, Spain’s Indignados, an anti-austerity coalition, in 2011 became the first big protest movement to make extensive use of social media. Even Islamic State relies on its online propaganda and messaging apps, which allow the self-styled caliphate to recruit new fighters and keep in touch with those on the ground.

However, this special report will argue that, in the longer term, online crusading and organising will turn out to matter less to politics in the digital age than harnessing those ever-growing piles of data. The internet and related technologies, such as smartphones and cloud computing, make it cheap and easy not only to communicate but also to collect, store and analyse immense quantities of information. This is becoming ever more important in influencing political outcomes.

America’s elections are a case in point. Mr Cruz with his data savvy is merely following in the footsteps of Barack Obama, who won his first presidential term with the clever application of digital know-how. Campaigners are hoovering up more and more digital information about every voting-age citizen and stashing it away in enormous databases. With the aid of complex algorithms, these data allow campaigners to decide, say, who needs to be reminded to make the trip to the polling station and who may be persuaded to vote for a particular candidate.

No hiding place

In the case of protest movements, the waves of collective action leave a big digital footprint. Using ever more sophisticated algorithms, governments can mine these data. That is changing the balance of power. In the event of another Arab spring, autocrats would not be caught off guard again because they are now able to monitor protests and intervene when they consider it necessary. They can also identify and neutralise the most influential activists. Governments that were digitally blind when the internet first took off in the mid-1990s now have both a telescope and a microscope.

But data are not just changing campaigns and political movements; they affect how policy is made and public services are offered. This is most visible at local-government level. Cities have begun to use them for everything from smoothing traffic flows to identifying fire hazards. Having all this information at their fingertips is bound to change the way these bureaucracies work, and how they interact with citizens. This will not only make cities more efficient, but provide them with data and tools that could help them involve their citizens more.

This report will look at electoral campaigns, protest movements and local government in turn. Readers will note that most of the examples quoted are American and that most of the people quoted are academics. That is because the study of the interrelationship between data and politics is relatively new and most developed in America. But it is beginning to spill out from the ivory towers, and is gradually spreading to other countries.

The growing role of technology in politics raises many questions. How much of a difference, for instance, do digitally enabled protest surges really make? Many seem to emerge from nowhere, then crash almost as suddenly, defeated by hard political realities and entrenched institutions. The Arab spring uprising in Egypt is one example. Once the incumbent president, Hosni Mubarak, was toppled, the coalition that brought him down fell apart, leaving the stage to the old powers, first the Muslim Brotherhood and then the armed forces.

In party politics, some worry that the digital targeting of voters might end up reducing the democratic process to a marketing exercise. Ever more data and better algorithms, they fret, could lead politicians to ignore those unlikely to vote for them. And in cities it is not clear that more data will ensure that citizens become more engaged.

When the internet first took off, the hope was that it would make the world a more democratic place. The fear now is that the avalanche of digital information might push things the other way. Viktor Mayer-Schönberger, a data expert at the University of Oxford, sums up the problem: “Data are mainly helping those who already have information power.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21695198-ever-easier-communications-and-ever-growing-data-mountains-are-transforming-politics/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Election campaigns

Politics by numbers

Voters in America, and increasingly elsewhere too, are being ever more precisely targeted

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

Trumping the enemy

WHEN TOM PITFIELD talks about the campaign of Justin Trudeau, who was recently elected Canada’s prime minister, he gets animated. Mr Trudeau’s Liberal Party could not afford a lot of television time and spent much of its advertising budget on social media. That proved an inspired choice. “We would create an ad, see how people reacted to it on Facebook, tweak the content and test it again. On some days we would produce more than 50 different ads,” explains Mr Pitfield, who was in charge of the campaign’s digital side. This rapid feedback, he says, allowed his team to offer much more flexible and targeted messages than the competition.

Although the trend is obscured by Donald Trump’s tweets and his other antics, Facebook will also play a big role in America’s presidential contest this year. The tools that the world’s biggest social network offers to campaigners are getting better all the time. Last year it provided a way to upload lists of people to its site so they could be sent targeted messages. Now it is offering a further service that allows campaigners to reach Facebook users who “like” and share a lot of political content.

Even Barack Obama’s first presidential campaign in 2008 was widely hailed as “data-driven”. But it was only in 2012 that his team systematically used digital technology to deal with every campaign’s biggest challenge: how to make the best use of a limited budget to reach the right voters. In the past, geography had served as a proxy target: if a precinct was considered Democratic, for instance, it would get a lot of attention from Democratic campaigners. But in recent years it has become possible to target voters individually, thanks to the availability of ever more data as well as ever cheaper computing power and better methods to mine them.

To find out where to concentrate its resources, the Obama campaign used polls and other data to generate a statistical model of the attributes potential Obama supporters had in common. “When volunteers knocked on doors in 2008, four out of ten people they met backed Obama. In 2012 the ratio was nine out of ten,” says Dan Wagner, who led the president’s data-science team during his second campaign.

Hidden persuaders

From a windowless office in Chicago that became known as the “data cave”, Mr Wagner and his colleagues also pioneered a number of other methods of persuasion in that election. They tested the subject lines of fundraising e-mails (“I will be outspent” raised $2.6m; “Do this for Michelle” only about $700,000). They found out whether a group of voters they wanted to target watched certain cable shows, which allowed them to use television advertising more cost-effectively. Beyond mobilising their own voters, they also tried to identify others who might be persuaded to change their mind (with limited success).

Such novel approaches helped scupper the campaign of Mitt Romney, the Republican candidate last time round. At the time the Democrats were widely expected to retain a lasting edge in data, not least because they find it easier than the Republicans to attract highly trained data scientists. But that turned out to be wishful thinking. “Most of what we did in 2012 is now a commodity,” says Mr Wagner, who went on to found Civis Analytics, a startup which offers data-management and analytics services to left-leaning groups.

The starting-point for all this information-gathering was the controversial Florida recount after the presidential election of 2000, which became necessary partly because of incomplete voter rolls. To avoid a repeat, Congress in 2002 passed the Help America Vote Act (HAVA), which required states to maintain a “single, uniform, official, centralised, interactive computerised statewide voter registration list”. This was a bigger deal than it appeared at first sight. Along with improvements in database technologies, HAVA made it possible for the first time for political parties to compile an up-to-date list of all voters in the country. In his book, “Hacking the Electorate”, Eitan Hersh of Yale University argues that this laid the groundwork for individual targeting. Campaigners were able to identify voters easily and link them to other public information.

The legislation also kicked off what might be called “database politics”. Democrats were the pioneers: in 2006 party officials set up a company called Catalist which today offers one of the most comprehensive databases on Americans of voting age, covering more than 240m people. Apart from the official register of voters, it also includes other public records and information from commercial data brokers. Each entry contains hundreds of pieces of information, from race to the probability of owning an SUV.

Catalist is best understood as a “data co-operative” for Democratic campaigns, trade unions and other left-wing organisations, says Laura Quinn, its chief executive. For a fee, it gives clients access to its common data pool. They can combine it with their own information and benefit from the firm’s analytics expertise, which mainly comes in the form of statistical “scores”. These numbers predict, for instance, how likely someone is to vote Democrat and go to the polls (see chart).



But the Democratic Party did not want to rely on an outside database. When Mr Obama became president, it decided to create its own. Called VoteBuilder, it also relies on the principle of sharing data. During the primaries all competing Democratic campaigns can use VoteBuilder and combine it with data they gather on the trail. Much of that additional information is kept separate, but campaigns share basic items such as name changes or deaths. Once a nominee has been chosen for the general election, a lot of these data become part of the common pool.

The Republicans’ central database, Voter Vault, has commanded less co-operation and has often been neglected between campaigns. Warring factions have insisted on producing their own databases, often working with commercial vendors. After Mr Romney lost to Mr Obama in 2012, Charles and David Koch, billionaire brothers with a passion for conservative causes, invested millions in i360, a for-profit firm that competes with Voter Vault. On both sides, access to all these databases can be a highly political issue. Insurgent Democratic candidates in state and local races frequently complain that they are being excluded; they need to show a minimum of co-operation to get the data.

Thanks to all this data-gathering, campaigners now seem to “know you better than you know yourself”, as CNN, an American cable news channel, once put it. But the reality is different, explains Mr Hersh in his book. A lot of the available data, particularly the commercial sort, are of little value in helping campaigners decide which voters to target. The best guide is the basic demographic information taken from public records, such as gender, age, voting history and party affiliation.

According to Mr Hersh, this explains why most lawmakers are in favour of allowing easy access to public records. In 2012 a legislator in Utah proposed giving voters the option of limiting access to their date of birth, but the idea was quashed by the leadership of both parties. Campaigners also file lots of requests based on the Freedom of Information Act and state statutes that govern public access to administrative data. “Ironically, laws ostensibly passed to help private citizens track the government’s action turn out to be laws that help political campaigns track private citizens,” writes Mr Hersh. But his main complaint is the conflict of interest arising when parties control the sources of data which they themselves use extensively.

The big question is whether the use of such databases and the algorithms that sift through them change the outcome of elections. Recent estimates suggest that they can add between two and three percentage points to a candidate’s result. In a closely fought election that could be crucial, but in an emotionally charged race between Mr Trump and Mrs Clinton it may not play a decisive role. Then again, Mrs Clinton will probably end up relying on technology more than she has done so far. The Democrats, explains Matt Hindman of George Washington University, always have a harder time getting their supporters out to vote than the Republicans do. Since Mrs Clinton has not enjoyed universal enthusiasm for her candidacy, getting out the voters in November may be even more difficult than usual.

Besides, even if parties do not derive a lasting and decisive advantage from data and analytics, they will still be obliged to invest in technology to keep up with their competitors. And although social media give politicians direct access to their voters, as the Trump campaign shows, big parties still enjoy an advantage because they have the money to hire technical talent, pay for polls and buy advertising on Facebook.

Shrinking the public sphere

More broadly, some people worry about how all this number-crunching will affect democracy, in America and elsewhere. Mr Hersh does not see much of a problem, as long as data are used just to get people out to vote, rather than to try to make them change their mind. But Zeynep Tufekci of the University of North Carolina argues that targeting voters with ever more personalised messages will shrink the “public sphere”, which Jürgen Habermas, a German philosopher, once defined as the basis of democracy. “This form of big-data-enabled computational politics is a private one. At its core, it is opposed to the idea of a civic space functioning as a public, shared commons,” writes Ms Tufekci. And privacy is a growing concern. In December a database containing the records of 191m voters found its way onto the internet.

Rasmus Kleis Nielsen of Oxford University, who has written a book on political campaigns in America, thinks that such targeting will remain largely confined to that country. Nowhere else have party organisations access to so much money, data and technical talent. Moreover, America’s political system lends itself well to analytics because once voters get to the polling station they often have only two options.

Yet there are signs that some other countries are shifting in America’s direction. Apart from buying lots of ads on Facebook, Canada’s Liberal Party in last year’s election used the services of Civis Analytics, a firm spun off from the Obama campaign in 2012. In Britain, too, targeted ads on Facebook helped the Conservative Party win the general election last May. And when it comes to using social media to influence the political weather more generally, America is by no means alone.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21695190-voters-america-and-increasingly-elsewhere-too-are-being-ever-more-precisely/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Tracking protest movements

A new kind of weather

Social media now play a key role in collective action

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

Umbrella power

WHEN BRITAIN’S MOST active followers of Islamic State (IS) sent tweets and posted on Facebook, they did not expect all their online output to end up in print on a wall at the International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation at King’s College London. “Allah gave you this life, so use it the way he commanded you to,” writes one. “Whenever pain comes to me I just stop and think, ‘Allah does not give me more than I can bear.’ Then I carry on,” says another.

The unusual display is an important part of a research project to find out if British IS followers who left for Syria use social media differently from those who stayed at home. Shiraz Maher, the project’s leader, and his colleagues took months to classify each of the 50,000-odd messages and posts under headings such as “yearning for the afterlife”, “religiosity” and “desire to migrate”. “If we can find patterns, we can perhaps predict when somebody is about to go,” says Mr Maher.

The research illustrates a basic dilemma for movements that live at least partly online: without the internet and social media some of them would not exist, but the technology also opens them up to an unprecedented degree of scrutiny. And the tools for laying them bare are getting ever better.

Gilad Lotan, the chief data scientist at betaworks, an incubator for startups in New York, did his military service in the intelligence corps of the Israeli army, where he was trained to dig up information. He was pleasantly surprised when one day the data just started arriving without any effort on his part—on Twitter. The micro-blogging service was an important communication channel for activists of Iran’s Green Movement in 2009 before it was blocked by the government in Tehran.

Mr Lotan’s fascination with the data generated by social movements has grown further as the tools to analyse them have improved. “Topic modelling” reveals what people are talking about; “sentiment analysis” gives an idea of how they feel; “network mapping” identifies the most important “nodes”; “visualisation” software turns the information into colourful pictures. And using such programs is becoming cheaper all the time.

Last year Mr Lotan turned his attention to the anti-vaccination movement in California, which relies heavily on social media to spread its message. Analysing the hashtags—increasingly used as the brands of social movements, as in #BlackLivesMatter—he found that most anti-vaccination messages came from only a dozen Twitter accounts. After losing a legislative battle, the movement’s leaders changed their message: rather than making dubious claims about the link between vaccines and autism, many accounts started to present vaccination as a matter of freedom to choose (see the visualisation on the cover of this special report, where the dark blue cluster on top represents messages of that sort).

Mr Lotan is about to turn his hobby into a product. Other firms already produce such network maps for money. One is Graphika in New York. Its speciality is identifying communities of interest within social networks, finding the most influential members and tracking what they are talking about. Most of the firm’s customers are companies such as fashion brands or media firms, but it also looks at political issues. Its software revealed, for instance, that during the Maidan protests in Ukraine in 2013-14, Russian “spam bots”—programs that automatically send messages—had a much larger presence in Ukraine’s Twittersphere than tweets by the Russian political opposition.

Such analyses have answered many of the questions asked about collective action online. They show that social media play a key role under any kind of regime. Sceptics about the Green Movement in Iran pointed out that many if not most tweets were in English and sent by people outside the country. But during the Maidan protests most messages were in Ukrainian or Russian, say researchers at New York University’s Social Media and Political Participation (SMaPP) programme.



Similarly, to find out how Hong Kong’s Umbrella Movement evolved, a team at Hong Kong University looked at its public Facebook pages. For every day when protesters occupied several public spaces in the city in the second half of 2014, they measured how interlinked the pages were. This number turned out to be a good predictor of the mood in the population at large.

In a widely cited article in the New Yorker in 2010, Malcolm Gladwell, a bestselling author, argued that the form of protests promoted by social media, such as signing online petitions, would never have the same impact as “high-risk” actions such as those taken at the time of America’s civil-rights movements. But online “slacktivism”, as other critics have called it (combining the words “slacker” and “activism”), can make a difference. Looking at the tweets of several recent protest movements, including the Indignados in Spain and the demonstrators at Istanbul’s Taksim Gezi Park, researchers at SMaPP concluded that participants at their periphery were as important as the ones at the centre.

Last but not least, social media can isolate people from viewpoints they disagree with. Eli Pariser, an internet activist, calls this the “filter bubble”. Researchers at Indiana University’s Network Science Institute who analysed links shared on Twitter and searches on AOL, a web portal, showed that the sites reached from social media are much less diverse than those reached from a search engine. Pablo Barberá, formerly of SMaPP and soon to join the University of Southern California, who examined the political Twitterspheres in America, Germany and Spain, found they were indeed polarised, particularly in America.

Random spikes

Some researchers have now moved on to building computer models to test theories about the behaviour of online social networks. The spread of information on social media is typically “spiky”, with some posts suddenly becoming extremely popular whereas others never take off, regardless of the topic.

Politics in the age of social media is better described by chaos theory than by conventional social science

To track how misinformation travels online, Filippo Menczer and his colleagues at Indiana University developed a system that can simulate millions of users to reproduce the “spikyness” of social media. Even if the “users” are programmed to prefer worthy content, misinformation can go viral when it coincides with information overload, which is common online. “People just pass on stuff without thinking,” notes Mr Menczer.

A new book entitled “Political Turbulence” gives a taste of where such research might lead. The four authors, most of whom work at the Oxford Internet Institute, come to an intriguing conclusion: social media are making democracies more “pluralistic”, but not in the conventional sense of the word, involving diverse but stable groups. Instead, the authors see the emergence of a “chaotic pluralism”, in which mobilisations spring from the bottom up, often reacting to events. Online mobilisation can develop explosively and seemingly at random. Most online petitions, the authors found, attract only a small number of signatures, but the successful ones took off in the first few days (see chart). Success does not seem to depend on the subject matter: similar ones often fare quite differently.



Politics in the age of social media, the authors conclude, is better described by chaos theory than by conventional social science: “Tiny acts of political participation that take place via social media are the units of analysis, the equivalent of particles and atoms in a natural system, manifesting themselves in political turbulence.” One day, say the authors, it will be possible to predict and trigger such surges, in the same way that meteorologists have become good at forecasting the weather.

But who will be the political meteorologists? The chances are that it will not be researchers such as Mr Lotan or Mr Menczer. Access to data is getting harder. Many followers of IS, for instance, have abandoned Twitter and now use encrypted messaging services considered safer, such as Telegram or TextSecure. Social-media services are also becoming less generous with their data, both for privacy and commercial reasons.

Only two groups of actors are sure to have good access to social-media and other types of internet data. One is the online giants, such as Facebook and Google, which know much more about people than any official agency does and hold all this information in one virtual place. It may not be in their commercial interest to use that knowledge to influence political outcomes, as some people fear, but they certainly have the wherewithal. In 2010 Facebook allowed James Fowler, a political scientist at the University of California, San Diego, to test the service’s influence on people deciding whether or not to vote in the elections for Congress. About 61m users were presented with an “I voted” button and shown pictures of friends who had clicked on it. Two smaller control groups received either no message or just a notice about the elections and how many users had clicked the “I voted” button. The results showed that the Facebook users who had seen pictures of their friends were 0.4% more likely to vote than those who had not.

The other group of actors are governments, particularly the authoritarian kind. Having been caught off guard by online protest movements, many are now investing heavily in their web-based propaganda infrastructure. Russian government agencies, for instance, are not just good at setting up social-media bots and other spamming weapons to drown out genuine online discourse. They also employ armies of “trolls” to fight on their behalf in Western comment sections and Twitter feeds.

China’s political weathermen are even more sophisticated. Researchers at Harvard University who studied millions of Chinese social-media posts found that censors mostly blocked content designed to spur collective action but tended to tolerate comments critical of the Chinese leadership.

The longer-term worry is that the internet and related technologies could strengthen authoritarian governments and may make it harder for the countries concerned to move towards democracy. In a recent report the World Bank pointed out that among non-democratic countries, the most autocratic have invested most in e-government services (see chart). They do this, says the bank, to strengthen control and solve what it calls the “dictator’s dilemma”: the invidious choice between restricting the internet, which would hurt economic development, and leaving it unfettered, which could undermine the government’s power.



Similarly, in a recent paper Espen Geelmuyden Rod and Nils Weidmann, both of the University of Konstanz, find that the internet tends to grow faster in countries in which regimes are more concerned about the flow of information. They also argue that there is no evidence to date “that democracy advances in autocracies that expand the internet”.

At least in democratic countries, though, there are some encouraging signs that at the local level the internet has improved participation in decision-making from the bottom up.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21695192-social-media-now-play-key-role-collective-action-new-kind-weather/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Online collaboration

Connective action

How the internet changes the way people club together

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

IT IS MORE than half a century old, but Mancur Olson’s book, “The Logic of Collective Action”, is still hugely influential. In a nutshell, the late economist argued that large groups of people will organise only if they have some particular incentive: many will simply “free-ride” on the efforts of others. Are the rules different online?

In recent years a number of academics have tried to find an answer. One prominent attempt is a book called “The Logic of Connective Action”, by Lance Bennett and Alexandra Segerberg. The authors contend that when people express views online, they do not need to be part of a formal organisation. By sharing links or posting comments, they are already engaging in political activity. But this diffuse political energy has to be bundled to become effective, hence the importance of rallying cries such as the Occupy movement’s “We are the 99%”.

Yochai Benkler, a law professor at Harvard University and author of another influential book, “The Wealth of Networks”, makes a similar argument. Just as far-flung communities of volunteer programmers are able to produce useful open-source software, he says, activists can further their cause by banding together online. The best example for such political “peer production”, as he calls it, was the successful campaign to stop SOPA and PIPA, two controversial bills in America aimed at strengthening intellectual-property rights online. He and his collaborators tracked the websites of the organisations supporting the campaign and mapped links between them at different stages. They found a network that was constantly evolving, with different players taking the lead at different points. “They managed to get things done in a decentralised way,” says Mr Benkler. He concludes that such movements have become a “new source of power” in addition to conventional ones, such as old-style media and political parties.

Henry Farrell, of George Washington University, and Cosma Shalizi, of Carnegie Mellon University, are more interested in the scope the internet might offer for experiments to improve democratic structures. These are not nearly as good as they could be, they reckon in a paper entitled “Cognitive Democracy”. The internet is full of experiments in collective decision-making. The most successful ones can be found in open-source software and content-sharing sites. Their governance structures range from benevolent dictatorship (as practised by Linux, an operating system) to more decentralised organisations (for example, Wikipedia, an online encyclopedia).

None of this refutes Olson’s basic premise that people do not automatically collaborate, even if they have a common interest. But the internet makes such collaboration much easier. And in the online world people take action for different reasons, argue the authors of another book, “Political Turbulence”: income levels matter less and personalities more. Extroverts, for instance, are attracted by the prospect that whatever they do will be widely noticed.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21695191-how-internet-changes-way-people-club-together-connective-action/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Local government

How cities score

Better use of data could make cities more efficient—and more democratic

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

What the mayor saw

MARTIN WALSH, THE mayor of Boston, keeps on top of what is going on in his city. His office is dominated by a dashboard, a large screen packed with constantly changing snippets of text, numbers and charts (pictured). One section shows the current traffic to the city’s call centre and the percentage that has been answered within 30 seconds. Next to it is a chart tracking the number of potholes filled every day, which makes way for a map of Boston’s neighbourhoods coloured according to how often Mr Walsh has visited them.

But the central piece of information is the “CityScore”, a single number to indicate Boston’s overall health. It combines 24 different metrics, from crime to Wi-Fi availability, energy consumption and grants for the arts. A value above 1 means that things are going better than planned; anything below this, and the mayor is likely to pick up the phone. “Everybody knows that he is looking at this,” says Daniel Koh, Mr Walsh’s chief of staff, who came up with the idea for the index. Bostonians can check it online.

CityScore, launched last October, reflects a growing trend among city governments in America. Led by Boston, Chicago and New York, they have started to use the ever-increasing amounts of data they collect to improve planning, offer better services and engage citizens. To speed up the process, the White House recently launched a new “smart-city” initiative.

Here we go again, you might say: it was only a few years ago that big makers of computing and communications gear made an effort to persuade city halls to buy more of their machines. But this time the push is coming more from the city governments and even the citizens themselves. Cities are becoming aware that data, and the infrastructure to analyse them, will eventually become as important to their citizens’ welfare as the power grid and the transport system.

What most mayors have yet to realise, however, is how much their administrations will have to change to be able to get the best out of these data—and use them to make their cities more democratic. More and better data could help governments ensure that services in poor neighbourhoods are as good as those in rich ones. Given a city-wide system of sensors, the lead-contaminated water that poisoned poor citizens of Flint, Michigan, in 2014-15 would probably have been spotted much earlier.

Pinpointing potholes

In some ways Boston has been a digital pioneer. In 2006 the previous mayor, Tom Menino, hired the city’s first cabinet-level chief information officer. He was behind the launch of an app called “Citizen Connect” which made it easy for people to report problems, for instance by taking a picture of graffiti. Another first was the creation of an internal innovation team, perhaps best known for another app, Street Bump. This collects vibration data from moving cars to pinpoint potholes that need to be filled.

Now the city is putting more effort into learning from such data. About one-third of its rubbish bins are equipped with solar panels and sensors that signal when a bin is full, making rubbish collection more efficient. The city’s data scientists have also analysed online classified ads to identify landlords who cram too many tenants into their flats. And they are running experiments known as “A/B-tests” that have already become routine online. So far they have tried prioritising buses at traffic lights and increasing fines for blocking an intersection, and then used data from Waze, a popular navigation app owned by Google, to see how this affects congestion, a big problem in Boston.

A project called “Underworlds” envisages small robots crawling through sewers, collecting samples and perhaps one day analysing them on the spot

MIT’s Senseable City Lab in Cambridge across the Charles River gives a taste of how much more cities could do with data. Researchers there are working on a cheap package of sensors to be put on top of street lights, which if widely deployed would make it possible to measure noise and pollution levels almost house by house in real time. A project called “Underworlds” envisages small robots crawling through sewers, collecting samples and perhaps one day analysing them on the spot. This could reveal things such as what people eat and how many have the flu. “Imagine how many data get flushed down the toilet,” says Erin Baumgartner, one of the lab’s directors. The project is supported by the government of Kuwait, which is looking for ways to measure its people’s excessive intake of salt.

However, this sort of thing is not going to make much difference if the bureaucratic structure of city governments remains the same. Most are collections of departmental silos that do not communicate much with each other, held together by complex hierarchies and rules. That may have worked when information was scarce and moved slowly, but now it has become an obstacle. City governments have to become more of a coherent whole—a “platform”, as geeks put it.

This often starts with getting the technology right. City governments’ computer systems tend to reflect their fragmented nature. Information is typically kept in separate databases. Making these work together is crucially important, but the task is often underestimated, explains Jascha Franklin-Hodge, Boston’s chief information officer. The city still has more work to do, but most of its digital information now sits in a “data warehouse”, a big computer system where it can be easily accessed and analysed.

The next thing is better integration of a city’s administration. To be able to improve existing services and develop new ones, departments have to work together more closely, says Stephen Goldsmith of Harvard University and co-author of “The Responsive City”, a new book about urban government. City employees also have to be able to act more independently and be judged by their results, not have to follow rules slavishly.

Regulation, too, has to be rethought. When information about businesses was hard to come by, it made sense to impose all kinds of rules and regularly check for compliance. But now that analytics can point to likely violators, and business practices can be tracked in real time, such regulation may amount to overkill. In Chicago inspectors were sent mainly to restaurants which an algorithm had identified as potential problems.

Yet the biggest change will be of another order: cities need to play a more active role as broker of urban data. This means more than just sharing reams of their own administrative information, as many cities around the world already do, says Anthony Townsend, a researcher at New York University and author of a book on smart cities. Municipal governments should become the guardians of the local data ecosystem, creating a framework that encourages others to share data and offer services to citizens. They could act, for instance, as a portal for information from utilities and online firms, while also protecting privacy and ensuring that the algorithms used do not discriminate against particular groups of people.

Some cities are beginning to take on this role. An early example is Boston’s data-sharing partnership with Waze on reducing traffic congestion. In return for some of the service’s data, the city is giving it early warning of any planned road closures. Chicago, meanwhile, has launched OpenGrid, a website which allows citizens and businesses easily to visualise public urban data using online maps.

In New York the Centre for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP) has launched a project called “Quantified Communities” to work out how people could use data generated by increasing numbers of sensors in their neighbourhoods. One idea is to measure air quality in different areas and compare it with hospitalisation rates for asthma. Constantine Kontokosta, who heads the project at CUSP, explains that “we want to define the problem before we decide on the technology—not the other way around.”

Seattle, for its part, has discovered that citizens will insist on stringent protection of privacy. A few years ago it began using a wireless police network that could track smartphones, along with automatic licence-plate readers. The programme was implemented without much public discussion or thought about how the data would be managed. That led to a backlash from residents and a hasty about-turn. The city has since adopted detailed privacy principles and has just appointed a data-protection officer—a standard requirement in European cities but a first in America.

It is less clear what cities can and will do to prevent algorithms from becoming “Weapons of Math Destruction”, the title of a forthcoming book by Cathy O’Neil, a blogger and former quantitative analyst on Wall Street. Critics allege that local police forces in America are the worst offenders. Their “predictive policing”, which uses algorithms, crime statistics and other data to pinpoint “hotspots” where further crimes are likely to be committed, has sometimes proved quite accurate. But it can also lead to unnecessary questioning, excessive stopping and searching and racial profiling in such hotspots.

Even apparently neutral apps such as Street Bump may have unintended consequences: the service could give priority to wealthier neighbourhoods where people can afford smartphones, leaving potholes in poor areas unfilled. To avoid such an outcome, Boston first released the app to its road inspectors, who drive all over the city. It has also negotiated a deal with Uber, the taxi-hailing service, to get trip data so that its transport department can monitor, for instance, how long passengers in poor neighbourhoods have to wait for a car.

The big political question is whether data will simply make city government more efficient—which in itself is a worthwhile goal—or whether they will also empower citizens. Susan Crawford of Harvard University, co-author of “The Responsive City”, argues that having access to data will not only show people what their tax money can achieve, but give them the tools to get involved in their city’s affairs.

Others are not so sure. Technology rarely fixes the underlying problem but mostly replicates it, says Benjamin Barber, an American political theorist with an interest in local government. “Above all we need smart mayors and smart citizens, not smart cities.” The dashboard in the mayor’s office suggests that in Boston, for now at least, efficiency and control win out.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21695194-better-use-data-could-make-cities-more-efficientand-more-democratic-how-cities-score/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Living with technology

The data republic

To safeguard democracy, the use of data should be made as transparent as possible

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

The internet, but not as you know it

“TECHNOLOGY IS NEITHER good nor bad; nor is it neutral,” said the late Melvin Kranzberg, one of the most influential historians of machinery. The same is true for the internet and the use of data in politics: it is neither a blessing, nor is it evil, yet it has an effect. But which effect? And what, if anything, needs to be done about it?

Jürgen Habermas, the German philosopher who thought up the concept of the “public sphere”, has always been in two minds about the internet. Digital communication, he wrote a few years ago, has unequivocal democratic merits only in authoritarian countries, where it undermines the government’s information monopoly. Yet in liberal regimes, online media, with their millions of forums for debate on a vast range of topics, could lead to a “fragmentation of the public” and a “liquefaction of politics”, which would be harmful to democracy.

The ups and downs of the presidential campaign in America and the political turbulences elsewhere seem to support Mr Habermas’s view. Indeed, it is tempting to ask whether all this online activism is not wasted political energy that could be put to better use in other ways. Indeed, the meteoric rise of many online movements appears to explain their equally rapid demise: many never had time to build robust organisations.

But online activism cannot be dismissed. Some movements have had real impact, either by putting an issue on the political agenda or by taking over an existing organisation. Without the Occupy movement, the debate about income inequality in America would be much less prominent. The same goes for the Black Lives Matter campaign and violence against African-Americans. In Britain, Jeremy Corbyn and his supporters managed to commandeer the Labour Party. In America, Donald Trump seems about to do the same with the Republican Party (though whether he can do it to the whole country remains to be seen).

No going back

Only the most extreme critics want to go back to a time when the flow of information was controlled mostly by governments and mass media. And the current political turbulences may lead to the creation of services that calm them down. Earlier this year, for instance, Change.org, a petition site with nearly 140m members, launched Change Politics, which lets any user, including media companies and other organisations, post endorsements. The idea is that voters will be able to draw on recommendations by people they trust, rather than being manipulated by political commercials and tweets.

The effect of vast quantities of data is both easier and harder to gauge. As this special report has shown, piles of digital information and the algorithms to analyse them tend to be good for those in power. Political parties with plenty of money can use them both to target voters and to discipline recalcitrant candidates by cutting off access. Autocratic governments that were blindsided when the internet took off in the mid-1990s have regained their vision. Data can make cities more efficient, but also more centralised and controlling.

Piles of digital information and the algorithms to analyse them tend to be good for those in power

All this suggests that data and analytics risk slowing down and perhaps even undoing the welcome redistribution of power to ordinary people that the internet seemed to be able to offer. They create “points of control” in what used to be largely an “open system”, as Yochai Benkler of Harvard University puts it in a recent article in Daedalus, an American journal. The design of the original internet, he writes, was biased towards decentralisation of power and the freedom to act. Along with other developments such as smartphones and cloud computing, he now sees data as a force for recentralisation that allows “the accumulation of power by a relatively small set of influential state and non-state actors”.

Does this matter? Another law of technology, particularly the digital kind, is that it is never in equilibrium. Data can empower both empires and rebels. David Karpf, of George Washington University, expects a rise in what he calls “analytic activism”, the title of a forthcoming book of his. One example is MoveOn.org, a left-wing advocacy group in America with a voracious appetite for data of which even many of its 8m members are unaware. Among many other things, it closely tracks whether people have read the many messages it sends out.

Equally important, digital technology has a “capacity to surprise”, says Helen Margetts of the Oxford Internet Institute (OII). The database politicking within America’s parties has created room for non-partisan offerings. One is NationBuilder, a startup based in Los Angeles. Its clients get access to a basic national voter file to which they can add their own data and share it with other campaigns if they wish. “Unlike an organisation which keeps a big central database, we don’t have to make a decision on who can use it,” says Jim Gilliam, the startup’s chief executive.

And then there is the blockchain. This technology, a version of which powers bitcoin, a cryptocurrency, could prove to be a big democratic reset button. It is essentially a new type of database that is owned and maintained not by a single actor but by its users, who collectively agree to any changes. Such “distributed ledgers”, as they are known, could one day become alternatives to big centralised databases. Venture-capital firms have made their first bets on such undertakings, including OpenBazaar, a peer-to-peer marketplace. Perhaps one day voter files will be kept in blockchain-like distributed ledgers, which allow citizens to reveal their data only to the candidates they like.

Taming the beast

It would be foolish, however, to base public policy solely on the hope that some new service or technology will come along to solve existing problems. So what safeguards might be introduced to limit the power conferred by data? The most radical proposal comes from Evgeny Morozov, a technology critic. He thinks that big companies such as Facebook and Google should be barred from owning certain types of data, such as the keywords users search for, and whether those users have voted in the past. Instead, this information should belong to the individuals concerned and shared only if they so choose. Yet the political will to implement such a policy is lacking in much of the world, says Mr Morozov.

A more practical idea comes from Gavin Starks, the executive director of London’s Open Data Institute. He argues that certain types of data may need to be kept available to all: address files and geospatial information, for instance, are akin to roads and other public infrastructure and need to be treated in the same way. “We need to discuss who owns our data infrastructure, what roles the public and private sectors should have, and what role we as citizens play,” he recently wrote in a blog post.

Others think that more transparency would help. Zeynep Tufekci of the University of North Carolina wants campaigners to be required to publish all the messages they pitch to voters—in the same way as they are obliged, at least in America, to show in detail how they have spent their campaign money. And Eitan Hersh of Yale University recommends that voters should be given the chance to check the information held about them in campaign databases.

Transparency over the use of algorithms has its limits. Opening them up for inspection, as some have proposed, can make them lose their value because it will allow them to be gamed. Others are so complex that even their authors do not fully understand how they operate. One possibility is to develop algorithms that check on algorithms. Researchers at Columbia University have built a software tool called Sunlight to reveal why, say, users of online services are presented with certain ads.

Luciano Floridi, also of the OII, calls for an ethical framework for the use of data, much like that currently being developed for reproductive technologies. Some companies have already started to move in this direction. Google has set up an ethics committee for artificial intelligence. And the British parliament’s science and technology committee recently proposed the creation of a national data-ethics council.

The debate about data and politics has only just begun and these proposals need time to mature. But getting the rules for managing digital information right is critically important. Societies will have to decide how they want data to be used, in politics as well as in other spheres. As Alec Ross, a former State Department official who now works as an adviser on technology politics for Hillary Clinton’s campaign, puts it in his new book “The Industries of the Future”: “The choices we make about how we manage data will be as important as the decisions about managing land during the agricultural age and managing industry during the industrial age.”

Data and politics are likely to become ever more intertwined, as science-fiction writers have long forecast. They may have got the details wrong, but some of their ideas are nevertheless worth considering. Isaac Asimov, who died a quarter of a century ago, before the internet took off, invented a prophetic universe ruled by a group of “psychohistorians” who forecast humanity’s future, using a set of complicated equations. To prevent people from interfering with the predictions, they had to keep them secret, but that in turn created untold complications. The story, like this special report, suggests that technology is morally neutral. Data are neither good nor bad for democracy. It all depends on how people use them.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21695195-safeguard-democracy-use-data-should-be-made-transparent-possible-data/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Digital advertising: Invisible ads, phantom readers

Mobile advertising: Shine, but not rise

Electronics: Taiwan 2.0

Pulp producers in Brazil: Money that grows on trees

Power stations in Indonesia: Shock therapy

Television: Changing the channel

Schumpeter: The man who put Intel inside





Articles Sections Next

Digital advertising

Invisible ads, phantom readers

Worries about fraud and fragmentation may prompt a shake-out in the crowded online-ad industry

Mar 26th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



THIS year, for the first time, advertisers in America may spend more online than on television. Worldwide, online ads may surpass television in 2017, predicts the forecasting unit of Interpublic, a giant ad agency. Digital advertisers’ ambitions border on the divine. They are omnipresent, nestling their ads in news sites, search results and Instagram feeds. They are increasingly omniscient: no longer do advertisers know just general things about you—a worldly professional, say, with superb taste in journalism—but they target you, specifically. Omnipotence, however, is proving harder to achieve.

The industry has not so much a supply chain as a tangle. More than 2,500 companies are involved in the supply of digital ads, according to Luma Partners, an investment bank. Marketers worry that their ads will linger unseen in obscure slots or worse, be served to robots posing as human consumers. Meanwhile millions of real ones, fed up with online ads, want to block them. Among investors, enthusiasm for “ad tech” has waned. Digital advertising’s woes are not existential. Spending will continue to grow. But the current turmoil is likely to reshape the industry.

“Programmatic”, or automated, buying and selling of ad slots was supposed to make advertising online simpler, and in many ways it has. Advertisers bid for space on a webpage that a consumer has just clicked on, based on cookies and other tags that are tracking his online activities. The auction is held, and the “winning” ad transmitted, within milliseconds. The idea is to help publishers get the best price for their slots and advertisers the best return on their investment.

The trading of online ad slots is as complex as it is fiendishly fast. Thousands of firms jostle to analyse consumer data and buy, sell and monitor ads. Middlemen repackage “inventory” (as ad slots are known in the business), then sell it to other middlemen. An ad impression sold programmatically can change hands 15 times before finally being bought by an advertiser, notes Peter Stabler, an analyst at Wells Fargo, a bank. “We have an immature supply chain that is constantly evolving,” says Randall Rothenberg of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB), which represents media and ad-tech firms. That brings both innovation, he argues, and headaches.



Some problems are more easily fixed than others. In recent years the various participants in the industry have bickered over “viewability”: webpages are usually bigger than the screens they are viewed on, so if a reader sees only part of an ad on his screen, for a fraction of a second, how much should the advertiser pay? The Media Rating Council (MRC), which sets the rules for audience measurement, now considers a display ad “viewable” if a consumer can see half of it for at least one second. Videos must be seen for two seconds.

But some advertisers want more. GroupM, a buyer of ad slots on behalf of consumer brands, considers an ad viewable only if the consumer can see all of it. Consumers must play at least half a video with the sound on. The MRC is still working on standards for ads on mobile phones.

On the whole, however, the debate over viewability points to online advertising’s promise, not its failings. It is impossible to know if a television viewer has gone to the bathroom during the commercials or if a Vogue reader skips a particular page of ads. Online, marketers have at least some means of tracking who saw what, the better to understand which ads work.

Fraud is a peskier problem. Bad actors hide within advertising’s supply chain, unleashing robots to “see” ads and suck money from advertisers. The subtly titled Trustworthy Accountability Group, backed by the industry’s trade associations, wants to create a registry of vetted online-ad firms and use special identifiers to track which firms get paid for each impression, the better to trace problems as they arise. AppNexus, which runs a big ad exchange, filters out ad slots that seem to be attracting lots of fake “readers”, offers rebates to advertisers which detect bot fraud and has cut the number of ad impressions sold by middlemen. Such steps will lower fraud, not banish it. The Association of National Advertisers reckons fake impressions will cost its members more than $7 billion this year.

An even thornier challenge is the growing number of consumers blocking ads altogether (see chart). Some consider it creepy to be watched so closely. Third-party tags can be messengers for malware. Ads drain smartphones’ batteries and their users’ data plans. Tags to track viewability and bots make such things worse.



Little wonder, then, that AdBlock Plus, a popular tool, has been downloaded more than 500m times. The company keeps a list of ads it deems tolerable, and thus lets through. Sites with lots of ads, such as Google, pay a fee to be on the list. AdBlock Plus says this is proper, as the paying firms must still offer palatable ads. Critics, including the IAB, call it extortion.

Ad-blockers are most troubling for publishers, which rely on advertising revenue. But brands have reason to fret, too, if they cannot reach consumers online. The IAB is urging them to make advertisements less irksome, so that consumers are less inclined to block them. The Washington Post is one of many companies hoping that “native” ads, which mimic the paper’s editorial style, will be less annoying. But the company is also speeding page-load times and testing various dummy ads to see which types consumers dislike least. As these experiments continue, ad-blocking will impose broad costs on publishers, estimated by Wells Fargo at $4.6 billion in America and $12.5 billion globally this year.

A secular shift

All these problems may just be inevitable teething troubles. “We haven’t had this kind of transformation since television came in the late ‘40s and early ‘50s,” says Marc Pritchard, the marketing boss at Procter & Gamble, the world’s largest advertiser. Grappling with these challenges, however, may spur a shift in the industry’s structure. There will always be startups, particularly because technology changes so quickly. But on the whole, power is likely to move to fewer, larger companies.

Rob Norman, GroupM’s chief digital officer, expects advertisers to continue shifting towards large platforms such as Google and Facebook, and a select group of firms that agree to stricter standards on viewability. Brands’ concern about fraud and fragmentation may help simplify the supply chain. Some brand owners, such as Procter & Gamble, control their own programmatic buying.

Others are pruning the number of other firms they deal with. “We would always prefer fewer partners,” says Jamie Moldafsky, chief marketing officer for Wells Fargo. A variety of larger companies such as Yahoo, Oracle and Salesforce have bought up smaller firms, the better to offer themselves as one-stop shops to advertisers.

The best positioned firms, however, are Google and Facebook. Terence Kawaja, Luma’s founder, notes that the two companies have more than half of the mobile-advertising market, a share he expects to rise. Thanks to logins, each can track consumers from their computers to their phones and back again. Each has a broad, ever-expanding suite of services. On March 15th Google unveiled new tools, including one to manage data on customers.

Rivals are worried. TubeMogul, a provider of ad-buying software, has a new advertising campaign claiming that Google has excessive power. This is in part to defend its own interests—TubeMogul’s criticisms include Google’s decision to limit the ways by which brands can buy ad space on its YouTube video service. But it is not unreasonable to worry that the pressures to rationalise the fragmented online-ad industry might eventually push it too far in the other direction.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695388-worries-about-fraud-and-fragmentation-may-prompt-shake-out-crowded-online-ad/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Mobile advertising

Shine, but not rise

Ad-blocking may not quickly spread to smartphones

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

AD-BLOCKING is becoming ever more popular on personal computers. According to some estimates, in a few countries more than a third of internet users now have the necessary software installed in their browsers. But what has advertisers and publishers really worried is that ad-blocking could soon make a dent in the more rapidly growing market for ads on smartphones, which will reach $100 billion this year globally, according to eMarketer, a data provider.

On the face of it, such fears are indeed warranted. Mobile browsers which block ads on web pages (though not in apps) have become more popular, particularly in Asia. The operating system for Apple’s iPhones now lets users download ad-blocking software. Most importantly, last month Three, a big mobile operator, announced that it is planning to install ad-blocking technology in its British and Italian networks. Its customers will be able to use it to block ads within apps, too. Other carriers have said that they are looking into offering such a service. Digicel, which is based in Jamaica, is already doing so.

But on closer inspection, it is too soon to write the obituary of mobile advertising, says Dean Bubley, a telecoms consultant. More than half the time, smartphone users connect to the internet using Wi-Fi, so they will still get ads even if their mobile operator blocks them. What is more, the fastest-growing sort of mobile advertising is “native”, meaning indistinguishable from other types of content, and sometimes even encrypted. That makes network-based blocking hard, if not impossible.

Then there are legal and commercial hurdles. Three is planning to let subscribers opt into its ad-blocking service, which is based on technology developed by Shine, an Israeli startup. But that may still run afoul of “network neutrality” rules, which require that all sorts of online traffic, including ads, should be treated equally. To be on the safe side, the service is likely to be offered directly through Shine. Three has given itself a few months to figure it all out. Other carriers are likely to wait and see how Three’s ad-blocking efforts fare.

Given all this, mobile ad-blocking may not grow much beyond its current level in the short term. Online publishers interviewed by Joseph Evans of Enders Analysis, a consulting firm, report that only a few percent of all ads are getting blocked. Even some consumers with ad-blockers installed on their phones may still be choosing to let some through.

Yet advertisers and publishers should not get their hopes up too high. The frustration with mobile ads is growing, and not just because they can annoy. An increasing worry is privacy: mobile ads are targeted using lots of personal data, but it often remains unclear how they are being collected and used. If the advertising industry doesn’t clean up its act, ad-blocking on smartphones may yet grow, albeit slowly, to become as widespread as it is on personal computers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695390-ad-blocking-may-not-quickly-spread-smartphones-shine-not-rise/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Electronics

Taiwan 2.0

The island’s electronics firms are in need of an upgrade

Mar 26th 2016 | TAIPEI | From the print edition



THE takeover bid by Hon Hai of Taiwan for Sharp, a chronically loss-making Japanese electronics firm, is being watched closely as a test of Japan’s openness to foreign investment. But it is also being scrutinised back in Taiwan. The deal may yet falter: as The Economist went to press, Hon Hai was reportedly seeking to knock around $900m off its earlier offer of $5.4 billion including assumed debt. But if it does go ahead, and Terry Gou, Hon Hai’s boss, succeeds in absorbing Sharp’s brand and technology, he will be able to offer his big customers, such as Apple, a broader array of parts, and may even transform his firm into a seller of innovative consumer goods. The deal could serve as a model for other Taiwanese electronics firms which want to go global, says the island’s economics minister, John Deng.

Electronics firms together contribute 40% of Taiwanese exports, and 15% of its GDP. For more than two decades they have achieved great success assembling computers and other gadgets for Western companies. At first their factories were all in Taiwan, but as China opened up, they shifted some to the mainland. The combination of Taiwanese production expertise and the mainland’s cheap labour was hard to beat.

Now, however, this cross-strait partnership is giving way to competition. Taiwanese firms fear that rising mainland counterparts, which they call the “red supply chain”, are catching up. Taiwan’s semiconductor firms, such as TSMC, are so far going strong. But its main makers of big display screens, Innolux (which Hon Hai controls) and AU Optronics, are under threat from the mainland’s BOE and China Star Optoelectronics. Whereas Taiwan’s total exports fell by 12% year on year in February, display screens and other “optical instruments” plunged by 34%.

Of all the countries dependent on purchases by China, Taiwan has most to lose as the mainland’s electronics industry becomes more self-sufficient, says Angela Hsieh, an economist at Barclays, a bank. South Korea also depends on China, but its firms sell a wider variety of goods there, such as cars and cosmetics.

Becoming more innovative is easier for some than others. Hon Hai, which has its eye on Sharp’s research into advanced OLED display screens, is big enough to absorb the struggling Japanese firm, and to keep throwing money at developing its technology. Likewise, South Korean firms such as Samsung Electronics, which belong to giant conglomerates, can afford the R&D and marketing budgets needed to remain globally competitive. But many of Taiwan’s electronics firms are, thus far at least, small, anonymous links in other companies’ supply chains.

Starting to sell gadgets under their own brands might offer these firms far higher profit margins, allowing them to pull themselves up by their bootstraps. But past experience shows that it is hard to do this without going into competition with the more famous customers that they rely on. Some Taiwanese firms, including HTC and Asus, have produced branded products—such as phones and notebook computers—only to be deserted by the customers to whom they sell components.

Raymond Hsu, an analyst with Taiwan Ratings, an affiliate of Standard and Poor’s, thinks Hon Hai would only try to make money from Sharp’s brand if it could attach it to products that wouldn’t upset its existing customers. The Taiwanese firm may be more interested, in the short term, in being able to offer brand-owners like Apple a wider range of components, and thus to increase its bargaining-power with them. Mr Hsu says Apple would prefer not to buy OLED displays from Samsung, which is a rival producer of smartphones.

Taiwan’s president-elect, Tsai Ing-wen, has promised to reshape its economy by “shifting from an efficiency-driven model to an innovation-driven one.” Ms Tsai also wants to reduce reliance on China and promote greater technology ties with America and Japan. The question is how. Taiwanese firms have already been encouraged by the outgoing government to flirt with the likes of cloud computing, the “internet of things”, 3D printing, biotechnology and renewable energy. Some are showing potential, but there will be no quick fixes. Meanwhile, prospering rivals on the mainland enjoy the benefits of a vast home market, and a government with lots more money to throw around.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695529-islands-electronics-firms-are-need-upgrade-taiwan-20/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Pulp producers in Brazil

Money that grows on trees

Brazil’s economy is crumbling but its giant pulp firms are booming

Mar 26th 2016 | TRÊS LAGOAS, MATO GROSSO DO SUL | From the print edition

The margins are high too

LOOK north from atop the 120-metre (390-foot) bleaching tower at the Horizonte 1 pulp mill, and all you see is plantations of tall, slender eucalyptus trees. They stretch from the factory gate, across the gentle undulations of Mato Grosso do Sul, a state in Brazil’s centre-west, all the way to the horizon. “That’s our competitive advantage,” explains Alexandre Figueiredo, who is in charge of production at the plant. Its owner, Fibria, is the world’s biggest producer of “short-fibre” cellulose pulp, which is used to make such things as newsprint, nappies and banknotes. (“Long-fibre” is used for high-grade paper and packaging.)

As its name suggests, Mato Grosso do Sul (roughly, “southern thick bush” in Portuguese) has vast expanses of cerrado, or tropical savannah, a chunk of which was long ago turned into farmland, some of which has more recently been planted with eucalyptus. Most of Fibria’s 568,000 hectares of plantations lie within 200km of its mills. Eldorado, a rival with a mill on the other side of Três Lagoas (a city of 115,000 that is fast becoming Brazil’s cellulose cluster), needs its lorries to drive only a bit farther. No other firm in the world has such ready access to its raw material. Add the balmy climate and rich soils of Brazil’s south and centre-west—where, as Joe Bormann of Fitch, a credit-rating agency, puts it, eucalyptus “grows like a weed”—and it is easy to see how Brazil has conquered 40% of the global short-fibre market.

Investment in technology is paying off, too. In the late 1990s Brazilians introduced a fast-growing eucalyptus variety that can be harvested after just seven years, compared with the two decades or more it takes to grow pine, the main source of cellulose pulp in the northern hemisphere. Next door to Horizonte 1, Fibria is building a high-tech nursery with technology devised by Dutch flower growers. Eldorado pioneered the use of drones to map the topography of its woods and optimise planting and harvesting.

Pulp producers are also thriving thanks to the storm that is sucking life out of much of the rest of Brazil’s economy. From his vantage-point, Mr Figueiredo waves towards the only clearing in the arboreal landscape: an unfinished Petrobras fertiliser plant a few kilometres away. Construction stopped in 2014, when the state-controlled oil giant emerged as the locus of a multibillion-dollar bribery scandal that may yet topple Brazil’s government (see article). That is in stark contrast to the frenetic activity directly below him, where a second, 8.7 billion reais ($2.4 billion) production line is taking shape that will more than double Horizonte 1’s current annual capacity of 1.3m tonnes, once it is completed in late 2017.

Recession and political upheaval have brought Brazil’s currency, the real, down by three-fifths against the dollar since 2011. That is a boon to pulp producers, who export nearly all their output. Standard & Poor’s, another rating agency, reckons that production costs in dollars dropped by $50 per tonne in 2015; another $40 per tonne was saved on maintaining mills. UBS, a bank, calculates that for every 10-centavo decline against the greenback, Brazilian producers’ earnings rise by $15 per tonne.

As the real has tumbled, global pulp prices have held steady, whereas some of the other commodities Brazil produces have slumped (see chart). As it rebalances from investment to consumption, China may build fewer bridges, hurting Brazilian iron-ore exports. But the Chinese are buying more bog roll; and over 40% of Brazilian pulp producers’ output is turned into tissue for the Chinese market. Between 2013 and 2023 annual toilet-paper sales will grow by 7.4m tonnes, with China accounting for nearly half of the rise, according to RISI, a consulting firm.



The combination of a cheap currency and healthy demand has pushed Brazilian producers’ margins to mouth-watering levels. Fibria’s rose to 53%, on record revenues of 10.1 billion reais, last year. With earnings equal to 75% of revenues in the fourth quarter of 2015, Eldorado’s margins set an all-time industry high. This helped ease its debt burden, which remains large compared with rivals’. Klabin and Suzano, two other big Brazilian firms, also had a good year, even if, as integrated producers of both pulp and its products, their mostly domestic papermaking businesses suffered in line with Brazil’s economy.

Can it last? Overcapacity is one worry. Last May CMPC, a Chilean concern, fired up a plant in Rio Grande do Sul state in southern Brazil that will churn out 1.3m tonnes of pulp a year. This month Klabin produced the first bales at a 1.5m-tonne plant in nearby Paraná state. Eldorado is breaking ground on its own expansion project in Três Lagoas, which could add another 2.3m tonnes to annual output. And that is just Brazil. Global capacity is poised to grow by 2.7m tonnes this year alone, estimates UBS; demand by just 1.5m tonnes. That will surely weigh on prices eventually. And the real has recently begun to pick up, as markets bet on a change of government and thus an end to Brazil’s political and economic paralysis.

Brazilian pulp bosses nevertheless seem chipper. If pulp prices fall, older, high-cost producers, mainly in the northern hemisphere, may go out of business, reducing any excess capacity. In the long run, demand for tissue can only grow. As Marcelo Castelli, Fibria’s boss, observes, the average Chinese still uses just over 5kg of it a year; in developed countries the figure is 10-20kg.

As for the currency, Eldorado’s boss, José Carlos Grubisich, notes that the industry survived a rate of 1.6 reais to the dollar five years ago. With the exchange rate now around 3.6, there is a long way to go before it begins to hurt. Even the rich world’s falling demand for printing and writing paper is not such a worry: it means there is less used paper for recycling, which should in turn shore up demand for “primary” pulp.

Though Brazil’s pulp industry is booming, it is on the lookout for new uses for its eucalyptus timber, from biofuels to green substitutes for plastics. In the past few years Fibria has bought stakes in several startups with promising technology, including one in Canada. It is sizing up two more. “Money can grow on trees,” Mr Castelli promises. “It just takes time.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695530-brazils-economy-crumbling-its-giant-pulp-firms-are-booming-money-grows-trees/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Power stations in Indonesia

Shock therapy

Plans for breakneck electrification mean opportunities for foreign firms

Mar 26th 2016 | SINGAPORE | From the print edition



A FLOTILLA of floating power stations is supposed soon to traverse the vast waters of eastern Indonesia. The ships, burning marine oil and leased from a Turkish firm, will be a temporary fix for the sprawling archipelago’s rising thirst for power. Indonesia consumes about half as much electricity as Britain, despite being four times as populous; about 50m Indonesians have no mains power at all. Shortages will grow more pressing as the country’s middle class expands: over the next decade or so, electricity demand is expected to rise by nearly 9% a year.

Putting a stop to blackouts is a priority for the government. Last May President Joko Widodo announced an ambition to build more than 100 new power stations in five years (as part of an even bigger scheme to revamp the country’s creaking infrastructure). That plan, combined with work still hanging around from an earlier electrification drive, calls for about 43GW of new generating capacity to be added to the grid. This increase is comparable to the total installed capacity of countries such as Sweden and South Africa, and would mean almost doubling Indonesia’s power output.

Such a scheme will require a huge expansion in the role of private-sector power firms. Independent power producers (IPPs) presently generate around 20% of Indonesia’s electricity; the rest is churned out by PLN, the state utility. Indonesia hopes they will build and operate most of the new power stations and that their home countries’ banks may finance them. Independents could eventually provide around half of the country’s juice.



Foreign power firms were once keen on Indonesia. Many fled during the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, and those that remained were forced to sell their power far cheaper than they had planned to. Lately, confidence has returned, encouraged by liberalising legislation and the new government’s ambitions. India and China also have gargantuan electrification drives, but in Indonesia a paucity of local expertise means it offers a greater opportunity for foreign builders and operators of power stations.

So far, firms from elsewhere in Asia have been keenest. One of the first big projects, a $2 billion power station in West Java, will be built by a consortium including Chubu Electric and Marubeni of Japan, and Komipo and Samtan of South Korea. Chinese companies are taking a leading role, despite a perception that some of the power stations China previously built in Indonesia were not entirely up to snuff. American and European utilities, for their part, are hanging back. Engie, formerly known as GDF Suez, a French firm with a long history in South-East Asia, has just sold its stake in one of Indonesia’s biggest power projects to Nebras of Qatar, as part of a global withdrawal from coal (though it remains keen on Indonesia’s promising but poorly-developed geothermal sector).

Traps abound. Acquiring land—a headache for infrastructure-builders anywhere—is particularly tricky in Indonesia, says Lenita Tobing of PwC, a consulting firm. The construction of what is supposed to be South-East Asia’s largest power station, a 2GW coal plant in Java backed by an Indonesian firm and two Japanese ones, J-Power and Itochu, is running four years late after scores of locals refused to sell their farms. Meanwhile, Indonesia’s transmission and distribution network, run by PLN (which remains the monopoly buyer of electric power), will need beefing up enormously, with financing from multilaterals like the Asian Development Bank (ADB), if it is to transport all the energy the proposed power stations will produce.

Mr Widodo’s administration is eager to help. It has created a “one-stop shop” to help foreign investors short-circuit Indonesia’s tortuous bureaucracy. Officials say they have cut the time it takes power firms to obtain permits from two-and-a-half years to about eight months. A new land-acquisition law, which came into force last year, may speed up negotiations; so will a recent presidential decree, says Agung Wicaksono, an energy-ministry official. Yet strong backing from Jakarta does not guarantee deference from provincial authorities, which under Indonesia’s political system enjoy great autonomy.

Some people fret that the scheme could fall victim to its own ambition. Indonesia’s power demands could probably still be met if the new power stations were added over ten years rather than hurried through in five, reckons Pradeep Tharakan of the ADB. The presidency may be imposing a tight deadline in the belief that unless it creates a sense of urgency, nothing will get done. Most in the business doubt that the electrification drive will be completed on schedule. Nevertheless, all the whip-cracking has some observers worrying that quality will be sacrificed for speed—and has some IPPs wondering if bits of the country might even end up temporarily with an excess of capacity. Indonesians should be so lucky.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695532-plans-breakneck-electrification-mean-opportunities-foreign-firms-shock-therapy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Television

Changing the channel

A startup seeks to keep the conventional TV station alive in the digital era

Mar 26th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

Now, which channel is Hipster TV on?

THE received wisdom of the on-demand era of television is that people, young ones especially, want to watch their favourite shows anytime, anywhere and on any device; the “linear” viewing of a succession of programmes chosen by a TV station will fade, as viewers dine à la carte from Netflix, Amazon and Hulu. The wisdom is not entirely wrong, but what if young consumers were offered channels more attuned to their tastes?

Pluto.tv, a three-year-old American startup, offers free television over the internet on the assumption that many viewers are still couch potatoes at heart: they want to sit back and watch whatever happens to be on the telly. The firm has developed more than 100 channels, curated by humans with guidance from data (and the occasional hunch) on what people like to watch. Among the offerings are “Classic Toons TV”, “News 24/7”, “Cats 24/7”, an all-Beyoncé pop channel and another that plays nothing but Kung Fu movies. Sky, an early investor along with Universal Music Group, also streams its news channel on the service. Pluto splits advertising revenue with its content partners.

This might seem a challenging business model, given the direction of travel in televised entertainment. Not only do viewers increasingly want to consume shows on demand, they also want to skip the ads. The Boston Consulting Group (BCG) projects that such “non-linear” television-watching in America will double to 40% of all viewing by 2018.



Tech giants with huge user bases—Amazon and Google—are streaming video and commissioning original shows, and Apple may soon join them. As for the cable firms, they still enjoy an advantage in that many customers have to rely on them for their broadband-internet service.

But there is one crack in these formidable content platforms that a niche service could exploit. They cost money, and millennials are said to hate paying for stuff. Cable in particular is coming to be seen as too pricey. There is a lot of waste in their expensive pay-TV packages, says Ken Parks, Pluto’s executive chairman and a former executive at Spotify, a music-streaming service. The cable giants’ bundles of channels include many that viewers will never watch, and their cost can exceed $150 a month. BCG estimates that the number of pay-TV subscriptions in America has just about peaked and will decline substantially, albeit gradually.

Until the next generation of mobile technology, “5G”, arrives, bringing lightning-fast wireless-broadband speeds, many consumers will still have to hand over some money to the cable guys for their internet access. But Pluto (which does not yet release financial results) says it already has more than 2m people viewing its channels at least once a month. About 40% of those are aged 18-34. The service plans to add a premium, paid-for tier, but for now Mr Parks is banking on frugal young couch potatoes.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695528-startup-seeks-keep-conventional-tv-station-alive-digital-era-changing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

The man who put Intel inside

Andy Grove, who died on March 21st, was at the heart of the computer revolution

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



IN HIS book, “Giants of Enterprise”, Richard Tedlow of Harvard Business School argues that America has an extraordinary ability to produce business titans. Italy produces a disproportionate number of great opera composers, he writes, and Russia an abundance of great novelists. America’s unique genius lies in nurturing business heroes. Whether this remains true in the future as American capitalism becomes mired in red tape, protectionist pressure mounts, and business dynamism shifts to the emerging world, is open to debate. But Andy Grove certainly stood squarely in this great tradition.

Just as Andrew Carnegie helped to usher in the steel age and John D. Rockefeller the oil age, Mr Grove, Intel’s former boss, who died this week, helped to bring about the computer age. And just as Carnegie and Rockefeller worked their magic by building organisations rather than inventing new products, Mr Grove, though a brilliant technologist, worked his by building Intel from a startup into the world’s dominant semiconductor firm. Like Carnegie and Rockefeller, he built huge plants employing thousands; but whereas they flaunted their wealth and power, Mr Grove laboured in a cubicle no different from those of his employees.

Mr Grove’s genius was as an organisation-builder and manager rather than as an innovator. His most obvious quality was his fierce intelligence. He could be difficult—hot-tempered when confronted with idiocy, prickly when challenged. He believed in the value of “creative confrontation” (which sometimes meant screaming matches). His successful management book, published in 1996, was called “Only the Paranoid Survive”. Possessed of a fierce work ethic, he drove his subordinates as hard as he drove himself. But this combination of characteristics was exactly what was needed in the infant semiconductor industry. He joined Intel in 1968 as its first employee, after it was founded by Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore. He became Intel’s president in 1979, its CEO in 1987 and, when he stepped down from the CEO job in 1998, having earlier been diagnosed with prostate cancer, he remained its chairman until 2005.

The semiconductor industry, then as now, was defined by incredibly rapid change. Mr Moore suggested (first partly in jest and then in seriousness) that the industry was governed by a law whereby the number of components that can be crammed onto a chip doubles roughly every two years. Companies had to run at top speed just to stay in the same place. A succession of competitors in Japan, South Korea and China tried to topple Intel. During Mr Grove’s 37-year career there the company courted disaster on several occasions: in the early 1980s, for example, he introduced an advanced chip, the iAPX 432 microprocessor, that was supposed to reshape the industry’s future but turned out to be far slower than its competitors. But he had a genius for coming back stronger than ever. He masterminded Intel’s switch from memory chips to microprocessors and, with Bill Gates, established the “Wintel” monopoly in personal computers, in which Intel’s processors and Microsoft’s Windows operating system became an unbeatable combination.

Mr Grove achieved all this by embracing management methods that are now so common that they pass without comment, but were then strikingly new. He attacked corporate hierarchy and devolved power to front-line workers. He combined this with an obsession for measurement and performance-related rewards: top performers got juicy stock options; and weak performers were shown the door. Under the slogan “Intel inside”, he ensured that the firm’s processors became branded goods, not commodities. Under his leadership it increased annual revenues from $1.9 billion to more than $26 billion and made millionaires of hundreds of employees.

His career is a testimony to the wisdom of America’s liberal immigration policy. He could hardly have had a worse start in life—he was born into a Jewish family in Budapest in 1936 and managed to survive both the Holocaust and then the Hungarian Communist Party. A childhood bout of scarlet fever left him almost deaf. (His hearing was corrected in middle age after several operations.) He fled to America in 1956 when the Soviets invaded his homeland, Anglicised his name from Andras Grof, and enrolled in the City College of New York, which was then both free and meritocratic. He graduated at the top of his class in chemical engineering, despite struggling with poor English and impaired hearing; then took a PhD in the same subject at the University of California, Berkeley. He claimed that he moved to California because he hated eastern winters but his quest for sun also put him at the heart of a new industrial revolution.

A drunken rat in 1960s Berkeley

Mr Grove’s career is also a testimony to America’s ability to spot merit even if it comes in the oddest of packages. Grove was not an obvious catch in 1963. He then spoke with a strong Hungarian accent. He adopted the manners of a resident of radical, mid-1960s Berkeley. By his own admission he was a “hotheaded 30-year-old running around like a drunken rat.” But Mr Moore saw the genius behind the quirky persona. For decades the Intel Trinity—Messrs Grove, Moore and Noyce—drove the semiconductor revolution in large part because they were such different people united only by a respect for raw IQ. Noyce was a visionary. Mr Moore was a technological virtuoso. Mr Grove was also a technologist but, to the surprise of many who knew him, he turned himself into a management genius, supplying Intel with drive and discipline and turning it round when it got into trouble.

America was good to the young Andy Grove, providing him with a refuge from totalitarianism and then a first-class education. In return Andy Grove was good for America, by helping it to remain at the very heart of the semiconductor revolution. His career was a parable as well as a triumph.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21695361-mr-grove-who-died-march-21st-was-heart-computer-revolution-andy-grove/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Buttonwood: Tough choices

Investing in South Korea: Losing faith

Gold in India: A tarnished appeal

Kenyan coffee: A bitter harvest

Chinese economic data: Fudge-ocracy

Asset managers: The tide turns

Peer-to-peer lending: A ripple of fear

Free exchange: No exit





Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

Tough choices

State spending will be hard to cut given rising inequality

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



VOTERS’ anger over inequality is one explanation for the rise of politicians as varied as Donald Trump, Bernie Sanders and Marine Le Pen. This anger also makes it very difficult for the free-market right to realise one of its key aims: the shrinking of the state. In Britain a plan to reduce spending on benefits for the disabled has been sabotaged by the resignation of a government minister and a backbench rebellion. In America mainstream Republicans are horrified by the rise of Mr Trump, who does not share their small-government ideals.

Ideally, conservatives would like people to be more self-reliant, owning their own homes and funding their own retirements. But many people do not have enough spare income to meet those goals. One study found that 21% of Americans lacked a savings account and 62% had less than $1,000 in their rainy-day funds. Similarly, in Britain, nearly 60% had less than £1,000 ($1,417) in liquid savings. Many of those people will have savings in another form, as part of a workplace pension scheme. Still, a Federal Reserve study found that around 31% of Americans had no private retirement savings at all, including nearly a quarter of those aged over 45.

This leaves people very dependent on the state. Around 60m Americans currently receive payments from the Social Security system. The average retirement benefit is $16,000 a year. A person with average earnings who retires at 65 can expect to receive around 40% of their final salary. More than half of retired people depend on Social Security for the majority of their income; for more than a third, it comprises over 90% (see chart). In short, this is a vital benefit for tens of millions of Americans, which they would have no way to replace. No wonder that cutting Social Security has long been known as the “third rail” of American politics.

Yet Social Security makes up around a quarter of all federal spending. Add in Medicare, a health programme for those over 65, which cost $546 billion in 2015, and 39% of the budget goes toward benefits for the elderly. With an ageing population, these figures are likely to go up, not down.

Meanwhile, attempts by government to encourage private saving for pensions have run into difficulties. Tax breaks may simply prompt workers to shift their savings from accounts that are more heavily taxed rather than to increase their savings overall. And the biggest gainers from tax shelters tend to be the better-off, blowing a hole in government revenues without helping the poor much.

Pushing up the retirement age would reduce the burden a bit. But many workers leave the jobs market before the official retirement age: figures show that such people account for around half of the marked decline since 2007 in the share of working-age Americans who are actually in work. In Europe, many of those who retire before earning a full pension still get state support of various kinds, reducing the saving for governments.

Then there is housing. High prices and stagnant wages make it harder for young people to own homes. Figures from the 2011 census showed that the proportion of British households that were owner-occupiers had fallen to 64% from 69% in 2001—the first decline in that figure in a century. The ratio of house prices to the incomes of first-time buyers in Britain is 5.2, close to the peak reached in 2007; in London, the ratio is a staggering 10.1, well above previous highs.

Attempts to encourage home ownership via tax breaks, such as the new lifetime individual savings account, may only push prices even higher. The fastest way to make prices more affordable would be a government-backed house-building programme, something that would be incompatible with attempts to cut the budget deficit and shrink the state.

Then there is automation, which may turn into the big policy challenge of the coming decades. Innovations such as driverless cars may threaten millions of jobs. Some academics, such as Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, envision a two-tier labour market, divided between workers who complement machines and those who compete against them. At the least, this may mean increased government spending on retraining; it may also mean higher welfare bills. It could create demand for public-sector employment to absorb surplus labour.

In short, it is very hard to see how rising levels of inequality can be squared with a smaller state. Voters will surely demand that politicians either reduce inequality or maintain the safety net.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695554-state-spending-will-be-hard-cut-given-rising-inequality-tough-choices/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Investing in South Korea

Losing faith

Reunification as an investment theme

Mar 26th 2016 | SEOUL | From the print edition

Kaesong in happier times

MANY South Koreans suspect that their country’s dream of reunification with destitute North Korea is best kept that way. But in early 2014 the South’s president, Park Geun-hye, began describing reunification as a “bonanza”. It would be a demographic boon, she suggested, marrying the technological know-how of the South, whose population may start shrinking as soon as 2030, to the young northern workforce. Resources, which are plentiful in the North, would help to fuel the South’s exports.

Soon afterwards, three South Korean asset-management firms—HI, Kyobo AXA and Shinyoung—all launched new-fangled “unification funds”: small equity funds that invest in stocks which are expected to gain from unification. Within ten days of opening, Shinyoung’s fund, the largest, had attracted over 9 billion won ($8m); by the end of 2014 it had sucked in 51 billion won, and four other funds held a combined total of 6.5 billion won. Since then, money has been flowing the other way: assets in the small fund managed by HI have halved; 10 billion won has flown out of Shinyoung’s fund.

The goal of the funds is to reap the expected benefits of unification in the long run, and of closer economic co-operation between the two Koreas in the short term. HI’s fund includes shares in short-haul flight operators, likely to boom in a unified peninsula. Shinyoung’s invests in South Korean utility and construction firms; others bank on North Korea’s 25m potential consumers, investing for example in makers of electric rice cookers, says Kuk Min-chung of Fund Online Korea, a South Korean fund supermarket.

Jin Seong-nam of HI says that unification funds tend to attract investment when relations between the Koreas are cordial, on the expectation that cross-border business will grow. Over the past year, alas, a string of North Korean provocations has heightened tensions. Last month the South shuttered its last remaining economic project with the North, a jointly run industrial complex at Kaesong on the border. The South Korean textile and electronics firms with factories there at one point made up around 20% of HI’s reunification portfolio. It has since cut that back to just 5%.

Yet this forced reversal does not seem to have harmed the fund’s performance. Returns in the month since the closure of the Kaesong complex, at 10.7%, are far better than the average for South Korean funds, 7%. Part of the reason is that a quarter of HI’s reunification portfolio is in the KOSDAQ, the local version of America’s high-tech NASDAQ market, which has been performing well.

Shinyoung’s fund, in contrast, is heavily weighted towards manufacturing giants such as Samsung, an electronics firm, and POSCO, a steel giant, which it thinks would do well if the two Koreas became one. Both are now struggling due to China’s slowdown, and the fund is down 2.7% over the past year—far worse than the average. It seems that unification-fund managers can concoct a rationale for investing in almost any South Korean firm.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695557-reunification-investment-theme-losing-faith/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Gold in India

A tarnished appeal

India’s government tries to curb imports of gold—again

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

Bonds are no substitute

A SMALL room on the eighth floor of Mumbai’s former cotton exchange is where jewellery goes to die. At the Master Bullion Assaying & Hallmarking Lab in the heart of the gold district, superheated crucibles melt elaborate bangles and earrings into bars a central banker might recognise. This alchemy is being promoted by the government under a new “monetisation” scheme designed to reduce India’s imports of gold: the melted bling can be traded for a bond which will return the same amount of gold several years down the line, with interest of up to 2.5% in the interim.

Gold is the bane of India’s exchequer. Indians vie with Chinese as the world’s biggest consumers, buying just under 1,000 tonnes a year and stashing it in anklets, safe-deposit boxes and Hindu temples. As all but a few bangles’ worth is imported, only oil accounts for a bigger share of India’s trade deficit. To put it another way, the imports cost India more dollars every year than it attracts from foreign institutions investing in stocks and bonds, points out Ajit Ranade, an economist.

Although Indians have traditionally used gold as part of a bride’s dowry and as an offering at temples, demand has ballooned in recent years. In 1982 they consumed just 65 tonnes of the stuff. Decades of inflation and a much-debased rupee have pushed savers towards what is, in effect, a convenient way to insulate their nest-egg from the poor decisions of India’s policymakers (and, just as often, from its tax inspectors). In rupee terms, in other words, gold has been a stellar investment.

Getting Indians to forgo gold for weddings and religious offerings is probably a non-starter. Easier to target the portion that is bought as an investment, especially in rural areas where banks are scarce and mistrusted. The government hopes it will gather 50 tonnes of gold through its bond scheme—a modest target given the country’s 20,000-tonne pile. Yet four months in only three tonnes have been gathered.

That is hardly a surprise: government schemes to collect gold have disappointed since at least 1962, when Indira Gandhi, then the prime minister’s daughter, handed over her own finery to finance a border skirmish with China. Though gold and a government bond backed by gold are much the same on paper, they do not hold the same appeal for those who favour gold as a store of value. Indians who are comfortable with paperwork and banks simply aren’t big holders of gold, points out Gurbachan Singh, an economist at the Indian Statistical Institute. By the same token, most Hindu temples, many of which have hoards of gold donated by the pious, have steered clear of the scheme, despite pressure from the government.

Policymakers have other ways of making gold less appealing. A modest excise tax in the recently unveiled budget has kept jewellers across the country on strike for a month. Gold sellers were already furious at import duties and rules forcing them to identify customers buying more than 200,000 rupees’ ($3,000) worth. In addition, the central bank is discouraging lending to buy gold.

Several trends suggest gold may eventually lose its lustre. Inflation has fallen dramatically, reducing its value as a hedge. A government scheme is giving hundreds of millions of people bank accounts for the first time, providing them with an alternative way to save. Young people are said to be less interested in wearing gold jewellery than their parents.

If the government really wanted to accelerate this shift, it could change its own ways. Various laws steer a big share of bank deposits into low-yielding government debt and agricultural loans. That, in turn, means that Indians earn little interest on their savings, enhancing gold’s relative appeal. Such financial repression helps the government fund itself cheaply. But it means that Indians are sitting on gold equivalent in value to four months of economic output. That could be financing productive investments instead.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695558-indias-government-tries-curb-imports-goldagain-tarnished-appeal/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Kenyan coffee

A bitter harvest

A cautionary tale about an overregulated industry

Mar 26th 2016 | Nairobi | From the print edition



COFFEE was once Kenya’s biggest foreign-exchange earner, but these days the industry looks less perky. The country’s record, 127,000-tonne crop was all the way back in the 1987-88 season. Output plunged by 40% the following year, after the global coffee cartel axed its quotas, exposing the industry to competition. It has been falling ever since: last year it was less than 45,000 tonnes, a mere 0.5% of coffee production worldwide.

That is not for lack of quality. Kenya’s arabica coffee, grown in the highlands around Mount Kenya, is world-renowned, unlike the robusta produced in places like Vietnam and Brazil and used in instant granules. Domestic consumption is tiny, but growing by as much as 20% a year, as coffee-shop chains expand to cater to Kenya’s growing middle class.

That middle class also craves better housing, however, generating an insatiable thirst for land among developers. Nairobi’s property market is bubbling. The road between the capital and Thika, a town on the brink of being swallowed by its northern suburbs, is lined with coffee plantations that have been sold to developers. No one has bothered to pull up the weeds overtaking the coffee bushes on one hill-top outside Thika that is destined to become 500 homes.

For many smallholders, who account for 60% of the country’s coffee production, there just isn’t enough money in beans anymore. Some small farmers have abandoned the crop altogether for vegetables or other, more lucrative export crops, such as macadamia nuts. It doesn’t have to be this way. Coffee production in neighbouring Uganda has more than doubled since 1990, to 285,000 tonnes. In 2010, the most recent year for which comparative data are available, Kenyan coffee farmers received 20% of the export price of their crop, compared with more than 80% in Uganda.

Mismanagement has played a part in the Kenyan industry’s decline. The Kenya Planters Co-operative Union (KPCU), which owned 70% of the country’s milling capacity at its peak as well as providing its smallholder members with loans and cheap fertiliser, went bust in 2009. It came out of receivership in 2014, but allegations about its past were aired last autumn and led some farmers to threaten to leave their harvests on the bushes in protest. These included stories of a boardroom fistfight over the purchase of new computers, and of the theft of all the machinery from the KPCU’s Nairobi mill, as well as unconfirmed reports that some of the organisation’s directors had looted loans and coffee-sale proceeds meant for its members for nearly two decades before it went under.

Regulation has left the industry with a Byzantine structure that presents many opportunities for skimming off money. Only 10% of beans are bought directly from farmers. Most smallholders belong to a co-operative, which skins, ferments and dries the coffee beans before passing them on to a miller that finishes the processing and grading. The bags then go to one of eight licensed marketing agents, which sell the coffee to 60 local and international dealers at the Nairobi Coffee Exchange.

The exchange’s auctions, which take place in the bowels of a half-empty building in a rundown area of the city, had to introduce a $1,500 dealer registration fee after marketing agents withheld coffee in 2012 in protest at buyers that existed solely to resell the free coffee samples to which they were entitled. Disgruntled participants claim that “cartels” rig the bidding, suppressing prices. One Kenyan journalist claims to have witnessed dealers whistling to each other as a signal to hold down prices. The only noises your correspondent heard in the dimly-lit room, which resembles a 1960s lecture theatre, were hushed murmurs and bleeps as traders pressed buttons to place bids, and polite applause when one lot of coffee sold at a record price for the season.

Nonetheless, many of the mills, marketing agents and dealers are sister companies, which probably reduces competition to buy the wares of farmers. The multi-layered system has been further complicated by the decision of some local governments to set up their own mills and marketing agents. Further government meddling of this sort, needless to say, is unlikely to solve the industry’s problems.

In Uganda, in contrast, the industry has been completely liberalised since 1992. There are no auctions: middlemen compete vigorously to buy directly from farmers and sell on to exporters. If Kenya’s government wants to make good on its promise to double coffee production by 2020, it should wake up to the smell of its neighbour’s success.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695564-cautionary-tale-about-overregulated-industry-bitter-harvest/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Chinese economic data

Fudge-ocracy

The way to get ahead in China is to manipulate statistics

Mar 26th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition

Four babies, by the local count

IN THEORY Chinese officials receive promotions based on their performance against a range of targets: delivering strong growth, maintaining social stability and, until recently, enforcing the one-child policy. But scholars debate whether the system really rewards those who excel according to these (in any case flawed) metrics. Some believe the emphasis on merit is real, and helps explain China’s stunning economic progress over the past 35 years. Others reckon that connections to the right leaders matter more for those trying to advance their careers. New research, however, suggests a third option: that those who get ahead are adept not at stimulating growth nor at currying favour, but at cooking the books.

A recent paper from America’s National Bureau of Economic Research uses fertility rates as a way to test this theory. Economists have found a relationship between GDP growth in an official’s fiefdom and subsequent promotion, but it is difficult to know how accurate the GDP figures are (a question that haunts anyone following the Chinese economy). Population data are different: in addition to the figures provided by local officials, China conducts a census every ten years, revising population data all the way down to the village level. That makes it possible to pinpoint where bureaucrats have been fiddling the statistics.

Examining data on 967 mayors in 28 provinces from 1985 to 2000, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato and Xiao Yu Wang of Duke University and Shuang Zhang of University of Colorado, Boulder, find that officials who claimed to have suppressed population growth were rewarded. Mayors who reduced the local birth rate by one child per 1,000 people per year by their own count had a 10% greater chance of being promoted.

But the relationship between fertility rates and career trajectory disappears when using the census data rather than the figures reported by the local officials themselves. Mayors who received promotions were no better or worse at curbing population growth than those who did not. The way to get ahead in the Chinese bureaucracy, it seems, is to falsify statistics. It makes you wonder what other data have been doctored.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21695307-bureaucrats-who-falsify-economic-data-have-better-chance-being-promoted/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Asset managers

The tide turns

Consumers are finally revolting against an outdated industry

Mar 26th 2016 | New York | From the print edition



FOR decades looking after other people’s money has been a lucrative business. Profit margins in the asset-management industry were 39% in 2014, according to BCG, a consultancy, compared with 8% in consumer goods and 20% in pharmaceuticals. The industry’s global profits in 2014 were an estimated $102 billion, allowing firms to pay those picking stocks in the American equity market an average salary of around $690,000 a year. Better yet, asset-management is growing fast: the industry looks after $78 trillion worldwide, and could shepherd over $100 trillion by 2020.

Yet the outlook for many asset managers is grim. The industry is being reshaped by low-cost competition. At the same time falling markets are shrinking assets under management, and thus fees levied as a percentage of those assets. Regulators, meanwhile, are trying to prevent consumers from being sold inappropriate products, which are often the most lucrative.

The biggest challenge confronts so-called active managers, who promise to earn returns that are higher than the market benchmark (the S&P 500, for example) by picking investments judiciously. Very few manage to do so: a study by Standard & Poor’s, which compiles the S&P 500 index, among other things, found that 91% of active managers in emerging-market equities failed to beat the relevant index over ten years, and that 95% of active bond managers underperformed.

This is hardly surprising: the average manager is likely to do no better than the market, before fees. Once fees are subtracted, therefore, active managers are likely to underperform. Morningstar, a data provider, has found that high fees are indeed a predictor of underperformance.

Low blow

When markets are rising, clients may not notice the impact of fees, protecting asset managers’ profits. But last year most markets were flat or lower. McKinsey, a consultancy, says profit margins and growth fell at the majority of American asset-management firms in 2015. Paul Smith of the CFA Institute, an association of investment advisers, says, “Now the tide has gone out and the emperor has no clothes.”

That may help explain some big recent withdrawals (see chart). Actively managed funds in America saw outflows of more than $100 billion last year, even as $400 billion flowed into “passive” funds that aim simply to track an index, according to Morningstar. It did not help that resource-rich countries hit by falling commodity prices sold assets owned by their sovereign-wealth funds to compensate for lost revenue. Firms that specialise in emerging-market equities did especially badly, with Aberdeen suffering an outflow of 14% and Ashmore 19%.



Regulation and technology are adding to the challenges for incumbents. In the wake of the financial crisis, regulators focused on the banks. Now they are looking at asset managers, with everything from the transparency of their fees to the liquidity of their investments under the spotlight. In America, the Department of Labour plans to introduce rules later this year obliging most financial professionals to suggest investments that are not just “suitable”, as current regulation has it, but “in the best interest” of customers. That will make it difficult to recommend investments in funds which pay the advisers a commission. A similar reform took effect in Britain in 2013. Account statements will also tell customers how much they are paying in fees.

Such rules will have a big impact on business models. A greater number of wealthy investors will start choosing their own funds, which should benefit online retail platforms, predicts PricewaterhouseCoopers, an accountancy firm. Advisers will no longer have an incentive to push expensive products of dubious merit, which should boost low-cost products such as passive funds.

Meanwhile, institutional investors are reducing the number of managers they deal with. RPMI Railpen, a British pension fund, has gone from 20 external equity managers in 2013 to seven today. According to a survey by State Street, a financial-services group, four out of five pension funds plan to increase in-house asset management. Investors are also reconsidering their exposure to high-charging hedge-fund and private-equity managers. CALPERS, a big Californian pension fund, has dumped its hedge-fund managers. PGGM, which manages Dutch pension money, has halved what it pays for infrastructure investments since 2008, mostly by investing directly. Some pension funds are clubbing together to negotiate lower fees.

Technology also means that the strategies of active managers can be replicated at much lower cost. Take value managers, who claim to be able to beat the market by picking cheap shares. A computer program can comb the market for stocks that look cheap relative to their profits, asset values, or dividends; investors have no need to worry that the active manager might lose focus or change style. When it comes to choosing between asset markets, robo-advisers, using computer models, can help investors manage their wealth for a very low fee. Earlier this month Goldman Sachs, a big bank, became the latest big financial firm to buy one.

Fees for active equity funds are falling slowly, dropping by 4% for retail investors between 2012 and 2014, according to BCG. But the competition from passive managers is intense. Fees on passive equity funds for retail investors dropped by a fifth over the same period, as operating costs keep falling. As a percentage of assets, expenses at Vanguard, a specialist in tracker funds, now average 0.18% a year, a fifth of what they were in 1975.

Retail investors increasingly choose one-stop-shops, such as Vanguard. These investors are buying cheap exchange-traded funds (tracker funds that trade on the stockmarket) or all-in-one multi-asset funds (a mix of shares, bonds and other investments), rather than trusting equity specialists. Passive powerhouses like Vanguard and BlackRock, both of which also sell actively managed funds, are the main beneficiaries of the upheaval in the industry. In 2015 they captured almost half of the industry’s net inflows. There is also hope for newcomers: in China, some tech firms have become asset managers, earning custom from their prominent and trusted brands. A fund launched by Alibaba in 2014 quickly raised $90 billion from more than 100m investors.

Some star active managers, such as Bridgewater, a hedge fund, will continue to win business. But those that do badly will see their assets wither further, as withdrawals compound poor returns. For investors, this is good news: the industry may finally start benefiting them as much as it does managers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695552-consumers-are-finally-revolting-against-outdated-industry-tide-turns/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Peer-to-peer lending

A ripple of fear

A fashionable form of credit encounters its first crunch

Mar 26th 2016 | New York | From the print edition



IN A financial landscape that ranges from the dreary to the disliked, peer-to-peer lending stands out. P2P firms, also called marketplace lenders, channel loans directly from institutional investors and individuals to borrowers, for a fee. In the process, they have lowered interest rates for many and expanded access to credit. They have been growing pell-mell (see chart), in part because their structure allows them to escape much of the regulation being heaped on banks. But recent months have shown that they are not immune to the burdens that weigh down their conventional rivals.

On the face of things, it is business as usual. Lending Club, the biggest P2P firm, doubled its loan book last year. This year it expects it to grow by 72%, to over $14 billion. Yet its share price has fallen below $9, from a peak last year of $25. That is chiefly due to America’s slowing economy and rising interest rates (although the pace of increases is likely to be slow—see Free exchange). Under such circumstances, delinquent loans tend to increase. Prosper, the second-biggest P2P lender, has said that delinquencies are indeed rising on its riskier loans, although it emphasised that only a tiny subset of its portfolio had been affected and that the deterioration was trivial. Nevertheless, it has raised rates for all borrowers, especially the riskier ones, who now pay 31%. Lending Club has also raised its interest rates.

The primary motivation for these increases may have been to reflect the risk of credit losses, but it is also possible that raising funds has become tougher. Borrowing costs in other risky markets have risen sharply recently. The volume of loans that P2P firms have sold in securitised packages has halved since the end of last year.

Meanwhile, a case working its way through the courts may subject P2P loans to state usury laws, from which banks with a national charter are exempt. That would prevent the P2P firms from lending to the riskiest borrowers in much of America. In addition, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a federal agency, announced this month that it would begin accepting complaints about P2P consumer lending.

Nonetheless, the problems of P2P lending may be overstated, says Ram Ahluwalia of PeerIQ, a firm that crunches data for the industry. Securitisations may have slowed but they have not stopped. Defaults remain manageable. There may be ways around an adverse ruling on usury laws. And the market that P2P lending is catering to clearly has not been saturated. As long as that remains the case, growth may slow, but it is unlikely to stop.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695561-fashionable-form-credit-encounters-its-first-crunch-ripple-fear/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

No exit

Global financial integration is tying central bankers’ hands

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



IN THE weeks after December 17th, when the Federal Reserve raised its benchmark interest rate for the first time in nearly ten years, confident Fed officials told markets to expect four additional rate hikes in 2016. It has been obvious for a while that this guidance was wildly optimistic. Economists have been downgrading growth forecasts and markets have been retreating. At its meeting earlier this month the Fed acknowledged reality: it not only left rates unchanged, but also signalled in its projections that it expects to raise them by just two notches this year. This climbdown was not a surprise, but it does conceal a surprising admission: that American monetary policy is constrained, in part, by conditions in global financial markets.

The Fed is a collegial, consensus-driven central bank, but over the past six months an internal debate has politely unfolded. One group, led by Stanley Fischer, the vice-chairman, hews to a fairly conventional view of the Fed’s task. Mr Fischer argues that low unemployment leads inexorably to upward pressure on wages and prices. In late 2015 hiring roared ahead, even though unemployment stood at just 5%. A jump in inflation seemed inevitable. In order to keep rising prices and wages under control, Mr Fischer’s side reckoned, the Fed needed to act pre-emptively, if gradually, to raise interest rates. This camp won the day in December, when projections published by the Fed suggested that the federal funds rate would climb to 1.25-1.5% by the end of 2016.

The decision to raise rates in December was unanimous, but there was no consensus on the appropriate pace for subsequent increases. A second group, led by Lael Brainard, a member of the Fed’s Board of Governors, worried that the global nature of financial markets, and the dollar’s critical role within them, required the Fed to move slowly. In a speech in February Ms Brainard estimated that global market movements, in the form of a rising dollar and a growing gap between the rates at which governments and riskier private companies could borrow, in effect added 0.75 percentage points of additional tightening to the 0.25 percentage-point increase the Fed made in December. The planned procession of additional hikes, if amplified in a similar way, might well tip America and much of the world into recession. At the Fed’s meeting in March, Ms Brainard’s side seems to have had the better of the argument.

Ms Brainard reckons that in an era of deep financial-market integration there can be no “Great Divergence” between policy in America and the rest of the world. Over the past two decades a global glut of savings has depressed long-run interest rates all over the place. Savings have piled up as skittish emerging-market central banks stockpiled foreign-exchange reserves and as the share of income flowing to the savings-prone rich grew. Meanwhile, investment lagged, thanks to reduced expectations for growth in the ageing countries of the rich world and, more recently, China. In an effort to mobilise this sluggish capital and perk up growth, central banks around the world have pushed down the cost of borrowing.

In December the Fed calculated that American firms and households were confident enough to keep spending even if rates rose above zero. But capital flows freely around the world, and any country offering a safe financial return even a bit above the norm attracts waves of money. Similarly, a shift in the relative economic outlook—such as a downgrading in growth prospects in China relative to those in America—can lead to sudden moves in financial markets as a torrent of capital seeks safety.

In late 2015 the expectation of a rate rise in America sent capital gushing into the country, pushing up the value of the dollar and tightening credit conditions elsewhere in the world. An expensive dollar makes American exports less competitive and places a drag on growth and inflation in the American economy. The effect on investors’ appetite for risk is more immediate.

Between the Fed’s December meeting and early February, American stocks dropped by 10%; share prices in Europe and Asia fell by more. The spread between corporate-bond yields and those on safe government debt rose sharply (see chart). Not until mid-February, as policymakers around the world sought to soothe markets with promises to support growth, did the panic dissipate. Since then, share prices have recovered and the dollar has fallen in value; with its decision on March 16th, the Fed confirmed investors’ suspicion that it would not continue on its planned tightening path.

Hell is other people’s money

The forces inhibiting the Fed are, if anything, getting stronger. Central banks in Europe and Japan are loosening monetary policy in response to lacklustre economic conditions; China is easing, too. Meanwhile, America’s recovery continues thanks to its monetary reprieve, and various measures of inflation are moving back toward the Fed’s 2% target with surprising speed. If the Fed continues to stand pat, inflation may soon move above 2%, but if it attempts to raise interest rates well above the global level it may be inviting destabilising financial flows and an economy-choking rise in the dollar.

The balance of risks suggests the Fed should tolerate rising inflation. A faster pace of increase in wages and prices would be a healthy development for the American economy. Inflation has been below 2% for four years; exceeding that level would affirm the Fed’s claim that 2% is a symmetrical target for inflation, rather than a ceiling. A temporarily higher inflation rate might be an annoyance for some Americans, but it is preferable to imploding portfolios and a risk of recession.

Even though Ms Brainard prevailed in March, the debate is sure to continue. The Fed is bound to raise rates again at some point, as inflation rises. Another torrent of mobile capital will then flood in, perhaps swamping the Fed’s attempts to go its own way. The world should brace for more financial storms.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21695549-global-financial-integration-tying-central-bankers-hands-no-exit/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Clinical trials: For my next trick...

Urban planning: Listen up

The sociology of science: In death, there is life

Ecology: Pictures of guilly

Software engineering: Of more than academic interest

Dermatology: Rainbow’s beginning





Articles Sections Next

Clinical trials

For my next trick...

Too many medical trials move their goalposts halfway through. A new initiative aims to change that

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



PAXIL was a blockbuster. It was introduced by its inventors, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), in 1992, as an antidepressant. By the early 2000s it was earning the firm nearly $2 billion a year. It was being prescribed to millions of children and teenagers on the basis of a trial, called Study 329, which suggested it was a good treatment for depressed youngsters. But when British regulators took a second look at Study 329, in 2003, they concluded that it had been misleadingly presented. Not only did Paxil do little to help youngsters with depression, it often made things worse—to the extent of making some who took it suicidal. In 2012 the American authorities imposed the biggest fine in the history of the pharmaceutical industry, $3 billion, on GSK for misreporting data on a variety of drugs, of which Paxil was one.

Since then, Study 329 has become one of the best-known examples of a piece of academic sleight-of-hand called “outcome switching”. This is a procedure in which the questions that a scientific study was set up to answer are swapped part way through for a different lot. Study 329 set out to measure the impact of Paxil on eight different variables, all based around how participants scored on a variety of depression tests. None showed that it was any better than a placebo sugar pill, but the researchers who wrote the paper came up with 19 new measures. Most of those showed no benefit either, but four did. In the paper, those four were presented as if they had been the main measures all along.

Outcome switching is a good example of the ways in which science can go wrong. This is a hot topic at the moment, with fields from psychology to cancer research going through a “replication crisis”, in which published results evaporate when people try to duplicate them. Now, a team of researchers at the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine, at Oxford University, have set up a project called COMPare, in the hope of doing something about it.

Go COMPare

Outcome switching can sometimes be done for good reasons: participants may refuse to fill in a long form, for instance, meaning that no data can be collected from it. But it can also let unscrupulous researchers go on “fishing expeditions” to prove whatever they want. Collect enough data, and correlations that look statistically significant will appear by chance. Pick them out after the event and you have, unless you re-test to demonstrate that they were not flukes, proved nothing.

Study 329 finished in 1998. These days, such shenanigans are supposed to be impossible. American and European regulators require trials to be registered before they begin, complete with information about what they will be investigating and how they will go about it, so that researchers can check their colleagues have done what they promised to do. But enforcement is lax. A meta-analysis—a study of studies—published in BMC Medicine in 2015 found that 31% of clinical trials did not stick to the measurements they had planned to use. Another paper, published in PLOS ONE, also in 2015, examined 137 medical trials over a six-month period and found that 18% had altered their primary outcomes halfway through the trial, while 64% had done the same with secondary, less-important measures of success.

The COMPare team’s results are similar. They analysed all the clinical trials reported between October and January in the five most prestigious medical journals—specifically, the New England Journal of Medicine, the Journal of the American Medical Association, the Lancet, Annals of Internal Medicine and the BMJ—looking for evidence of outcome switching.



INTERACTIVE: Clinical trial simulator - Run your own trials and play the system in favour of your own drug

That came to a total of 67 different trials. Of those, nine were perfect—they had done exactly what they had said they would do, or if they had changed their measurements, they had said so plainly and given their reasons. The other 58, though, had flaws. Between them they contained 300 outcomes that should have been reported but were not, while 357 new outcomes, not specified in the documents describing what the trial would be doing, were silently added.

Where previous research has merely described the problem, says Ben Goldacre, a British doctor and epidemiologist who is leading the project, COMPare hopes to do something about it. For every imperfect trial, the team wrote a letter to the editors of the relevant journal, pointing out the inconsistencies with the aim of setting the record straight.

So far, responses have been mixed. Of 58 letters COMPare has sent out since the project began, seven have been published. Another 16 were rejected by the journals, who argued either that the problem was insignificant or that attentive, industrious readers could work out for themselves what had happened. The rest have seemingly been ignored.

Dr Goldacre—who has built a reputation as a crusader for open science—says some journals’ responses surprised him. He points out that all five have signed up to guidelines that require them to police outcome switching and to make sure papers they publish do not engage in it. The COMPare team plans to collate the responses into another scientific paper, to be published shortly. “I would regard this as a provocation study,” says Dr Goldacre, using the immunological meaning of the term. “When you provoke the system, the responses you get tell you a lot about how the system works. But we’re not doing this to be provocative and snide, we’re doing it to understand the pathology.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21695381-too-many-medical-trials-move-their-goalposts-halfway-through-new-initiative/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Urban planning

Listen up

How to map city soundscapes using social media

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



“VIBRANT” is a word often used in guide books to describe a particular quarter of a city: Soho, in London, for example. But what does that actually mean? To Daniele Quercia of Bell Labs in Cambridge, England, and his colleagues, the term has a literal truth to it. Soho is a place of good vibrations through the air—good sounds, in other words. It shares this with the Gothic quarter of Barcelona, for example, but not with much of Mayfair and Belgravia, upmarket London districts near Soho that Dr Quercia brands sonically “chaotic”.

He and his colleagues, who report their results in Royal Society Open Science this week, have been making sound maps of the two cities. In so far as city planners incorporate matters sonic into their thinking, Dr Quercia notes, they take most notice of noise. This form of sound, being by definition annoying, has political resonance, and planners do their best to minimise it. But sound can also be soothing, exhilarating, saddening, surprising and many other things besides. These aspects of the urban soundscape are little-studied. Dr Quercia thinks this is a pity. The spread of information technology, and in particular of social media, has created a pool of data about urban sounds that can be tagged to precise locations. That has let him and his team start correcting the omission.

Using a statistical analysis of people’s reactions to different sorts of urban sound, the team drew up four broad categories: chaotic, calm, monotonous and vibrant. Mechanical sounds tended to be chaotic. Human ones tended to be vibrant. The sounds of nature, though, could be either calm or monotonous. Birds chirping were calming. Crickets chirping were monotonous. Rain pattering down from the sky was monotonous, but dripping from trees it was calming. Drawing on social media to show which sounds people report hearing around them in particular places, the team then mapped the centres of the two cities accordingly.

Not surprisingly, parks, such as Hyde Park, sound calm. More surprisingly beaches (at least, those in Barcelona) are monotonous. But, main roads aside (they are usually chaotic), a stranger to either city would have difficulty predicting from a map which streets would have good vibes and which would seem chaotic. That would bear further investigation, and perhaps even the attention of forward-thinking planning departments.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21695376-how-map-city-soundscapes-using-social-media-listen-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The sociology of science

In death, there is life

Big-name scientists may end up stifling progress in their fields

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



MAX PLANCK, the inventor of quantum theory, once said that science advances one funeral at a time. He meant—or, at least, is presumed to have meant—that the death of a dominant mind in a field liberates others with different points of view to make their cases more freely, without treading on the toes of established authority. It might also rearrange patterns of funding, for they, too, often reflect established hierarchies.

But was Planck right? For almost a decade Pierre Azoulay of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has been trying to find out. His conclusion, reported in a working paper by the National Bureau of Economic Research, is a qualified “yes”.

Dr Azoulay first published on the subject in 2010 in the Quarterly Journal of Economics. On that occasion he came to an apparently different conclusion. This was that the death of a star resulted in a marked slowing of the published output of the star’s collaborators, a phenomenon which sometimes lasted for decades. But subsequent conversations led him to suspect this was not the whole story. Some scientists he spoke to agreed that the Quarterly Journal paper captured their experience. Others, though, dissented. These latter claimed that a star’s dominance often sucked the intellectual oxygen from a field, and that his or her demise let it back in.

With the assistance of two others, Christian Fons-Rosen of the Pompeu Fabra University in Barcelona and Joshua Graff Zivin of the University of California, San Diego, Dr Azoulay decided to dig deeper. The trio focused on biology, America and the period between 1975 and 2003. They mined online databases to extract the publication records of biologists working in different fields before and after the deaths of stars in those fields. Crucially, their data included both people who had collaborated with the star, and people who had not.

The three researchers’ definition of scientific stardom rested on such criteria as patents held, funding received and publications widely cited. Among those stars they identified, 452 also had in common the fact that they had died early—meaning, in this context, before they could retire or leave active research to take up administrative roles. They were, in other words, at their intellectual peaks.

Gratifyingly for Dr Azoulay, he and his colleagues confirmed his earlier finding. A star’s collaborators did indeed produce fewer articles after that star’s death—as many as 40% less a year, on average. But they also found a contrary effect. This was that publications by researchers who had not collaborated with the star (and who were indeed sometimes working in entirely different fields at the time of the “extinction event”) increased by 8% a year. Within five years of a star’s death, the increase in non-collaborators’ articles had fully compensated for the drop-off in those of the collaborators.

That the loss of his mentor would harm an acolyte’s career makes perfect sense. Why outsiders should benefit, though, is less clear. Dr Azoulay found that few of the stars in his sample sat on committees that distributed funds or edited journals, so explicit favouritism does not seem to be the answer. Perhaps the explanation does indeed lie in that woolly but evocative phrase, “intellectual oxygen”. A star’s death gives outsiders room to breathe.

Morbid though the thought is, Dr Azoulay’s hypothesis has the scientific virtue of generating testable predictions. Among the influential scientists who have died prematurely in the past two years are David Flockhart, who helped create the field of personalised medicine; Yoshiki Sasai, a prominent stem-cell biologist; and Allison Doupe, a neurobiologist who studied birdsong as a model for human language. It will be interesting to see how the careers of others in these fields now evolve.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21695378-big-name-scientists-may-end-up-stifling-progress-their-fields-death-there/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Ecology

Pictures of guilly

Old photos are an untapped record of animal populations

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

As it was in 1950 and 2014

IN GENERAL, the longer an ecological study goes on for, the more valuable it becomes. This is usually done, funding agencies permitting, by extending it into the future. Extending it into the past is tricker. It is not, though, impossible—as Jonas Hentati-Sundberg and Olof Olsson of Stockholm University show in a paper published this week in Current Biology.

Dr Hentati-Sundberg and Dr Olsson borrowed an idea that historians of architecture are starting to use to track changes to buildings—looking at tourist photographs taken over the years. That works well for much-snapped edifices in holiday hotspots, but getting equivalent sets of pictures for parts of the natural environment means finding something specific that is equally photogenic. Fortunately, the two researchers think they have done so.

Their something is Stora Karlsö in the Baltic Sea. This island is well known to ornithologists as a nesting site for guillemots and razorbills. Crucially, it has been a destination for daily tours to look at its cliffs since the 1920s—and was, before that, a royal hunting ground. The result is a trove of photographs, albeit one that is scattered around Sweden.

The task Dr Hentati-Sundberg and Dr Olsson set themselves was to find as many of the photos as they could, and subject them to scientific scrutiny. To do that, they searched through national and regional archives, collaborated with photo agencies, and put requests in magazines and internet forums. Working this way, they tracked down more than 200 shots of the same cliff face (see above for a pair of examples), taken in 37 different years between 1918 and 2005, and then every year until 2015.

They concentrated on the breeding season, and on guillemots in particular, since members of this species nest communally and are faithful to the same sites from year to year. They thereby hoped to judge the guillemot population’s health by noting from their photographs how many nests were occupied by birds that were either incubating eggs or brooding hatchlings.

That focus on the breeding season (May 1st to July 10th in the case of guillemots) restricted the set of photos they could use to 113 snaps that were either specifically dated as having been taken between those days, or which appeared to have been from the state of the vegetation shown in them. In each of the 113 images the researchers counted all the birds they could see. They found that there were 182 nesting pairs in 1918, a number that rose slowly, to 304, by 1950. By 1964 there were 508 pairs, but that dropped back to a low of 353 in 1981. After this, the birds started to recover again, and have done so spectacularly. In 1998 there were 571 pairs; in 2015, 1,209.

Dr Hentati-Sundberg and Dr Olsson interpret the initial half-century rise as being a consequence of the end of hunting and egg-collecting on the island. They put the decline after 1964 down to contaminants such as DDT and a growth in the practice of fishing for salmon with drift nets, which snag and drown birds that fly in to grab what looks like an easy meal. And they attribute the latest rebound to the result of curbs on such substances and practices.

How widely deployable the method they have developed will be remains to be seen. What worked on Stora Karlsö would surely work for seabird colonies elsewhere, many of which are the subjects of regular photography. Whether it could be adapted for other habitats is less clear. There may, though, be places like national parks where tourists are so abundant that useful ecological information can indeed be extracted from dusty albums squirrelled away in the world’s attics.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21695379-old-photos-are-untapped-record-animal-populations-pictures-guilly/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Software engineering

Of more than academic interest

Professors’ unprofessional programs have created a new profession

Mar 26th 2016 | Oxford | From the print edition



SOME programmers call it “spaghetti code”. Though error-strewn, it works—most of the time. It is likely to have been written in an out-of-date language, possibly more than one of them. It has grown by accretion, as different graduate students and postdocs, many long since departed to other institutions, have tweaked it, fixed it and patched it. And it is, of course, unannotated, so nobody really knows what is going on inside it.

In the rarefied atmosphere of academia, where enthusiasm is all and budgets are tight, that is generally good enough. For commercial applications, though, it is intolerable. Yet academic spaghetti code frequently contains commercially useful ideas that might be sold to outside companies or employed as the basis of new, startup businesses. So there is a market niche available to be occupied by those willing to take the stuff and untangle it.

One occupant of said niche is Oxford Computer Consultants (OCC), a firm based in the eponymous English city. A recent project it carried out was the transformation of drug-testing software developed by researchers at Oxford University into a commercial package called Virtual Assay, which can speed up preclinical trials of putative medicines. A second began with pieces of code written partly in Fortran, a programming language devised in the 1950s, and partly in Matlab, a more modern language, by researchers at Southampton University. This mixture was turned into RoCiT, a system that engineers at National Grid, the firm which (among other things) runs Britain’s electricity-distribution network, use to calculate the maximum power that underground cables can carry safely.

According to Reynold Greenlaw, one of OCC’s directors, cleaning up spaghetti code starts with the obvious but not-always-easy step of getting a copy of the program to run on one of the firm’s own machines—and, once it is running, to turn out the same results as it does on the originator’s machine. That done, each of the program’s parts can be examined and tested individually, translated into a more modern computing language if required, and upgraded as necessary. Only then, when all parts are working properly, is the spaghetti untangled, the entire program restructured into something a commercial programmer would accept, and annotation added to it so that other programmers can understand exactly how it works.

As might be expected, OCC is not alone in its mission to transmogrify academic software into something business can use. Such an industry exists in America, too. There, though, universities often try to keep the process within their walls. The Venture Development Centre of the University of Massachusetts, in Boston, is one example of an in-house spaghetti untangler for researchers who want to go commercial. The New York University School of Engineering Incubator is another. A third is the Southern Tier Startup Alliance at Cornell, also in New York state.

Untangling spaghetti code in this way would not, of course, be necessary if researchers were better programmers in the first place. But that would involve a change in their incentives, because for most academics writing software is merely a means to an end rather than an end in itself. Those who do put effort into producing good code risk being seen by their colleagues as time-wasters.

Some brave souls are, nevertheless, trying to encourage this change. One such is Neil Chue Hong, founder and head of the Software Sustainability Institute (SSI) at Edinburgh University. The SSI has the self-appointed mission (backed by government funding agencies) of encouraging British academics to code sensibly from the beginning—for their own good, as well as that of any commercial spin-offs.

Mr Chue Hong is a relative newcomer to the task of teaching good programming practices to academics, for the SSI was founded in 2010. Greg Wilson has been at it since 1998, when he started “software carpentry” workshops at Toronto University. He now runs the Software Carpentry Foundation, an international charity, but has not yet succeeded in turning the majority of computing’s academic bodgers into craftsmen. The spaghetti-untanglers, it seems, will be around for a while yet.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21695377-professors-unprofessional-programs-have-created-new-profession-more/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Dermatology

Rainbow’s beginning

The epidermis now comes in Technicolor

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

Scars and stripes

VERTEBRATE animals, human beings included, are constantly changing their skin—producing new layers of it as old cells slough off from the surface. Understanding this process of regeneration would help the treatment of skin diseases and of injuries such as burns. This week, a group of researchers led by Kenneth Poss of Duke University Medical Centre, in North Carolina, have announced a colourful new technique that should enhance such understanding. They dub it the “skinbow”.

Skinbows are themselves an adaptation of an approach called a “brainbow”, invented almost a decade ago, that is used to label nerve cells different colours. Brainbow technology permits someone with an appropriate microscope to trace the connections that lots of individual nerve cells make with one another in the brain of, say, a mouse.

Dr Poss’s experimental animal is not a mammal but a fish: the zebrafish. This species is widely employed in the study of embryology, and is thus well understood. Skinbow or brainbow, though, the basic procedure is the same. Genetic engineering is used to create lines of animals whose genomes contain multiple copies of genes for proteins that glow under ultraviolet light. These genes are controlled by DNA switches that are activated only in the appropriate tissue type—brain for brainbows, skin for skinbows. In the case of skinbows, some of the proteins glow red, some glow green and some glow blue.

To create different hues out of these three primary colours, animals are subjected to a technique called site-specific recombination, to which the fluorescent-protein genes have been primed to be susceptible. Site-specific recombination randomly deletes some of those genes. Cells thus affected, and their descendants, will therefore glow red, green and blue to different degrees, and each specific mix of primaries will give that group a hue distinct from all of the others.

At the moment Dr Poss reckons his microscopes can distinguish 70-80 such hues. This, as he and his colleagues describe in Developmental Cell, has given them one of the most detailed views of skin regeneration yet seen. Moreover, unlike brainbow technology, which requires that the animal be killed in order to see what is going on, a skinbow is visible from the outside. Regenerative processes can thus be followed over an extended period.

The researchers could, for example, observe in detail how a fish responds to injury. When they amputated a fin from one of their charges, they were able to track cells moving to the site of the damage and helping to repair it. They also saw new cells rising from deeper layers of the skin to supplement those that had migrated to heal the injured fin. After two to three weeks of this, the fin had regrown completely.

The next stage will be to test how fish skin responds to diseases, and to drugs that might treat those diseases. In the fullness of time, the technology might be extended to look at skin regeneration in other species, mammals included. Even while restricted to fish, though, it is likely to yield useful insights into the process of regeneration—not to mention the possibility of a nice little sideline in the creation of designer denizens for aquaria.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21695380-epidermis-now-comes-technicolor-rainbows-beginning/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




Evolution of the internet: Growing up

Existentialism: Smokey and the bandits

China: Chronicle of a death foretold

International Pop: Far and wide

Johnson: Noam Chomsky





Articles Sections Next

Evolution of the internet

Growing up

How the internet lost its free spirit

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



Splinternet: How Geopolitics and Commerce are Fragmenting the World Wide Web. By Scott Malcomson. OR Books; 198 pages; $15 and £10.

RARELY has a manifesto been so wrong. “A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace”, written 20 years ago by John Perry Barlow, a digital civil-libertarian, begins thus: “Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome among us. You have no sovereignty where we gather.”

At the turn of the century, it seemed as though this techno-Utopian vision of the world could indeed be a reality. Entertainment and information, once extravagantly priced or locked away in dusty government offices, became instantly accessible. Brilliant youngsters set out to “organise the world’s information” and “make the world more open and connected”. It was easy online communication that helped Egyptians organise to topple Hosni Mubarak.

It didn’t last. States do not allow new territories to go ungoverned for very long. Europe’s competition commissioner is pursuing Google with antitrust charges. Apple has been locked in a battle with the FBI over whether it should compromise security on its iPhones. Autocratic governments around the world learned from Egypt and have invested in online-surveillance gear. Filtering systems restrict access: to porn in Britain, to Facebook and Google in China, to dissent in Russia.

Competing operating systems and networks offer inducements to keep their users within the fold, consolidating their power. Their algorithms personalise the web so that no two people get the same search results or social media feeds, betraying the idea of a digital commons. Five companies account for nearly two-thirds of revenue from advertising, the dominant business model of the web. Of the million-odd apps available for download, most people use fewer than 30 a month.

The open internet accounts for barely 20% of the entire web. The rest of it is hidden away in unsearchable “walled gardens” such as Facebook, whose algorithms are opaque, or on the “dark web”, a shady parallel world wide web. Data gathered from the activities of internet users are being concentrated in fewer hands (see article). And big hands they are too. BCG, a consultancy, reckons that the internet will account for 5.3% of GDP of the world’s 20 big economies this year, or $4.2 trillion.

How did this come to pass? The simple reply is that the free, open, democratic internet dreamed up by the optimists of Silicon Valley was never more than a brief interlude. The more nuanced answer is that the open internet never really existed.

That should not have come as a surprise. As Scott Malcomson writes in “Splinternet”, an illuminating survey of the past and future of the internet, it was developed “by the US military to serve US military purposes”. In fact, nearly every technology that makes smartphones so delightful started life as a tool of war. The Washington naval treaty, signed soon after the first world war to limit the size of warships, was silent on the matter of weaponry; that provided the impetus to develop machines capable of the complex mathematical calculations required to aim and fire guns accurately. The attack on Pearl Harbour spurred what would become the first computer with an operating system. The computer screen came from the need for radar-tracking screens.

So it is with the internet, argues Mr Malcomson. The Advanced Research Projects Agency, which created the internet’s forebear, ARPANET, was President Eisenhower’s response to the launch of Sputnik by the Soviet Union, he writes. The decentralised, packet-based system of communication that forms the basis of the internet originated in America’s need to withstand a massive attack on its soil. Even the much-ballyhooed Silicon Valley model of venture capital as a way to place bets on risky new businesses has military origins.

In the 1980s the American military began to lose interest in the internet. Priorities shifted further with the fall of the Soviet Union and end of the cold war. The time had come for the hackers and geeks who had been experimenting with early computers and phone lines.

Today they are the giants. Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon and Microsoft—together with some telecoms operators—help set policy in Europe and America on everything from privacy rights and copyright law to child protection and national security. As these companies grow more powerful, the state is pushing back.

There are two potential drawbacks to this reassertion of established power over the internet, both serious. The first is the threat from surveillance and its potential chilling effects on free speech. The disclosures made by Edward Snowden in 2013 about the mass collection of data by American and other intelligence agencies showed that the temptation to hoover up digital information can be hard to resist for even the most liberal countries. And the commercial data-gathering by big web companies means they often know us better than we know ourselves. When people know they are being watched, they are likely to self-censor and to change their behaviour in response.

The other big risk is that the tension between states and companies resolves into a symbiotic relationship. A leaked e-mail shows a Google executive communicating with Hillary Clinton’s state department about an online tool that would be “important in encouraging more [Syrians] to defect and giving confidence to the opposition.” If technology firms with global reach quietly promote the foreign-policy interests of one country, that can only increase suspicion and accelerate the fracturing of the web into regional internets.

This does not mean, however, that governments—at least democratic ones—should always keep their hands off the internet. Why should it be free of oversight when every other sphere of human activity is governed by laws and codes of conduct agreed upon by society at large? A well-regulated, well-governed internet is in the best interests of its users. And if that means losing some of the spirit of the early internet, that is a small price to pay, especially for the vast majority of the internet’s 3.3 billion-odd users who lack much technological expertise.

The internet of 1996 and the internet of 2016 have little in common. When Mr Barlow wrote his manifesto, some 50m people, or 0.86% of the world, used the internet. Today well over 40% of humanity is online. No system of this scale can be completely self-governing.

Mr Malcomson describes the internet as a “global private marketplace built on a government platform, not unlike the global airport system”. He does not push his metaphor far enough. Pining for the decadent, freewheeling internet of old is not dissimilar to romantic notions of the golden age of air travel, with its three-course meals and plenty of leg room. But that internet, like that era of air travel, was the domain of a small group of rich, highly educated, largely male users. Air travel today may be less luxurious but it is vastly more affordable and democratic. So too, for all its flaws, is the internet.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21695370-how-internet-lost-its-free-spirit-growing-up/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Existentialism

Smokey and the bandits

Fun and philosophy in Paris

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



At the Existentialist Café: Freedom, Being and Apricot Cocktails. By Sarah Bakewell. Other Press; 439 pages; $25. Chatto & Windus; £16.99.

EXISTENTIALISM is the only philosophy that anyone would even think of calling sexy. Black clothes, “free love”, late nights of smoky jazz—these were a few of intellectuals’ favourite things in Paris after the city’s liberation in 1944.

Simone de Beauvoir was “the prettiest Existentialist you ever saw”, according to the New Yorker in 1947. Her companion, Jean-Paul Sartre (pictured) was no looker, but he smoked a mean Gauloise. Life magazine billed their friend, Albert Camus, the “action-packed intellectual”.

Certainly there was action. One evening in Paris, a restaurant punch-up involving Sartre, Camus, de Beauvoir and Arthur Koestler spilled out on to the streets. In New York another novelist, Norman Mailer, drunkenly stabbed his wife at the launch of his abortive campaign to run for mayor on an “Existentialist Party” ticket in 1960. In addition to such excitements, existentialism offered a rationale for the feeling that life is absurd.

Countless adolescents, both young and old, have discovered the joys of angst through the writings of Sartre and his ilk. In her instructive and entertaining study of these thinkers and their hangers-on, Sarah Bakewell, a British biographer, tells how she was drawn as a teenager to Sartre’s “Nausea” because it was described on the cover as “a novel of the alienation of personality and the mystery of being”.

It was over apricot cocktails on the Rue Montparnasse that Sartre and de Beauvoir glimpsed a novel way to explore such mysteries. The year was 1932, and their friend Raymond Aron, a political scientist and philosopher, had just returned from Germany with news of the “phenomenology” of Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger. “If you are a phenomenologist,” Aron explained, “you can talk about this cocktail and make philosophy out of it!” The idea was to glean the essence of things by closely observing one’s own experience of them, preferably in mundane settings. Sartre and de Beauvoir set out to do just that.

Drawing on considerable personal knowledge, Sartre delved into “the meaning of the act of smoking”, among other things. Observing the behavioural tics of waiters, he noted that they sometimes seemed to be play-acting at being waiters. This led to labyrinthine reflections on the nature of freedom and authenticity. De Beauvoir’s efforts were more focused. By dissecting female experience of everyday life, she illustrated the ways in which gender is shaped by self-consciousness and social expectations. Ms Bakewell plausibly suggests that de Beauvoir’s pioneering feminist work, “The Second Sex”, was the most broadly influential product of European café philosophy of the period.

When Norman Mailer was asked what existentialism meant to him, he reportedly answered, “Oh, kinda playing things by ear.” Serious existentialists, such as Sartre, earned their label by focusing on a sense of “existence” that is supposedly distinctive of humans. People are uniquely aware of—and typically troubled by—their own state of being, or so the theory goes. Human existence is thus not at all like the existence of brute matter, or, for that matter, like the existence of brutes. People, but not animals, find themselves thrown into the world, as existentialists liked to say. They are forced to make sense of it for themselves and to forge their own identities.

The café philosophers came to regard each other’s existence as particularly troubling. Except for Sartre and de Beauvoir, who remained an intellectually devoted pair until his death in 1980, the main characters in post-war French philosophy drifted apart with varying degrees of drama. So did the German philosophers who inspired them.

Sartre’s embrace of Soviet communism, which he abandoned only to endorse Maoism instead, led Aron to condemn him as “merciless towards the failings of the democracies but ready to tolerate the worst crimes as long as they are committed in the name of the proper doctrines”. Ms Bakewell credits the existentialist movement, broadly defined, with providing inspiration to feminism, gay rights, anti-racism, anti-colonialism and other radical causes. A few cocktails can, it seems, lead to unexpected things.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21695369-fun-and-philosophy-paris-smokey-and-bandits/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

China

Chronicle of a death foretold

Why China must adapt or die

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



China’s Future. By David Shambaugh. Polity; 195 pages; $19.95 and £14.99.

EVERY few years a high-profile commentator gains fame and sometimes shame by predicting the imminent disintegration of the Chinese Communist Party. In 1989 many China-watchers disagreed only on whether it would take weeks or months for the Communist Party to crumble after it ordered government troops—the People’s Liberation Army—to crush the people’s liberation. In 2001 Gordon Chang wrote a book, “The Coming Collapse of China”, in which he predicted that a financial crisis would fell the regime within a decade.

A year ago, David Shambaugh, an American political scientist, fired his opening shot as the new doomsayer, with a provocative opinion piece in the Wall Street Journal: “The Coming Chinese Crackup”. In it he wrote that “the endgame of Chinese communist rule has now begun,” and forecast the regime’s “protracted, messy and violent” demise.

His new book, “China’s Future”, elaborates this view. Mr Shambaugh has long argued that China is less powerful than many people think and that this makes its future “one of the key global uncertainties over the coming decades”. The concern is partly about an economy that is so central to the global one. But China’s trajectory also raises a bigger question: no country has yet been able to modernise its economy without becoming a democracy. Can China break the model?

His bald conclusion is “no”. China today is more repressive than at any time since the early 1990s, says Mr Shambaugh, bringing the country close to falling apart. The political system is “badly broken” and the wealthy elite have lost confidence in it. Like Mr Chang, he highlights systemic economic traps from which it will struggle to escape. Writing here for the general reader, Mr Shambaugh uses years of earlier academic research to put this repression in context.

From the 1950s onwards China has been beset by political oscillations, with occasional periods of opening up followed by phases of tightened control. Mr Shambaugh also looks at the tensions between state and society in an authoritarian regime. He reminds readers that what made the mass pro-democracy protests in Tiananmen Square in 1989 so threatening to the Communist Party was that they had high-profile supporters within the elite, some of whom were making slighter, but potentially successful attempts to effect real political reform themselves.

Looking forward, the author declares that China now faces a choice: reform or die. Ultimately, he reckons, it will stick to its current course of “hard authoritarianism”, corroding the party’s ability to govern, constraining economic progress and stifling innovation. He does well to disentangle which aspects of China’s predicament are distinct. All societies face a “revolution of rising expectations” as they get richer, he notes, but for autocratic governments like China’s, these pose an existential threat.

In the end, Mr Shambaugh cannot decide whether the coming crackup will be led by the party or the people. Early in the book he notes that the major determinant of China’s future lies with its leadership and their choices. The party, in other words, commands its own destiny. But he also lists a catalogue of credible threats from within society, including tensions over pensions, health care and the environment: “At some point, some—or several—of the elements…will ‘snap’,” he reckons. Hong Kong, Tibet and the far western province of Xinjiang are all tinderboxes, with the fuses already burning.

This sweep is both the book’s strength and weakness: by Mr Shambaugh’s telling, China’s problems are so many, various and deep that it does indeed seem impossible that the Communist Party can survive. Yet it raises the opposite question too: what, then, has held such an improbable regime together for so long?



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21695373-why-china-must-adapt-or-die-chronicle-death-foretold/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

International Pop

Far and wide

A deeper and more international take on the Pop Art movement

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition

Set the tongues wagging

WHEN John Locke wrote in 1689, “In the beginning all the World was America,” the English philosopher meant an untamed wilderness populated by savages. After the second world war all the world seemed to have become America once more, only this time the savages were not survivors from an almost vanished past but the brash hucksters of an emerging present. The Soviet Union might have competed with America militarily and even ideologically, but when it came to the soft power projected through high art and low commerce, it was simply no contest.

Pop Art was the movement that captured the post-war reality of a globe awash in Americana hawked by Madison Avenue and Hollywood dream-merchants. But this did not mean all the art came stamped “Made in the USA”. As a thoughtful, ambitious exhibition at the Philadelphia Museum of Art demonstrates, much of the most interesting work was created far from American shores, by those on the receiving end of this apparently unstoppable gusher of products, posters and propaganda. “International Pop”, on view until May 15th, brings together works by artists from four continents to show how the same reality could appear drastically different depending on where you stood.

For the Americans themselves the outlook was rosy, if not entirely uncritical. Robert Indiana, creator of the iconic “Love” image (those four stacked letters, with the “O” gently rocking on its side), once proclaimed that Pop Art “is the American Dream, optimistic, generous and naive.” Those from countries defeated in war or exhausted by hard-won victory, living in permissive Western democracies or under Latin American military dictatorships, generally had a more jaundiced perspective on the new world order, one characterised as much by repulsion as attraction.

The first work in the show sets the tone: “20th/21st-Century Tribute” (pictured) by Antônio Henrique Amaral from Brazil. The painting, from 1967, depicts four mouths in mid-harangue superimposed over an American flag and atop what appears to be a pile of military badges. A none-too-subtle critique of military dictatorship, the work deploys the bright colours of advertising billboards to expose American complicity in authoritarian repression. Even more pointed is “The Western, Christian Civilisation”, a sculpture from 1965 by León Ferrari of Argentina, showing Jesus crucified on an American bomber.

For those suffering under brutal dictatorship, subtlety was a luxury they could ill afford. But artists in nations newly liberated from tyranny tended to be more ambivalent, acknowledging the allure of American culture even as they struggled to free themselves from its grip. Shinohara Ushio, a Japanese artist, responded to the flood tide of American products with more humour than outrage. “Drink More” (1964) is a crudely slapped together assemblage in which the title phrase is stencilled over a canvas of the stars and stripes; a plaster hand protrudes, grasping a bottle of Coke. One of a series of works made for an exhibition called “This is Pop!”, the badgering slogan of the first is countermanded by another that says: “No thanks!”

Sigmar Polke focuses as much on the medium as on the message. “Bunnies” (1966) reproduces a hugely enlarged photograph of Playboy hostesses in grainy dots that blur the image almost to the point of indecipherability. Mr Polke, a German artist, deploys many of the same strategies that have been used by American artists, such as Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein, to reveal how manufactured desire turns people into consumers. As the signal is overwhelmed by the noise, the systems by which this transformation is achieved become exposed at the very moment they begin to break down.

“International Pop” does not contradict the narrative that the second half of the 20th century belonged to America. But by telling a familiar story from multiple angles, by giving as much space to the dissenters as to the supporters, it enriches what has too often been presented in simplistic or triumphalist terms.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21695372-deeper-and-more-international-take-pop-art-movement-far-and-wide/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

Noam Chomsky

The theories of the world’s best-known linguist have become rather weird

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



FEW disciplines are so strongly associated with a single figure: Einstein in physics and Freud in psychology, perhaps. But Noam Chomsky is the man who revolutionised linguistics. Since he wrote “Syntactic Structures” in 1957, Mr Chomsky has argued that human language is fundamentally different from any other kind of communication, that a “linguist from Mars” would agree that all human languages are variations on a single language, and that children’s incredibly quick and successful learning (despite often messy and inattentive parental input) points to an innate language faculty in the brain. These ideas are now widely accepted.

Over the past 60 years, Mr Chomsky has repeatedly stripped down his theory. Some aspects of human language are shared with animals, and others are part of more general human thinking. He has focused ever more narrowly on the features of language that he reckons are unique to humans. All this has led to a remarkable little book, published late last year with Robert Berwick, a computer scientist. “Why Only Us” purports to explain the evolution of human language.

Other biologists, linguists and psychologists have probed the same question and have reached little consensus. But there is even less consensus around the world’s most eminent linguist’s idea: that a single genetic mutation created an ability called “Merge”, in a single human whom Mr Chomsky has called “Prometheus”, some time before the human exodus from Africa. That mutation was so advantageous that it survived and thrived, producing today’s 7,000 languages from Albanian to Zulu. But the vast differences among the world’s languages, Mr Chomsky argues, are mere differences in “externalisation”. The key is Merge.

But what is it? Merge simply says that two mental objects can be merged into a bigger one, and mental operations can be performed on that as if it were a single one. The can be merged with cat to give a noun phrase, which other grammar rules can operate on as if it were a bare noun like water. So can the and hat. Once there, you can further merge, making the cat in the hat. The cat in the hat can be merged with a verb phrase to create a new object, a sentence: The cat in the hat came back. And that sentence can be merged into bigger sentences: You think the cat in the hat came back. And so on.

Why would this be of any use? No one else had Merge. Whom did Prometheus talk to? Nobody, at least not using Merge. (Humans may already have been using cries and gestures, as many animals do.) But Merge-enabled, hierarchically structured language, according to Mr Chomsky, did not evolve for talking at all. Rather, it let Prometheus take simple concepts and combine them in sentence-like ways in his own head. The resulting complex thoughts gave him a survival advantage. If he then passed the mutant Merge gene on to several surviving children, who thrived and passed on the Merge gene to their children, Messrs Chomsky and Berwick believe that they must have then come to dominate the population of humans in Africa. Only later, as Merge came to work with the vocal and hearing organs, did human language emerge.

Many scholars find this to be somewhere between insufficient, improbable and preposterous. The emergence of a single mutation that gives such a big advantage is derided by biologists as a “hopeful monster” theory; most evolution is gradual, operating on many genes, not one. Some ability like Merge may exist, but this does not explain why some words may merge and others don’t, much less why the world’s languages merge so differently. (Not a single non-English example appears in “Why Only Us”, nor a single foreign language in its index.)

Mr Chomsky says those who disagree with his ever-more contentious ideas are either blind or hucksters. Critics refer to a “cult” of “acolytes” around a “Great Leader”, unwilling to challenge him or engage seriously with the work of non-Chomskyan scholars. (One critic has said “to be savaged by Chomsky is a badge of honour.”) Linguistics is now divided into a Chomskyan camp, a large number of critics and many more still for whom the founder of the modern discipline is simply irrelevant. He is unlikely to end up like Freud, a marginal figure in modern psychology whose lasting influence has been on the humanities. Mr Chomsky’s career is more likely to end up like Einstein’s—at least in the sense that his best and most influential work came early on.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21695371-theories-worlds-best-known-linguist-have-become-rather-weird-noam-chomsky/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Hilary Putnam: The meaning of meaning





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Hilary Putnam

The meaning of meaning

Hilary Putnam, a philosopher, died on March 13th, aged 89

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition



TO BE identified with a distinctive position is an academic career’s crowning achievement. Hilary Putnam did better than that: his intellectual odyssey meant that on some of the most important controversies in modern philosophy he had defined and defended positions on both sides of the argument.

His Socratic self-questioning was notable, but his hallmark was thought experiments. He posited iron-willed, poker-faced Spartans to show that pain was not just about expression. To prove that meaning in language was not solely about what is intended, he proposed identical twins living on identical planets, which differed only in that water on one of them was not H2O but another substance with similar properties. Each twin would refer to “water”, intending the same meaning—but they would be referring to different things.

By modern, hyper-specialised academic standards Mr Putnam ranged widely. His work included logic, ethics, metaphysics, political thought, mathematics, and the philosophy of science, of mind, of economics, of literature, of language and of religion. His early stance was that if humans can be said to have mental states, then it is impossible to say that machines do not. This was the basis of what became known as functionalism—the idea that what matters about mental states is what they do, not what they are made of.

Over time he became less keen on thinking of the mind only in terms of what happens inside the brain. Instead he adopted externalism: “meanings just ain’t in the head”. Refining Wittgenstein, he posited a linguistic division of labour, analogous to Adam Smith’s thinking in economics. The people best able to determine a word’s meaning do so on the basis of expertise. Others then rely on their usage. As a Harvard philosopher, he might have no idea how to tell an elm from a beech, but he could confidently use the words with the assurance that botanists knew exactly what they meant.

A related example of the tension between knowledge and reality came with another thought experiment: a sceptic might wonder whether she were no more than a brain in a vat, artificially nourished, and stimulated with a bogus but utterly convincing version of the real world. How could one prove that this is not so? The answer is that our brains are more than just perception machines, and meaning depends on what other people think too. So a brain in a vat might exist, but it could not meaningfully say that it was merely a brain in a vat. Philosophers would call that epistemological externalism: factors outside the mind are crucial to what it can be said to “know” and “think”.

Many saw parallels between that controversy and “The Matrix”, a successful Hollywood film which bridged science fiction and philosophy. It portrayed a dystopia in which machines have subdued humans by trapping them in a simulated reality while their bodies languish in vats.

Mr Putnam was surprised and flattered by the film-makers’ interest. He was not a populariser, liking the quip: “any philosophy that can be put in a nutshell belongs in one.” But he wanted philosophy to relate to the real world. It should fit the complexity of human existence and civilisation, and not the other way round.

Reloaded

That was a reaction to the arid logical positivism he was taught as a student—the idea, once dominant in the English-speaking academic world, that philosophy is really a branch of science and that the only knowledge that matters is what can be empirically verified. One of his famous courses at Harvard was a direct challenge to the logical positivist approach: it featured “non-scientific knowledge”, exploring the philosophy of aesthetics and ethics.

In his case involvement in the real world mostly took the form of left-wing politics, where his views were almost as versatile as his philosophy. Born to communist parents (his father was a columnist for the Daily Worker), he lived in a commune, campaigning against the Vietnam war and joining the Progressive Labour Party, an exotic outfit for those who found the Communist Party too staid. He would stand outside factory gates in the early morning, trying to sell magazines and to discuss politics with the workers. He baffled his students by sitting among them during lectures, though later he took to the podium to brandish Mao’s “Little Red Book”. Harvard tolerated him more than he tolerated disagreement: he disrupted a colleague’s lectures because researching inherited intelligence was racist.

He later recanted his communism, and also his fervent secularism (he once dismissed an Oxford philosopher’s argument that no machine could be an adequate representation of the mind with the scornful put-down: “If I believed that, I would have to be not only a Theist but an Episcopalian”). Yet the final great enthusiasm of his life was Judaism. He and his wife Ruth Anna were determined to recover the identity that his parents’ generation had rejected, and they created a Jewish household for their children. Mr Putnam himself had his own bar mitzvah in 1994, aged 68. He learned Hebrew, and wrote a book on Jewish philosophy as a guide to life: seeking proof, he argued, missed the point of religion. It was what it did that mattered.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21695366-hilary-putnam-philosopher-died-march-13th-aged-89-meaning-meaning/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Poland marks 20 years of OECD membership

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21695397/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21695398-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21695399-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21695401-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Poland marks 20 years of OECD membership

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21695403-poland-marks-20-years-oecd-membership/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Mar 26th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21695382-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Fri, 25 Mar 2016]

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



Business in America: The problem with profits





Bombings in Brussels: The new normal





Brazil’s political crisis: Time to go





Reform in rural China: Sell up, move on





Welfare cuts: Two-nation Britain





Technology and politics: Bits and ballots





Letters



On American politics, African trade, companies, migrants, glyphosate, Malaysia, the semicolon: Letters to the editor





Briefing



Business in America: Too much of a good thing





United States



Trump and the world: Don’t deal with it





The primaries: Heard on the trail





College endowments: Yard sale





Deporting child migrants: Self-defence





Primaries in the West: Mormons against the Donald





Florida’s Haitian-Americans: The Creole caucuses





Lexington: The meaning of blue jeans





The Americas



Brazil’s political crisis: Tick tock





Canada’s budget: Globalisation with a human face





The United States and Cuba: An American invasion





Bello: The drama of Lula





Asia



New political drama in Australia: Turnbull’s big gamble





Money laundering in the Philippines: Walls of silence





Relations between China and Taiwan: The Gambia gambit





South Korea and wartime sex slaves: Kindred spirits





The South China Sea: China v the rest





China



Urbanisation: Reform’s big taboo





Middle East and Africa



Oil and the Gulf states: After the party





Yemen: Fighting to a standstill





The Kurds: Containing multitudes





Apostasy and Islam: Not advised





Unrest in Ethiopia: Grumbling and rumbling





Press freedom in east Africa: Pencil blunted





Europe



Brussels bombings: Not again





Terrorism and France: The end of insouciance





Turkey and the EU: Refugees and terror





Spain without government: Stuck in the centre





What Europeans think of each other: Green-eyed continent





Charlemagne: A terrible problem is born





Britain



Fiscal policy: In it together?





Brexit brief: Unfavourable trade winds





Religion: Northward Christian soldiers





Ministry of Silly Names: Name that boat





Education reform: Starbucksification of schools





The Baltic Exchange: Nordic noir





Devolution: City united





Bagehot: E pluribus unum





International



Vaccination: A jab in time





HPV vaccines: The cost of embarrassment





Special report: Technology and politics



Technology and politics: The signal and the noise





Election campaigns: Politics by numbers





Tracking protest movements: A new kind of weather





Online collaboration: Connective action





Local government: How cities score





Living with technology: The data republic





Business



Digital advertising: Invisible ads, phantom readers





Mobile advertising: Shine, but not rise





Electronics: Taiwan 2.0





Pulp producers in Brazil: Money that grows on trees





Power stations in Indonesia: Shock therapy





Television: Changing the channel





Schumpeter: The man who put Intel inside





Finance and economics



Buttonwood: Tough choices





Investing in South Korea: Losing faith





Gold in India: A tarnished appeal





Kenyan coffee: A bitter harvest





Chinese economic data: Fudge-ocracy





Asset managers: The tide turns





Peer-to-peer lending: A ripple of fear





Free exchange: No exit





Science and technology



Clinical trials: For my next trick...





Urban planning: Listen up





The sociology of science: In death, there is life





Ecology: Pictures of guilly





Software engineering: Of more than academic interest





Dermatology: Rainbow’s beginning





Books and arts



Evolution of the internet: Growing up





Existentialism: Smokey and the bandits





China: Chronicle of a death foretold





International Pop: Far and wide





Johnson: Noam Chomsky





Obituary



Obituary: Hilary Putnam: The meaning of meaning





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Poland marks 20 years of OECD membership





Markets





