The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Special report: Finance in China

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



Donald Trump all but secured the Republican nomination for America’s presidential election after a thumping victory in the Indiana primary. Ted Cruz, his closest rival, quit the race after the result came in, as did John Kasich, the only other Republican left standing in a field that started with 17 candidates. After a wobble in April’s Wisconsin primary, Mr Trump has taken impressively large shares of the vote in the past seven contests and is now on course to get the majority of delegates he needs to avoid a contested Republican National Convention in July. See article.

For Democrats Indiana was anything but decisive. Hillary Clinton, the front-runner, felt the “Bern” again when Bernie Sanders, her rival, nipped her to a surprise victory in the state. Although he still trails heavily in the delegate count, the septuagenarian Mr Sanders is likely to fight to the finish. The turn towards a Clinton v Trump race will have to wait a little longer yet.

Calling time

Venezuela’s opposition submitted 1.85m signatures to the country’s electoral commission to initiate a referendum to recall the populist president, Nicolás Maduro. That is more than nine times the minimum needed to begin the next stage of the process, the collection of a further 4m signatures. To save power, which is in short supply, the government moved the clocks forward a half-hour. This ended the Venezuela-only time zone introduced by Mr Maduro’s predecessor, Hugo Chávez. See article.

A judge in Brazil ordered mobile-phone operators to shut down WhatsApp, a messaging service with more than 100m users in the country, for 72 hours. The judge decided that WhatsApp had withheld information from police conducting a drug-trafficking investigation. The company says it does not have the information. An appeals-court judge ordered the service to be restored. See article.

Mexico’s Senate failed to approve the “3-out-of-3 law”, which would require officials to publish declarations of assets, taxes paid and possible conflicts of interest, because of opposition from the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party. The Senate also blocked a law to grant independence to a new anti-corruption prosecutor. Unless Congress calls an extraordinary session and passes the measures by May 28th, a proposed National Anti-corruption System is unlikely to be implemented.

Thinking inside the zone



Hundreds of protesters stormed the barriers around the “Green Zone” in Baghdad, the capital of Iraq, and entered parliament calling on MPs to approve a government of technocrats. Many Iraqis view the current government, in which ministries are shared out between big ethnic and religious voting blocks, as corrupt and ineffective. See article.

An Israeli man was sentenced to life in prison for the abduction and murder of a Palestinian teenager during an upsurge of violence in 2014. The incident occurred shortly after three Israeli teenagers were murdered on the West Bank in an attack attributed to members of Hamas.

The International Monetary Fund cut its forecast for economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa this year to 3%, which would be the slowest rate since 1999. The fund had previously expected growth of 4.3%

In Kenya the government set fire to 105 tonnes of ivory, around 5% of the world’s total, as part of a campaign to stigmatise the trade and protect elephants from poachers.

Polling stations

With his treasurer unveiling a budget that, among other things, promised to penalise multinational companies that moved profits offshore to avoid tax, Malcolm Turnbull, the prime minister of Australia, paved the way for an early general election on July 2nd. He will struggle to keep the hefty majority for his Liberal-National coalition that he inherited from his predecessor as prime minister, Tony Abbott, whom he defenestrated from office last September. See article.

Vijay Mallya, the founder of Kingfisher airlines and one of India’s most prominent businessmen, stood down from the seat he holds in Parliament amid questions about outstanding debts. Mr Mallya left India in March, before a court issued a warrant for his arrest. Known as “the king of good times”, his lavish lifestyle had become a symbol of the rise of India’s go-getter capitalist class.

Gucci, a European luxury- goods maker, warned shops in Hong Kong not to sell paper replicas of its handbags, shoes and jewellery that are burned as offerings to deceased relatives, so that they may be surrounded by comforts in the next world. It is not known what the recipients think.

Out-of-office message

Turkey’s prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, is being forced out over tensions with the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. The pair have been at odds over peace talks with Kurdish rebels and constitutional changes to boost the presidency, among other things. See article.

The European Commission recommended that Turkish citizens be allowed to travel in EU countries visa-free. The move would fulfil a key condition of the deal reached in March between Brussels and Ankara to stem the flow of Middle Eastern migrants across the Aegean Sea, but some European governments oppose the shift. The commission also proposed measures to punish EU member states that do not accept their quota of asylum-seekers. See article.

Spain announced that it will hold another general election on June 26th, after months of talks between the parties failed to produce a government. At the election last December, Spaniards split their votes between two establishment parties and two upstarts, and neither the governing centre-right People’s Party nor the opposition Socialists could forge a coalition. Opinion polls indicate that new elections may return similar results.



Leicester City, an English football club, pulled off one of the all-time sporting upsets by winning the Premier League title just a year after narrowly avoiding relegation to a lesser division. Starting odds of 5,000 to 1 meant several lucky gamblers collected tens of thousands of pounds from betting on the team’s fairy-tale success. Some punters who cashed out early for a guaranteed lower return are now ruing that decision as an own goal. See article.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21698299-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

Europe’s big banks followed the trend of their American counterparts with generally dismal first-quarter earnings. The share prices of UBS and Commerzbank fell sharply after each said net profit had fallen much more than had been expected compared with the same three months last year, to SFr707m ($712m) at UBS of Switzerland and €163m ($180m) at Commerzbank of Germany. HSBC’s pre-tax income dropped by 14% to $6.1 billion, but the bank pointed out it was on track in restructuring its business to focus more on Asia.

A share issue by Banca Popolare di Vicenza flopped. Italy’s tenth-largest bank had tried to raise capital to satisfy European regulators through a share sale, but few investors were interested, leaving a bank-rescue fund created by other Italian financial firms to underwrite the whole issue. See article.

The European Central Bank decided to phase out the €500 banknote ($570) by late 2018 because of the proclivity of criminals and terror groups to use them. The last time €500 bills were printed was 2014, but they are popular among law-abiding folk in Germany and some other European countries.

Transatlantic drift

Intercontinental Exchange, which runs the New York Stock Exchange, decided not to bid for the London Stock Exchange, which has already agreed to a merger with Deutsche Börse. In March ICE announced that it was considering whether to make a rival offer; it says the London exchange displayed a “disappointing level of engagement”.

In a surprise decision Australia’s central bank reduced its benchmark interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point, to 1.75%. It was the first cut in a year and came after one measure of Australia’s inflation rate dipped to 1.5%. See article.

Halliburton and Baker Hughes called off their $28 billion merger, which would have rivalled Schlumberger in size in the oilfield-services industry. The deal had run into opposition from antitrust officials, notably in America where the Justice Department recently signalled its intent to block the merger. See article.

The torrent of mergers in the health-care industry kept flowing. IMS Health and Quintiles agreed to combine in a $9 billion transaction that will integrate the wide range of data services they provide to drug companies, from tracking medical claims to advice on clinical trials. Another big deal was Abbott Laboratories’ $25 billion takeover of St Jude Medical, which brings together two of America’s biggest makers of medical devices for hearts.

A civil lawsuit in Brazil was filed against Vale and BHP Billiton seeking $44 billion in damages for the collapse of a dam last November that was run jointly by the two mining companies. The disaster killed 19 people and polluted hundreds of miles of rivers. Said to be Brazil’s worst environmental disaster, lawyers say the claim for damages has been calculated by comparing the costs from BP’s oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010.



Despite a brewing political crisis Brazilians have not been crying into their beer as much as AB InBev would like. The beermaker, which counts Budweiser among its labels, posted a steep fall in profit for the first quarter, to $844m, partly because sales in Brazil drooped.

Comcast announced that it would buy DreamWorks Animation, which includes the “Shrek” films in its stable of hits, for $3.8 billion.

Little problems in big China

The world’s most valuable company, Apple, lost an unusual trademark case in China when a court in Beijing found in favour of Xintong Tiandi, a seller of leather goods with the name “iPhone” emblazoned on them. The court ruled that Apple had failed to prove that the iPhone was well-known in China before Xintong Tiandi filed its trademark application in 2007.

Craig Steven Wright, an Australian computer scientist, claimed that he was “Satoshi Nakamoto”, the reclusive creator of bitcoin. Mr Wright released what he claimed was cryptographic proof that he is Mr Nakamoto, five months after he was outed in an investigation by two tech publications. But his initial proof was swiftly debunked and doubts remain if he is the right man. See article.

Being and nothingness

In France an executive sued his former employer for making his job too boring. The man claims he suffered from “bore out” when his superiors downsized his role as general-service director and asked him to perform non-work-related tasks, such as picking up their children from lessons. The existential strain of doing nothing led to months of sick leave, after which the man was let go. He wants €360,000 ($415,000) in damages.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21698297-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21698300-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




American politics: Trump’s triumph

China’s financial system: The coming debt bust

Child refugees: Under-age and at risk

Crony capitalism: Dealing with murky moguls

Fairy tales: Underdogs are overrated





Articles Sections Next

American politics

Trump’s triumph

Donald Trump’s victory is a disaster for Republicans and for America

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



DURING its 160-year history, the Republican Party has abolished slavery, provided the votes in Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act and helped bring the cold war to a close. The next six months will not be so glorious. After Indiana’s primary, it is now clear that Republicans will be led into the presidential election by a candidate who said he would kill the families of terrorists, has encouraged violence by his supporters, has a weakness for wild conspiracy theories and subscribes to a set of protectionist and economically illiterate policies that are by turns fantastical and self-harming.

The result could be disastrous for the Republican Party and, more important, for America. Even if this is as far as he goes, Mr Trump has already done real damage and will do more in the coming months. Worse, in a two-horse race his chances of winning the presidency are well above zero.

It is possible that, with the nomination secured, Mr Trump will now change his tone. The crassness of his insults may well be muted as he tries to win over at least some of the voters, particularly women, who now abhor him. His demeanour may become more presidential (though there was little sign of that in this week’s bizarre and baseless pronouncements that the father of Ted Cruz, his erstwhile rival, had been around Lee Harvey Oswald before he shot John F. Kennedy). What he will almost certainly not do is change political course. For it is increasingly clear that Mr Trump has elements of a world view from which he does not waver (see article). These beliefs lack coherence or much attachment to reality. They are woven together by a peculiarly 21st-century mastery of political communication, with a delight in conflict and disregard for facts, which his career in reality television has honed. But they are firm beliefs and long-held.

Beyond the braggadocio

That world view was born, in part, on his father’s construction sites in New York in the 1960s. Mr Trump likes to explain that he once spent his summers working in such places alongside carpenters, plumbers and men carrying heavy scaffolding poles. That experience, he claims, gave him an understanding of the concerns of the hard-working blue-collar men whom American politics has left behind. It explains his deep-rooted economic nationalism.

Mr Trump has railed against trade deals for decades. He was arguing against NAFTA in the early 1990s. He now calls it the worst trade deal in the history of the world. Similarly, he has always viewed America’s trade deficit as evidence of foul play or poor negotiating skills. For a man with such convictions, it is plain that more such trade deals would be a disaster and that American companies should move production back home or face tariffs. Mr Trump might be willing to bargain over the penalties they should pay, but the underlying instincts are deeply held. He is a conviction protectionist, not an opportunistic one. And, judging by the results of the Republican primaries, at least 10m voters agree with him.

On foreign policy Mr Trump mixes a frustration at the costs of America’s global role, something that has become common after the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, with a desire to make the country feared and respected. Those outside America who dwell on his geographical and diplomatic ignorance (of which there is plenty) risk missing the simple principle that animates him. Mr Trump wants to make those outside America pay the full cost of the hegemonic protection it gives them. Allies should have to stump up more for American bases on their soil, and for the costs of equipping and paying the soldiers in them. It is not correct to call this isolationism, since Mr Trump has also proposed some foreign adventures, including the occupation of Iraq and seizure of its oilfields. Rather it is a Roman vision of foreign policy, in which the rest of the world’s role is to send tribute to the capital and be grateful for the garrisons.

Counting the damage

For those, such as this newspaper, who believe in the gains from globalisation and the American-led liberal order, this is a truly terrifying world-view. Fortunately, Mr Trump will probably lose the general election. A candidate whom two-thirds of Americans view unfavourably will find it hard to win 65m votes, which is about what the winning candidate will need. The share of women who disapprove of him is even higher.



America's primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

But that should be scant comfort, for even without a victory in November Mr Trump’s coronation as candidate will cause damage. There may be violence at the Republican convention in Cleveland, where Trump supporters and protesters are likely to clash. Voters will spend the next six months hearing over and over again that Hillary Clinton, his Democratic opponent, is a crook and a liar. Much of that will stick even if she wins, leaving those who believe it enraged and Mrs Clinton weakened. America’s allies will watch the polls fearfully: whether at the UN Security Council or at bilateral talks in Beijing, Mr Trump’s spectre will loom over every meeting between America and a foreign power between now and November 8th.

The Republican Party, always fractious, may actually fracture. Even if he loses, Mr Trump will have shown that there is a path to the nomination that runs via nativism and economic populism. Mountaineers know that the surest route to the summit is the one that has worked before. Some Republicans will say that Mr Trump’s message, shorn of its roughest edges, could deliver victory next time. Others will argue that he lost because he was not a true conservative. Without agreement on what went wrong, it will be hard to forge something new.

And then, of course, there is the possibility that he might just win. Mrs Clinton is not loathed by as many Americans as Mr Trump is, but the share who view her unfavourably is far higher than is usual for presidential nominees. Just as the killings in Paris in December energised Mr Trump’s campaign, a terrorist attack or other event that terrified Americans could tip the vote his way. The balance of probability is against, but none of this is impossible. That is why Mr Trump’s triumph has the makings of a tragedy for Republicans, for America and for the rest of the world.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698251-donald-trumps-victory-disaster-republicans-and-america-trumps-triumph/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

China’s financial system

The coming debt bust

It is a question of when, not if, real trouble will hit in China

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



CHINA was right to turn on the credit taps to prop up growth after the global financial crisis. It was wrong not to turn them off again. The country’s debt has increased just as quickly over the past two years as in the two years after the 2008 crunch. Its debt-to-GDP ratio has soared from 150% to nearly 260% over a decade, the kind of surge that is usually followed by a financial bust or an abrupt slowdown.

China will not be an exception to that rule. Problem loans have doubled in two years and, officially, are already 5.5% of banks’ total lending. The reality is grimmer. Roughly two-fifths of new debt is swallowed by interest on existing loans; in 2014, 16% of the 1,000 biggest Chinese firms owed more in interest than they earned before tax. China requires more and more credit to generate less and less growth: it now takes nearly four yuan of new borrowing to generate one yuan of additional GDP, up from just over one yuan of credit before the financial crisis. With the government’s connivance, debt levels can probably keep climbing for a while, perhaps even for a few more years. But not for ever.

When the debt cycle turns, both asset prices and the real economy will be in for a shock. That won’t be fun for anyone. It is true that China has been fastidious in capping its external liabilities (it is a net creditor). Its dangers are home-made. But the damage from a big Chinese credit blow-up would still be immense. China is the world’s second-biggest economy; its banking sector is the biggest, with assets equivalent to 40% of global GDP. Its stockmarkets, even after last year’s crash, are together worth $6 trillion, second only to America’s. And its bond market, at $7.5 trillion, is the world’s third-biggest and growing fast. A mere 2% devaluation of the yuan last summer sent global stockmarkets crashing; a bigger bust would do far worse. A mild economic slowdown caused trouble for commodity exporters around the world; a hard landing would be painful for all those who benefit from Chinese demand.

Brace, brace

Optimists have drawn comfort from two ideas. First, over three-plus decades of reform, China’s officials have consistently shown that once they identified problems, they had the will and skill to fix them. Second, control of the financial system—the state owns the major banks and most of their biggest debtors—gave them time to clean things up.

Both these sources of comfort are fading away. This is a government not so much guiding events as struggling to keep up with them. In the past year alone, China has spent nearly $200 billion to prop up the stockmarket; $65 billion of bank loans have gone bad; financial frauds have cost investors at least $20 billion; and $600 billion of capital has left the country. To help pump up growth, officials have inflated a property bubble. Debt is still expanding twice as fast as the economy.

At the same time, as our special report this week shows, the government’s grip on finance is slipping. Despite repeated efforts to restrain them, loosely regulated forms of lending are growing quickly: such “shadow assets” have increased by more than 30% annually over the past three years. In theory, shadow banks diversify sources of credit and spread risk away from the regular banks. In practice, the lines between the shadow and formal banking systems are badly blurred.

That creates two risks. The first is higher-than-expected losses for the banks. Hungry for profits in a slowing economy, plenty of Chinese banks have mis-categorised risky loans as investments to dodge scrutiny and lessen capital requirements. These shadow loans were worth roughly 16% of standard loans in mid-2015, up from just 4% in 2012. The second risk is liquidity. The banks have become ever more reliant on “wealth management products”, whereby they pay higher rates for what are, in effect, short-term deposits and put them into longer-term assets. For years China restricted bank loans to less than 75% of their deposit base, ensuring that they had plenty of cash in reserve. Now the real level is nearing 100%, a threshold where a sudden shortage in funding—the classic precursor to banking crises—is well within the realm of possibility. Midsized banks have been the most active in expanding; they are the place to look for sudden trouble.

Pandamonium

The end to China’s debt build-up would not look exactly like past financial blow-ups. China’s shadow-banking system is big, but it has not spawned any products nearly as complex or international in reach as America’s bundles of subprime mortgages in 2008. Its relatively insulated financial system means that parallels with the 1997-98 Asian crisis, in which countries from Thailand to South Korea borrowed too much from abroad, are thin. Some worry that China will look like Japan in the 1990s, slowly grinding towards stagnation. But its financial system is more chaotic, with more pressure for capital outflows, than was Japan’s; a Chinese crisis is likely to be sharper and more sudden than Japan’s chronic malaise.

One thing is certain. The longer China delays a reckoning with its problems, the more severe the eventual consequences will be. For a start, it should plan for turmoil. Policy co-ordination was appalling during last year’s stockmarket crash; regulators must work out in advance who monitors what and prepare emergency responses. Rather than deploying both fiscal and monetary stimulus to keep growth above the official target of at least 6.5% this year (which is, in any event, unnecessarily fast), the government should save its firepower for a real calamity. The central bank should also put on ice its plans to internationalise the yuan; a premature opening of the capital account would lead only to big outflows and bigger trouble, when the financial system is already on shaky ground.

Most important, China must start to curb the relentless rise of debt. The assumption that the government of Xi Jinping will keep bailing out its banks, borrowers and depositors is pervasive—and not just in China itself. It must tolerate more defaults, close failed companies and let growth sag. This will be tough, but it is too late for China to avoid pain. The task now is to avert something far worse.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698240-it-question-when-not-if-real-trouble-will-hit-china-coming-debt-bust/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Child refugees

Under-age and at risk

Unaccompanied children are the neediest kind of refugee

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



IN 1939, at great personal risk, an English stockbroker rescued 669 Jewish children from Nazi-occupied Czechoslovakia. Nicholas Winton travelled to Prague, helped the children onto trains and battled with his own country’s bureaucrats to have them admitted to Britain. Among those he saved from the gas chambers was Alf Dubs, now a Labour peer, who is pressing Britain’s government to grant asylum to refugee children in Europe without their parents.

He has met stout resistance. On April 25th the House of Commons, including nearly all MPs from the ruling Conservative Party, voted against Lord Dubs’s proposal to admit 3,000 of these children. After an outcry from various charities, on May 4th the prime minister, David Cameron, relented somewhat. Reversing his previous stance that Britain would take refugees directly only from the region around Syria, he said that the country would take an unspecified number of unaccompanied children from European camps.

That is a start. But neither Britain nor the rest of Europe has done nearly enough to provide proper homes for the 90,000 unaccompanied refugees under the age of 18 who made their way to the European Union last year. They do not face the same peril that Lord Dubs once did, but their plight is dire. Many are in squalid camps in Italy and Greece. Hundreds are in the lawless “jungle” of Calais. By one estimate 10,000 have gone missing in the past two years. Many end up sleeping rough, or turning to prostitution or theft to get by. Others are underfed or unwell, and desperate to be in school. These are not adults who can look after themselves. They need help.



INTERACTIVE: Where in Germany offers the best opportunities for refugees?

Sweden and Germany have taken the largest number, though both countries are getting stricter. France and Spain have taken hardly any. Opponents of granting asylum to these children make three main arguments. First, it is hard to tell if they are all really minors. Second, letting them stay would spur more children to undertake the hazardous voyage across the Mediterranean. Third, granting them legal papers would allow their parents to come and join them.

Did some refugees lie about their age? Of course, and it is indeed hard to check—few packed their birth certificates when fleeing the barrel-bombs. But most are plainly children.

Would granting asylum to children already in Europe prompt more to board leaky boats? Perhaps, but probably not many. Since the European Union struck a deal with Turkey on March 18th, it has become far harder for refugees to cross the sea to Greece. Future asylum-seekers are likely to be screened while still in Turkey or Jordan, thus avoiding a potentially lethal voyage and the vast fares charged by people-traffickers.

Will Syrian parents seek to rejoin their children? One certainly hopes so. In many cases, however, the parents are dead. In the meantime, this is a humanitarian crisis, so politicians should err on the side of generosity. Supporting a few thousand more foster parents would not cost much.

The least we can do

Granting asylum to the 90,000 unaccompanied children should not be a substitute for letting in more adult refugees. Nor should Europe stint in offering aid to help refugees in Turkey and Jordan find jobs (see article). The refugee crisis must be tackled on several fronts, over several years. In the short term, however, the least Europeans can do is to keep the lost children of Syria safe.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698254-unaccompanied-children-are-neediest-kind-refugee-under-age-and-risk/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Crony capitalism

Dealing with murky moguls

How to disentangle business from government

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THE past 20 years have been a golden age for crony capitalists—tycoons active in industries where chumminess with government is part of the game. As commodity and property prices soared, so did the value of permits to dig mines in China or build offices in São Paulo. Telecoms spectrum doled out by Indian officials created instant billionaires. Implicit state guarantees let casino banking thrive on Wall Street and beyond. Many people worried about a new “robber baron” era, akin to America’s in the late 19th century. They had a point. Worldwide, the worth of tycoons in crony industries soared by 385% in 2004-14, to $2 trillion, or a third of total billionaire wealth; much of it (though by no means all) in the emerging world.

Now cronies are on the back foot. Their combined fortunes have dropped by 16% since 2014, according to our updated crony-capitalism index (see article). One reason is the commodity crash. Another is a backlash from the middle class. Corruption scandals have lit a fire under governments in Brazil and Malaysia. Elsewhere, pressure is coming from the top down. India’s reforming prime minister, Narendra Modi, is trying to subject his partly closed economy to a blast of competition. Xi Jinping, China’s autocrat, thinks graft is the big threat to one-party rule, and is trying to root it out.

Crony capitalism—or “rent-seeking”, as economists call it—shades from string-pulling to bribery. Much of it is legal, but all of it is unfair. It undermines trust in the state, misallocates resources and stops countries and true entrepreneurs from getting rich. So the dip in crony activity is welcome. To stop it roaring back, governments need to seize the moment.

A few will not want to. Cronyism is central to Vladimir Putin’s vision of Russia, the country that scores worst in our ranking. Others, though goaded by public anger at inequality and corruption, will find it hard to confront vested interests. On April 29th Mexico’s Senate failed to pass two anti-corruption measures (see article). Often the biggest difficulty is knowing where to start. It is all very well to demand efficient courts, fair regulators and an end to illicit political funding. These matter, but are the work of generations.

The quickest fixes

So governments should focus on four quicker steps. The first is to take care when public resources pass into private hands. Botched privatisations created Russia’s oligarchy—and many cronies elsewhere. Mexico is opening up its oil monopoly; Saudi Arabia plans to; and other developing countries, from Brazil to India to China, may privatise state-controlled firms to raise cash and improve efficiency. Unless the sales are fair, a new generation of cronies will be born.

Second, governments must rein in state-owned banks. In the past decade state-lending booms in Brazil, India and China have enriched well-connected moguls—and built mountains of bad debt. Rather than prop up the banks, governments should overhaul the way they are run.

The third step is to make it harder to stash crony cash overseas. Global capital flows have made the world richer, but also allowed cronies to hide in tax havens. Public registers of “beneficial ownership”—the humans behind the trusts and shell companies—would make that harder. This is on the agenda of an anti-corruption summit in London next week (see article).

Finally, be prepared for cronyism to adapt. China’s epic industrial boom will not be repeated; the days of making billions by shipping iron ore from Goa to Guangdong are over. Technology may be cronyism’s next frontier. It is ripe for rent-seeking: profits are huge and monopolies arise naturally. Governments should not seek to micromanage tech firms, but ought to push vigorously for competition and transparency.

America’s original robber barons provoked a reaction that led to the Progressive era. At the turn of the 20th century, politicians passed antitrust laws and corruption ebbed. America became richer, stronger and more politically stable. Emerging economies face a similar moment. They should not waste it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698261-how-disentangle-business-government-dealing-murky-moguls/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Fairy tales

Underdogs are overrated

Leicester City’s success should be celebrated, but not sentimentalised

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THE British like being on the side of the underdog. This affinity has more than a whiff of historical hypocrisy; the British empire, a distinctly top-doggy affair, was hardly noted for its enthusiastic encouragement of the downtrodden. Still, it is a genuine part of the national character. So when, on the evening of May 2nd, Leicester City were anointed champions of the English Premier League, a football competition, the country was united in delight. Bookmakers, to their subsequent regret, had set the odds of such a victory at 5,000 to 1. Leicester’s triumph was heralded as the greatest underdog story in sporting history, and Britain rejoiced in it.

The world is short enough of occasions for joy that to disparage such a blameless one may seem harsh. No one would begrudge the long-suffering supporters of Leicester, or the citizens of this East Midlands city (see article), their moment of jubilation. But a delight in seeing the expected undone can be a pathway to poor thinking. It encourages people to value the quality of narratives over the desirability of outcomes; to indulge in unrealistic assessments of their own potential; and to set too little store by one of the greatest achievements of civilisation: predictability.

There is a fairy-tale appeal to stories in which people vanquish great odds. But the tellers of tales are able to stack the deck and deal the winning hand to someone deserving. Real life is not so accommodating; having a good story in no way equates to being a good person. Lance Armstrong’s comeback from cancer was a profoundly inspiring narrative, but it did not make him a deserving winner of the yellow jersey. The fact that many pundits who wrote off Donald Trump last summer are now eating crow does not make his rise admirable, desirable or amusing. It is undeniably plucky of North Korea, despite the challenges it faces, to have got through some preliminary heats in the nuclear-arms race. So what?



INTERACTIVE: Flying foxes - footballing pay and performance

Surely Leicester’s underdog triumph has an inspirational value? Perhaps. But to delight in underdogs only when they win is rather to miss the point of what an underdog is. Most of the people thus inspired will go on to no comparable triumph; one unlikely outcome does not make others more likely. If it is good and kind to suggest to people that the odds against their dreams are shorter than they think, then Las Vegas is truly a very good, kind city. But most do not think it so.

That leaves the argument that the world is somehow a richer place if its events and contests are less predictable. But when the author of the book of Ecclesiastes cautioned that the race was not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, he did not do so with any sense of satisfaction at this state of affairs; he was lamenting how little his world made sense. When Damon Runyon, the bard of Broadway, noted that though these biblical caveats about races and battles had some truth, that was still the way to bet, he was proclaiming a salutary view that things could be predicted, and were all the better for it.

Leicester we forget

Making the world more predictable allows people to put more into it and get more out of it. This is the great work of civilisation, from explanations of nature through science to expectations that justice will be delivered through the law. A probabilistic nihilism that delights in the unexpected in and of itself sets at naught such achievements. So well done, Leicester. But if consistency has value, there is no team quite like Arsenal.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698263-leicester-citys-success-should-be-celebrated-not-sentimentalised-underdogs-are-overrated/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




On business in Iran, Dilma Rousseff, interest rates, English language, Republicans, solar power: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

On business in Iran, Dilma Rousseff, interest rates, English language, Republicans, solar power

Letters to the editor

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



Doing business in Iran

I would like to correct several points made in your article on business in Iran (“The over-promised land”, April 23rd). It is simply false that non-Iranian firms operating in Iran are cut off from the American financial system. Under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action foreign banks and firms may generally engage in business with Iran without risk of being cut off. With very limited exceptions, America’s primary embargo remains in place and prohibits access to the US system by or for Iran, which is something very different from what you described. As the secretary of state John Kerry noted, the United States has no objection to foreign banks engaging with Iranian banks and companies, as long as those banks and companies are not on our sanctions list for non-nuclear reasons.

You also repeated a myth that the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control has in recent years imposed billions of dollars in fines on foreign companies simply for “dealing with Iran”. OFAC’s enforcement actions were in response to foreign banks routing billions of dollars of transfers through US banks on behalf of sanctioned parties, often doctoring records to avoid detection. Introducing such payments into American banks was illegal and was not simply “dealing with Iran”.

You point to real concerns about the business climate in Iran, and we hope that the government in Tehran will address them quickly. To the extent that banks and firms have questions about American sanctions, I can only repeat the advice of Mr Kerry: do not assume. When in doubt, ask us. The bottom line is this: we are not standing and we will not stand in the way of business permitted under the Iran deal. Assertions to the contrary are flatly inaccurate.

AMBASSADOR STEVE MULL

Lead co-ordinator

Office of Iran Nuclear Implementation

US Department of State

Washington, DC





A rocky road for Rousseff

None of the factors you listed about Brazil’s political situation exempts Dilma Rousseff from responsibility for the wrongdoings of her government (“The great betrayal”, April 23rd). She and the Workers’ Party (PT) must be held liable. The creative accountancy perpetrated by the government is not a mere “technicality”. Falsifying the fiscal surplus destroyed the credibility of our economic policy. According to Datafolha, a pollster, over 60% of Brazilians support her impeachment.

Calling new elections would require a broad consensus to approve a constitutional amendment to allow that to happen. This would take several months and strain our electoral system, which is preparing for municipal elections. Brazil needs solutions. Impeachment could be a first step towards what you call “a thorough clean-up”.

FELIPE ITO ANUATTI

Ribeirão Preto, Brazil





Interesting rates

* Your article accurately describes one of the failures of America’s Congress to adequately fund the America’s Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC)—formed to guarantee the pension funds of corporations that went broke without adequate assets to cover their pension obligations (“Betraying the promise”, April 9th). That failure is minuscule compared to what the almost $20 trillion national debt has done to the long range actuarial soundness of public pension funds, such as Social Security; Medicare; and state and local government pensions, as well as thousands of private corporate pension funds and private 401(k)s.



In order to ensure that they can meet their obligations, most pension funds assume an actuarial return of 6-9%. That much return must be met to satisfy their obligations based on their current level of contributions. They must invest conservatively—usually in government bonds—and if they can only receive a return of 1-2% on these investments the retirement income that pensioners rely on won’t exist. For every 1% rise in interest that the government has to pay to service its $20 trillion debt costs them $200 billion dollars. Even with the historically low interest rates of the last nearly ten years (1-2%) the Treasury can’t raise enough revenue to cover the cost of running the government. In the current fiscal year the deficit will be $400-500 billion dollars, and the government will have to borrow that much to keep operating.



If the government raises interest rates to rescue the pension funds it won’t be able to pay the interest on the debt and will default. But if the rates are held down to 1-2% on government bonds, the pension funds will go broke (except the defined contribution funds, which will simply run out of money much sooner). I think that the government will keep interest rates low so that they can say that they are balancing the budget and that way they don’t have to talk about what that will do to pensioners.

It’s a Catch-22. Does anyone know how to solve the problem? And why is no one talking about it?



ROBERT BAKES

Retired chief justice of the Idaho Supreme Court

Eagle, Idaho





Ringing in the changes

Johnson should not entirely blame the European Union for the changes to English introduced by speakers of other European languages (April 23rd). He used the example of Europeans using “control” to mean “monitor” because contrôler has that meaning in French. But among British bird-ringers “control” was already in widespread use by 1965. It was used in “The Ringer’s Manual”, produced by the British Trust for Ornithology, albeit in the restricted sense of the recapture of a ringed bird in a place other than that at which it had been ringed.

I recall Sir Landsborough Thomson, one of the founding fathers of British bird-ringing, pleading at that time for this usage to be dropped on the ground that “control” had a different and long-established meaning in science. To no avail: even the eminent cannot stem the tide of change in living languages.

PROFESSOR JEREMY GREENWOOD

Centre for Research into Ecological and Environmental Modelling

University of St Andrews

St Andrews, Fife





Starr witness

Your observation that “Republicans have a history of pinning imagined crimes” on Hillary Clinton is strongly supported by a source not usually cited on this point (“Unloved and unstoppable”, April 23rd). In November 1998, Kenneth Starr told the House Judiciary Committee that after years of investigating all accusations, he had nothing negative to report about either Bill or Hillary Clinton regarding Whitewater, the FBI files or the White House travel office. I complained about his delay in telling us this—until after the midterm elections—and asked, as an example, for the date on which he had exonerated the Clintons on the travel-office issue. He replied that there was no such date because there had never been any information implicating them in the first place.

BARNEY FRANK

Former member of Congress

Newton, Massachusetts





The sundowners

If there is any chance that the world is to meet the Paris objectives on climate change, renewable energy such as solar power must surely be a key part of a solution (“The new sunbathers”, April 16th). However, focusing on concerns over the prices bid at recent auctions can be misleading, as those bids take no account of important related costs. You mentioned the investment needed to expand solar grids and for measures to mitigate the intermittency of solar power; these could easily add 50% to the prices quoted in recent bids.

Solar power could become cost-competitive with gas and coal, especially if the costs of carbon were internalised. But we should not compare apples with oranges; that is what advocates of solar power encourage us to do.

ANTHONY FRAYNE

Montreal





A brewing argument

Regarding the Reinheitsgebot, or “German beer purity law” (“Pure swill”, April 23rd). Your withering comments about the quality of German beers were off target. The variation of flavours is wide despite the restrictions on ingredients. I am a member of the Campaign for Real Ale and frustrated at the regular addition of wheat to ales.

LYNDA ATKINSON

Swansea

As a longtime Geordie exile in Germany with a sturdy Teutonic beer belly to prove it, I must take you to task over your vicious assault on the hallowed Reinheitsgebot. The shelves of my local supermarket are replete with cans of fizzy, heartburn-provoking foreign pop masquerading as beer rapidly approaching its best-poured-straight-down-the-toilet date. The Veltins and the Bitburger are being carted off by the crate load.

If it don’t comply with the Reinheitsgebot, it ain’t gonna sell in Germany. Punkt, full stop, period. So who do you think you are kidding, lesser breweries, if you think old Deutschland’s done?

PETER CAIN

Trier, Germany

* Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21698215-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




The Republican nominee: Fear trumps hope





Articles Sections Next

The Republican nominee

Fear trumps hope

Donald Trump is going to be the Republican candidate for the presidency. This is terrible news for Republicans, America and the world

May 7th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



WHEREVER the eye falls in Donald Trump’s Manhattan office, on the 26th floor of Trump Tower, there is Trump. Images of the tycoon glower from walls plastered with covers of Playboy, GQ, Newsweek and more. Piles of campaign literature—“Trump—Make America Great Again!”—jostle with stacks of more recent Trump-fronted publications on a desk so packed as to recall a dentist’s waiting room. A mound of Trump-covered copies of The Economist has pride of place: “I put you up front,” he says solicitously.

The pride Mr Trump takes in such self-aggrandising trumpery is almost touching. His Aladdin’s cave of celebrity puff, which doubles as the headquarters of a presidential campaign and large property company, is sufficiently eccentric to recall why his candidacy, announced at Trump Tower last June, was at first ridiculed. He looked like a chancer—a reality television star, with no serious political experience, who had changed his political stripes at least four times. Yet Mr Trump’s victory in Indiana on May 3rd (see article) has made him the presumptive Republican nominee. His remaining opponents, Senator Ted Cruz and Governor John Kasich, have quit the race. He was for far too long underestimated. The same must not be said of the threat his egomania and pernicious nativism represents to America and the world.

His electoral success is founded on espousing a view of America both exceptionally bleak and widely shared. Two-thirds of Americans think the economy is rigged in favour of the rich; almost seven in ten believe their politicians don’t care about ordinary Americans. It is not hard to see why. Until the recent fall in the oil price, median real wages had been stagnant for over a decade. Between 2007 and 2014 the wages of many workers declined; the lowest-paid, struggling to adapt to falling demand for low-skilled factory labour, have been especially hard-hit. America’s infrastructure is crumbling. Its Middle Eastern policy has seen wars waged across the region. Terrorism—though it claimed fewer American lives last year than toddlers with guns—has become a national bogeyman.

Strange but not a stranger

Mr Trump inflates and conflates these problems into an absurd caricature of undiluted failure and decline. “We’re like a third-world country,” he laments. America “makes the worst trade deals ever made in the history of trade…We’ve spent $4 trillion in the Middle East and we’re in far worse shape than we were before…China, it doesn’t respect us.” He must believe some of this; his opposition to free trade is long-standing. Yet his miserabilism is plainly tactical. It gives him opportunity to throw a few popular scapegoats to his despondent supporters: job-stealing illegal immigrants—including the “rapist” Mexicans he denounced when he launched his campaign; factory-killing Chinese trade negotiators, whom he accused this week of “raping” America; “incompetent” and “crooked” politicians.

His success, in short, is based on inviting the most exaggeratedly down-in-the-mouth Americans to indulge their meanest instincts. To attend a Trump rally, as hundreds of thousands of Americans now have, is to participate in a ritual enactment of injury and vengeance; an enactment which has, on occasion, done real harm.

As when two thugs in Boston who had beaten a homeless Hispanic man with an iron bar quoted Mr Trump to the police in justification; as when an aged Trump supporter in North Carolina assaulted a protester after, in Las Vegas, Mr Trump himself had screamed “I’d like to punch him in the face!” over the cries of another such. Or as in Virginia, when a Trump rally, interrupted by protesters from the group Black Lives Matter, appeared to totter on the brink of a race riot. It is probably only a matter of time before one of the journalists Mr Trump keeps caged up at the back of the rallies gets badly beaten. One of his party tricks is to insult them—“some of the most dishonest people in the world”—and invite his crowds to jeer. From the cage, as opposed to the privacy of his Manhattan office, where Mr Trump is immensely charming, he does not seem solicitous. He seems threatening and vile.

Some commentators say he is a fascist—an idea he encouraged by inviting his followers to pledge their allegiance to him with a fascist-style salute at a rally in Florida. This seems like an exaggeration, however, and, given his hunger for a grievance, self-defeating. There is, similarly, no reason to suppose he is racist, as many have. But a significant minority of his supporters are—17% of them consider ethnic diversity bad for America, a strikingly high number—and Mr Trump’s dog-whistling on immigration seems at least partly designed to appeal to them. No wonder 86% of African-Americans and 80% of Hispanics have a negative view of him. Through a conscious effort to spread discord he regularly transgresses moral lines that no decent American public figure ever should. His methods are abhorrent to most Americans; two-thirds of voters dislike him. Yet the minority that does not balk at them is growing.



For most of the Republican contest, Mr Trump got around 35% of the vote, mainly from white men with only a high-school education. That was more than his rivals—a starting line-up of 17, including four senators, of whom Mr Cruz was the last left standing, and nine current or former governors, including Mr Kasich. But it was low enough to make Mr Trump seem a weak front-runner, unable to win a majority in any state, and apparently dependent for his advantage on the way his opponents had split the mainstream Republican vote. Once the field was winnowed, it was assumed, Mr Trump would be trumped.

Gonna come in first place

Yet it was he who was to prove the main beneficiary of that consolidation. He won his first outright majority in his home state of New York on April 19th. He has since matched that feat six times on the trot; in Indiana he won 53% of the vote. In so doing he has started picking up support from other groups, including college students and women, previously averse to him.

Evangelical Christians have been strangely drawn to Mr Trump from early on. Working-class evangelicals, in particular, took him to victory in southern states such as Georgia and South Carolina. In Indiana, Mr Trump won evangelicals, who represent half the state’s primary electorate, by eight percentage points—which might seem surprising. Mr Trump is thrice-married and irreligious. On primary day in Indiana he also gave voice to an outlandish slander against Mr Cruz’s father, a well-known evangelical preacher. (He suggested, on the basis of no evidence, that Mr Cruz senior had been involved in the murder of John F. Kennedy: “I mean, what was he doing—what was he doing with Lee Harvey Oswald shortly before the death? Before the shooting? It’s horrible.”)

Despite the initial size of the field, Mr Trump is on the verge of breaking the record for votes won in the Republican primaries (10.8m, set by George Bush in 2000). That is partly because, owing to a combination of riled activists and a growing population, more people vote in Republican primaries these days. He is still a long way shy of the 66m votes with which Mr Obama won re-election in 2012. Yet the size of the haul and the growing breadth of his appeal underlines the fact that, despite his divisiveness, Mr Trump has a solid chance of becoming president.

His odds are helped by having a probable opponent, Hillary Clinton, who is also disliked; around half of voters take a poor view of her. Mrs Clinton must be thrilled to have an opponent more unpopular still, and whom she has beaten in all but two of the last 58 head-to-head polls. Yet such polling tends to be a poor guide until after the party conventions, which focus voters’ minds. And being unpopular is always a weakness. Mrs Clinton’s victory over Mr Trump, though likely, is not assured.



He would be a disastrous president. If Mr Trump’s diagnosis of what ails America is bad, his prescriptions for fixing it are catastrophic. His signature promise is to wall off Mexico and make it pay for the bricks. Even ignoring the fact that America is seeing a net outflow of Mexicans across its southern border this is nonsense. Mexico has already refused to pay. Mr Trump’s response was to threaten to stop remittances being sent home to Mexico: “It’s an easy decision for Mexico. Make a one-time payment of $5-10 billion to ensure that $24 billion continues to flow into their country year after year.” That would probably be illegal, and only by instituting capital controls could Mr Trump prevent people withdrawing cash from an American bank account in Mexico. His other big promises on the border, to deport 11m illegal immigrants and their offspring, and to bar all foreign Muslims from America—“until our country’s representatives can figure out what is going on”—are no better.

Time for jumping overboard

Mr Trump’s economic positions, some of which he rehearsed in his office, are also fantastical. For example, he has pledged to pay down America’s $19 trillion national debt in eight years, while at the same time cutting taxes by $10 trillion. Given that he has also pledged to protect Social Security, the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, an advocacy group, has estimated that he would have to cut other areas of government by 93% to meet his objective. He disagrees, citing the growth he promises to unleash by improving America’s trade terms and the savings he would make by rendering the government more efficient. Yet the contribution government waste and abuse makes to America’s $4 trillion federal budget is surely minuscule? “No, all over government,” Mr Trump blusters. “And I’ll tell you where there’s tremendous, tremendous money being spent is on the military. And yet I’m going to build up the military. But I’m going to build it up for us, not for every other country in the world. We’re spending massive amounts of money to protect other nations.” This sort of free-flowing nativist bunkum, purposefully delivered, including random references to unrelated national fears, is illustrative of Mr Trump’s rhetoric.

Other countries should be worried, because Mr Trump has bad news for all of them. He would jettison America’s existing trade agreements in favour of short-term, bilateral negotiations undertaken in a spirit so spikily retaliatory as to make trade wars, with China for starters, inevitable. Mr Trump declared himself ready for that outcome, as he must: his professed willingness to walk away from any negotiation, whether with a rival property developer or the world’s second biggest economy, is part of his shtick. “They can’t afford it, we can,” he says. “We have a trade deficit with China of hundreds of billions of dollars a year.”

To reinforce America’s military writ, Mr Trump would employ similar means. “Let’s say we say we’re going to have a 10% tax on goods coming in from China. Because they’re not supposed to be building in the South China Sea, and because they’ve devalued their currency…I’ll do that in a heartbeat.” He would demand that America’s allies pay “at least” the total cost of any protective American presence—or be abandoned to police themselves: “I would like to continue defending Japan. I would like to continue to defend South Korea. And I would like to defend Germany and Saudi Arabia and other countries. [But] they’ve got to pay up.”

Wait till the party’s over

Mr Trump would be even less indulgent towards America’s multilateral obligations. Asked whether, on the basis of his coruscating criticisms of the United Nations, which he called fat, sloppy and inactive, he would consider withdrawing America from that organisation, he says: “You always have to be prepared to walk or you can never get anything done. And that means walking from countries, in terms of defence, it means walking.”

No one could be more appalled by Mr Trump’s success than the leaders of his own party, most of whom are free-traders and national-security hawks, and all of whom want to win in November. That explains the enthusiasm many Republican bosses and donors showed for the Stop Trump movement. Despite a growing probability that Mr Trump would be their champion, they poured over $5m into television and radio spots supporting Mr Cruz or denigrating Mr Trump in Indiana. (Mr Trump spent less than $1m.)

They had no shortage of ammunition. Mr Trump has in the past bragged about his many sexual conquests. He has had recourse to bankruptcy law four times. His every speech is littered with lies. By one calculation, 76% of his political statements last year were untrue. In a normal year, his Republican critics would have stopped him; why did they fail?

His unusual talents are part of the answer. Charismatic, tactically astute, charming at times and ruthless, Mr Trump is a far more formidable politician than almost anyone had suspected. His outrages have kept print- and broadcast-media attention focused on him; with nearly 8m followers on Twitter and a flair for pithy invective, he rules on social media, too. At the time of his entry into the race, his slander against Mexicans seemed naive as well as boorish; it now seems remarkable how well-formed his pitch to resentful, working-class whites was. He says this was because he understands and shares their concerns. “I worked summers when I was going to school with carpenters and electricians. You know my father was a builder in Brooklyn and Queens, predominantly…I worked with all of these guys, I know these guys.” That has a rare ring of truth. Expedience explains his positions on many issues, including guns, which he once disliked and now advocates, abortion, which he once accepted and now opposes, God, in Whom he previously showed little interest but now praises. His xenophobia and protectionism, however, have form.

Call and response

Newspaper clippings suggest he vigorously opposed the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993: “The Mexicans want it and that doesn’t sound good to me,” he was reported as saying. On trade, revealingly, and unusually for a man who admits to no weakness, he is even prepared to acknowledge the negative consequences of his populism. Asked whether his supporters would not object, under a Trumpian trade regime, to being forced to pay more for an American-made product, he says: “Maybe they buy less of it. I see people buying five dolls for their daughters; maybe buy two dolls.”

Yet if Mr Trump’s supporters like his message, many are also motivated by disdain for the party bosses who so haplessly opposed him. Exit polls in Indiana suggested half of Republican voters felt “betrayed” by their party. This is a harvest the party sowed in two ways. First, though it is a caricature to suggest, as Mr Trump and others have, that the Republicans have long made fools of distressed working-class whites by offering them God, the flag and tax cuts to the rich, it is a caricature with some truth to it. None of Mr Trump’s 16 rivals spoke convincingly to the concerns of wage-distressed workers; none had a thoughtful answer to them.

Second, years of partisan grandstanding in Congress have discredited America’s entire political process, and the Republicans—especially those of them thrust to power by the party’s previous populist insurgency, the Tea Party—are mainly responsible. The several recent crises Republican congressmen have engineered over the passage of the federal budget, which they sought to hold hostage to their unrealistic and unconstitutional demands of Mr Obama, have earned the voters’ disdain. In that sense, the Trumpian revolt is not a continuation of the false promise raised by the anti-government Tea Party, but its successor. With Mr Trump’s nomination almost assured, its fires, too, must now rage and burn out.

Trump against Clinton: the general election is shaping up to be hot and ugly. There appears to be little prospect of Mr Trump moderating his positions, by lurching to the more ameliorative centre that Republican leaders—fearing electoral annihilation—recommend. Whether he believes in his positions or not, they are mostly too extreme to be credibly revised. Apparently vindicated by his success in the primaries, Mr Trump seems to have little interest in changing tack. That also goes for his aggressive, often offensive methods. Turning to Mrs Clinton, his one-time wedding guest, the presumptive Republican nominee is disdainful. “She’s playing the woman card. That’s all she’s got going. She’s got nothing else going. The only thing she’s got is the woman card. And she plays it to the hilt,” fumes Mr Trump, whom 70% of American women dislike.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21698252-donald-trump-going-be-republican-candidate-presidency-terrible-news/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




Indiana’s primaries: The fifth stage of grief

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

New York politics: Boss de Blasio?

Ageing and income: Silver-haired in clover

Disarray in the South: Sweet home

Lexington: What next for Bernie Sanders





Articles Sections Next

Indiana’s primaries

The fifth stage of grief

Can Republicans accept Donald Trump as their nominee?

May 7th 2016 | CROWN POINT, INDIANA | From the print edition



“TRUMP is scary,” says Jim Adkins, the manager of a branch of Olive Garden, a restaurant chain, as he comes out of the banquet hall of the St Peter & Paul Macedonian Church, where he has just cast his vote for Hillary Clinton. Mr Adkins usually votes for the Republican Party, but this time he overcame his dislike for Mrs Clinton. An election volunteer, who overhears the conversation, says many Republican voters are defecting to the other side, thanks to the seemingly unstoppable rise of Donald Trump.

These defections will play a role in the November elections, but in the Indiana primary on May 3rd only Republican votes counted for Mr Trump—and he won big. In spite of the local Republican establishment’s best efforts to halt his advance, he received 53% of the votes, compared with only 37% for Ted Cruz, the Texas senator who was the figurehead of a “Never Trump” alliance. John Kasich, the governor of Ohio, had ceased to campaign in Indiana to improve Mr Cruz’s chances; he got a measly 8%. Most of Indiana’s 57 delegates are likely to go to Mr Trump. He is now almost certain to reach the 1,237 bound delegates required to secure the Republican nomination. He will be unopposed in the states that are yet to vote. California alone offers 172 delegates, New Jersey hands out 51. Mr Trump has already passed the mark of 1,000 delegates.

On the Democratic side the race was a bit tighter. Hillary Clinton, the front-runner, was beaten by Bernie Sanders, her only rival. Mr Sanders received 53% of the vote compared with 47% for Mrs Clinton, confounding polls that suggested she would win. Yet Mr Sanders still has virtually no chance of wresting the Democratic nomination from Mrs Clinton, who is already focused on the general election.

The biggest news of the night was Mr Cruz’s decision to drop out of the race. “From the beginning I’ve said that I would continue on as long as there was a viable path to victory,” he said in a speech in Indianapolis, the state’s capital. “Tonight, I’m sorry to say it appears that path has been foreclosed. Together, we left it all on the field in Indiana.” The room was quiet. Some supporters cried. Several told reporters they would never vote for Mr Trump.

Until as little as a week ago, Mr Cruz seemed to have a good chance to win by a decent margin in Indiana. He had bet big on the Midwestern state, making it a personal all-or-nothing battle. Yet Mr Trump’s surprisingly big victories in Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, Connecticut and Rhode Island on April 26th gave the property tycoon a big boost. Trying to distract from Mr Trump’s victories in the north-east, Mr Cruz rushed to anoint Carly Fiorina, a former boss of Hewlett-Packard, as his running-mate in Indianapolis the next day. Two days later he managed to persuade Mike Pence, the state’s governor, to endorse him.



Mr Cruz’s departure from the campaign is unlikely to be the end of his political career. The junior senator, a hardline conservative who advocates deep tax cuts skewed towards the rich, the loosening of environmental rules and business regulations, the repeal of Barack Obama’s health-care law and an increasingly fierce anti-immigrant rhetoric, is only 45 years old. In his speech on May 3rd he seemed to be leaving the door open to a comeback in some future year. “Our movement will continue, and I give you my word that I will continue this fight with all of my strength and all of my ability,” he said.

Mr Trump is keen to get the supporters of Mr Cruz’s movement to back him instead, which is why he found unusually warm words in his victory speech for his rival, whom only the day before he had called “Lyin’ Ted” around two dozen times in a speech in Indiana. In his victory speech at Trump Tower in New York, Mr Trump said that he was not sure whether Mr Cruz liked him, but praised him anyway, as “a tough smart guy” and “one hell of a competitor”.



America's primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

Leading Republicans are starting to embrace Mr Trump’s takeover of their party. After the Indiana results were confirmed, Reince Priebus, chairman of the Republican National Committee, wrote that “Donald Trump will be presumptive GOP nominee, we all need to unite and focus on defeating Hillary Clinton”. After shock, anger and denial, much of what is left of the Republican establishment has reached acceptance. Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, put out an artfully worded statement saying he was committed to supporting the Republican nominee and that the nominee was Mr Trump.

Mr Kasich, the only remaining candidate with appeal to centrist Republicans (the unctuous Mr Cruz never hit it off with Washington insiders), jumped ship on May 4th. In a meandering speech in Ohio, the deeply religious governor said that as he was suspending his campaign he had “renewed faith, deeper faith, that the Lord will show me the way forward, and fulfil the purpose of my life”. Not one word about Mr Trump or any of his other rivals.

Never since modern polling began have the two likely nominees of the big parties been so disliked by the electorate. Mr Trump’s net approval rating (where those who disapprove are subtracted from those who approve) is minus 40. Mrs Clinton is at a still-Siberian minus 20.

Mr Adkins at the polling station says that he finds it hard to trust Mrs Clinton, but at least she is smart and experienced. On the other hand Faylene Altomere, a retired schoolteacher, voted for Mr Trump because “he seems to be sincere”. Her biggest worry is an explosion of violence at the convention in Cleveland. “It might be 1968 again,” she says, referring to the violent clashes between police and protesters at the Democratic convention in Chicago that year. Then, as now, voters were unhappy with the government—and deeply disliked the presumptive nominee.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698320-can-republicans-accept-donald-trump-their-nominee-fifth-stage-grief/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The campaigns

Heard on the trail

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

Character witness

“Lucifer in the flesh...I have never worked with a more miserable son of a bitch in my life.”

Former Speaker of the House, John Boehner on Ted Cruz. The Stanford Daily



Touch the stars

“They just wanted to get in with Donald.”

Rival groups of supporters in Florida are fighting over which are the real “Trumpettes”. Gawker

Riot grrrl

“The only way [Trump] wins the general election is if he …repeal[s] women’s suffrage between now and November.”

Tim Miller, press secretary for Jeb Bush’s defunct campaign. CNN

Truther

“This man is a pathological liar...The man cannot tell the truth, but he combines it with being a narcissist...the man is utterly amoral.”

Ted Cruz finally nails the Donald

Nobody loves us

“It sucks to be California, we’re like the ugly stepchild. They need us for our cash and our donors, they don’t need us for anything else.”

The California Republican Party is insulted by cheap seats in Cleveland. CNN

The boys are back in town

“I’m anticipating we’ll be doing a victory dance. But if the Republican Party tries to pull off any backroom deals and ignores the will of the people, our role will change.”

Chris Cox, chainsaw artist and founder of Bikers for Trump, plans for the convention. Huffington Post

You’re gonna miss me

“They say Donald lacks the foreign-policy experience to be president, but, in fairness, he has spent years meeting…leaders from around the world: Miss Sweden, Miss Argentina, Miss Azerbaijan.”

Barack Obama at his final White House Correspondents’ Association dinner

Hedging your bets

“I mean, I guess never say never. On the one hand, I’ll say #NeverTrump, and on the other hand, I’ll say never say never. I’ll leave it ambiguous.

Former #NeverTrump leader and Weekly Standard editor, Bill Kristol, seems to have given up. Newsmax

Bargain basement

“Five dollar shirts. Something to wipe the tears off with.”

Salesman at Mr Cruz’s concession rally. Matt Flegenheimer of the New York Times



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698317-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

New York politics

Boss de Blasio?

Probes may reveal more about corruption in Albany than in City Hall

May 7th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

The mayor, probed

“I NEED your prayers,” said Bill de Blasio, New York City’s mayor, to the pastor before addressing a congregation in Queens. He did not say why, but it may be because his administration is the subject of multiple investigations by federal, state and local enforcement and regulatory agencies. Most of the probes, including one by Preet Bharara, the federal lawyer trying to weed out corruption in New York state, involve money, specifically fundraising and campaign finance. Mr de Blasio has not been accused of any wrongdoing, but some in his inner circle have received subpoenas, including Emma Wolfe, a political adviser, Ross Offinger, his former top fundraiser, and BerlinRosen, a consulting firm with close ties to him.

The investigations, among other things, are looking into whether his office avoided campaign-contribution limits by getting powerful unions and wealthy individuals to donate to upstate county committees. The money then seems to have been handed to candidates running for state Senate, which may have broken the law. Campaign-finance laws in New York, up to now, have not been well enforced. And guidelines are lacking. “The system seems to work on a wink-wink, nudge-nudge basis,” says Susan Lerner of Common Cause, a corruption watchdog. “Did [Mr de Blasio] say something instead of winking?”

Mr de Blasio says there is a double standard. He has implied that he is being unfairly targeted. He may be right. At first glance, the various investigations might seem petty. But two questions remain: did his team engage in a quid pro quo, and did the mayor endorse it? There have long been accusations that Mr de Blasio is too close to developers who donated to his now closed non-profit. He has been accused of picking an unnecessary and unpopular fight to ban the horse-drawn carriages from Central Park because developers were said to want the land occupied by the stables. That the mayor’s team does not appear to have done anything that is not already common in Albany, the state capital, no longer sounds like much of a defence.

On May 3rd Sheldon Silver, a Democrat and former Assembly Speaker, was sentenced to 12 years in prison after being found guilty of using his position to obtain nearly $4m in bribes and kickbacks. Corruption in New York does not stick to one side of the aisle. Dean Skelos, a Republican and former head of the state Senate, will receive his sentence next week. He was convicted of conspiracy, bribery and extortion and using his post for financial gain. Between 2004 and 2013 there were more than 500 public-corruption convictions in the state. According to Citizens United, state lawmakers are more likely to quit because of ethical or criminal issues than to die in office. Mr Bharara has called Albany a “cauldron of corruption”.

New Yorkers are fed-up with dirty politicians. A Siena poll released on May 3rd showed that a whopping 97% of them want the governor and the legislature to pass new laws to address corruption in state government before the session ends next month. But they are extremely pessimistic that lawmakers will do anything about it. Previous efforts went nowhere, or did not go far enough. Andrew Cuomo, New York’s governor, vowed to clean up Albany, but he disbanded a commission to root out public corruption.

City Hall does not share Albany’s reputation. But even if Mr de Blasio is cleared of all wrongdoing, the probes have severely damaged him, according to Doug Muzzio, a political scientist at Baruch College. The mayor has been the focus of damning headlines in local tabloids for days. All this distracts from his successes, points out Nicole Gelinas of the Manhattan Institute, a New York think-tank. Crime remains low even as it goes up elsewhere. Last month was the safest April in more than 20 years. Homelessness is down. For the moment Mr de Blasio’s reforms in criminal justice go unheralded, and governing is difficult while his top staff are receiving subpoenas. The whole business may also affect his re-election campaign, depending on how long the investigations last.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698319-probes-may-reveal-more-about-corruption-albany-city-hall-boss-de-blasio/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Ageing and income

Silver-haired in clover

How demography distorts household-income statistics

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



HOW fast are incomes growing? The answer swings elections; Ronald Reagan, on his way to victory in 1980, told voters to ask themselves if they were better off than they were four years earlier. It also shifts the political spectrum. Paltry wage growth since the financial crisis has fed populism in both parties. According to official statistics, real (ie, inflation-adjusted) median household income in 2014 was only 0.7% higher than in 1989, when the Gipper left office. It is a common refrain that since then rising inequality, trade and outsourcing have left middle America languishing behind. But several trends make household-income statistics look gloomier than they really are.

Take household size. Since 1989, households have become, on average, 3.4% smaller, as fertility has fallen and living alone has become more common. In 1989 there were 2.63 Americans per household; today there are 2.54. Smaller households mean fewer earners (and fewer mouths to feed) in each, lowering median incomes without necessarily making anyone worse off. At the same time, higher earners are increasingly likely to marry one another. This pushes up inequality between households, but not between individuals. Since 1989, the real earnings of the median worker—a measure affected by neither of these trends—have grown by fully 13%.

All that growth, however, came before 2000, lending credibility to Hillary Clinton’s claim that most workers have not seen a pay rise in 15 years. Small pay rises in the mid-2000s were wiped out by the financial crisis. But another trend is suppressing the recovery of incomes since the recession: ageing. Americans’ incomes usually peak in middle age, then decline as they head towards retirement. The median income of households headed by 45- to 54-year-olds in 2014 was $71,000; for households headed by 65- to 74-year-olds, it was only $45,000.

This matters because America has been greying. The oldest of the baby-boom generation began to retire in 2008. Because workers who were once cashing paycheques are now drawing pensions, this has held down average income growth. Between 2010 and 2014, real median household income grew by 0.3%. But a weighted average of the median income in each age-group, with the weights frozen to reflect the age profile of the population in 2010, is up by 1.9%. This suggests that ageing is a significant drag on the headline measure. (When the numbers are not adjusted for ageing, the weighted-average measure is up by only 0.7%, so the different construction of the two measures accounts for only some of the gap.)

There is a catch, though: although the old have lower incomes than the working-age, today’s oldies have benefited most from rising incomes in recent decades. For example, households headed by 65- to 74-year-olds have incomes almost 30% higher in real terms than similar households in 1989. By contrast, incomes of households headed by 45- to 54-year-olds are 7% lower (see chart).

Why have the silver-haired done relatively well? Rising Social Security (public pension) payments are one answer. The median Social Security cheque has grown by 9% in real terms over the past decade. This is probably because today’s pensioners enjoyed rising incomes while they were working. Social Security entitlement grows with average wages, so rising wages in one decade deliver larger retirement cheques in the next.

This phenomenon diminishes, but does not eliminate, ageing’s drag on incomes. Exclude over-65s entirely from the figures, and the weighted-average median income, with 2010’s population weights, grew by 1.5% (rather than 1.9%) between 2010 and 2014.

Gender matters, too. Among women, real median earnings are up 32% since 1989; for men, growth was just 4.5%. But as more women entered the workforce, their lower earnings probably reduced average wages. Reagan’s question was simple enough for individuals to answer. For a whole country, it is much harder.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698318-how-demography-distorts-household-income-statistics-silver-haired-clover/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Disarray in the South

Sweet home

The circular web of scandals that has ensnared Alabama’s leaders

May 7th 2016 | MONTGOMERY | From the print edition

A comfortable Bentley

OSCAR WILDE’S quip doesn’t cover it. For not one, nor two, but three of a state’s highest officials to be embroiled in separate scandals goes beyond misfortune and carelessness and begins to look like a trend. And, in a way, in their strange intersections the pile-up of controversies in Alabama do create a pattern. It has the rough shape of a Mexican stand-off.

The grand-daddy of the ruckuses involves Alabama’s grandfatherly governor, Robert Bentley, a hitherto moralistic 73-year-old. Mr Bentley has been humiliated by leaked recordings of saucy phone calls between him and Rebekah Mason, a former aide; last year the governor’s wife of 50 years divorced him. Mr Bentley issued a Clintonian denial of “a physical affair”, but the embarrassment has continued in reports of his extensive use of burner phones and demands for the inspection of “Wanda’s desk”, named after Mr Bentley’s former secretary (on the tapes, he says he wants to rearrange her office for privacy).

Cue calls for his resignation, appeals to the state ethics commission and for a recall, inconveniently not provided for by Alabama law. Slightly more practically, Ed Henry, a Republican member of the state House of Representatives, submitted a resolution calling for the governor’s impeachment, on grounds he summarises as Mr Bentley’s “inability to run the state” and “using state resources inappropriately”. Since Alabama has never impeached a governor before, new procedures had to be devised, whereupon, Mr Henry says, the party establishment concocted rules to “make it so difficult as to nullify” the prospect. If that was the aim, it failed, and he won the support needed to trigger a probe by the state House Judiciary Committee. (Mr Henry is co-chairman of Donald Trump’s state campaign, but sees his peccadilloes differently: Mr Bentley “deceived the people”, he says, whereas Mr Trump “hasn’t tried to sell us a bill of goods”.)

The next step would be hearings in the House itself, presided over by its Speaker, Mike Hubbard. That is, so long as Mr Hubbard’s own trial on 23 felony charges, set to begin this month, goes his way. He is accused of improperly exploiting his Speakership and former chairmanship of Alabama’s Republican Party; his colleagues have sportingly kept him in office since his arrest in 2014. Mr Hubbard denies all wrongdoing. His lawyers argue that an ethics law he championed, now turned against him, is unconstitutional.

Mr Hubbard’s predicament and Mr Bentley’s are linked by more than the impeachment formula. The amorous tapes were released just as Spencer Collier—head of the Alabama Law Enforcement Agency (ALEA), until he was dismissed by Mr Bentley the previous day—gave his own version of the governor’s relationship with Mrs Mason. Mr Bentley said he fired Mr Collier over alleged mismanagement, “including possible misuse of state funds”. In his defence Mr Collier points to a recent auditor’s report that found no such problems in the agency; he calls the allegations against him “bogus, made-up stories”. Being sacked by Mr Bentley, whom he considered a close friend, was a betrayal “beyond my worst nightmare”.

The real motivation, Mr Collier maintains, relates to Mr Hubbard. In a claim less salacious than his account of the governor’s private life, but perhaps more important, Mr Collier says he was dismissed because he submitted an affidavit affirming that the ALEA had cleared prosecutors in the Hubbard case of misconduct. He claims Mr Bentley wanted him to say the investigation was ongoing: “That’s why he blew up.” Had he not filed the affidavit, the trial might have been delayed further—and with it a possible appearance on the witness stand by the governor. (Mr Collier is now suing Mr Bentley; Mr Bentley, who denies asking Mr Collier to lie or that there are grounds for impeachment, appointed his own bodyguard as ALEA’s boss instead.)

The impeachment process may wither in committee. But should it get through the House, Mr Bentley would be tried in the Senate. As Alabama’s constitution specifies, that trial could be overseen by the state’s chief justice, Roy Moore. That is, if he has not been forcibly ejected from office himself—again.

You remember Mr Moore: in 2003 he was ousted as chief justice after defying a federal court’s order to remove a granite monument of the Ten Commandments from the state judicial building; he was re-elected in 2012. This time the complaint, currently under consideration by the Judicial Inquiry Commission, is that he abused his authority, and undermined public trust in the judiciary, by counselling probate judges to flout federal orders to issue same-sex marriage licences. On April 27th, in the rotunda where the offending monument was once installed, Mr Moore denied any misconduct. Far from disobeying the law, he argues, he was following it.

Casting the first stone

“He’s disgraced his office too many times,” says Richard Cohen of the Southern Poverty Law Centre, which submitted the complaint. Still, a fresh martyrdom might be a useful springboard for a bid for the governorship. Mr Moore has run twice before, once against Mr Bentley. “Who knows what I will do in the future?”, he recently told The Economist. (Mr Hubbard is also considered a contender, circumstances permitting.) Quite apart from their political rivalry, Mr Bentley and Mr Moore have not always seen eye to eye: for all his sanctimony, Mr Bentley has been fatalistic about gay marriage, whereas Mr Moore is still fighting it. If he is disrobed again, Mr Bentley would appoint his successor.

These imbroglios are different and coincidental. Yet they overlap. To begin with, everyone concerned is a conservative Republican—further evidence, perhaps, of the risks of single-party rule, a danger amply documented in Alabama’s lurid political history (the lack of impeachments is not for want of cause). In the past the accused were frequently Democrats: the last Democratic governor is in prison. Indeed, the promise to clean up the mess helped the Republicans sweep the statehouse and brought Mr Hubbard to the Speakership.

And, disparate as they are, the cases have collided. To recap: Mr Bentley could appoint Mr Moore’s successor, if he is not impeached first. Mr Moore could oversee Mr Bentley’s impeachment, unless he is defenestrated, in which case the governor’s appointee might preside. Mr Hubbard would refer the impeachment to the Senate, depending on the verdict of his own trial, which may feature testimony from Mr Bentley. Alternatively, of course, they may all keep their jobs.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698306-circular-web-scandals-has-ensnared-alabamas-leaders-sweet-home/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

What next for Bernie Sanders

Hillary Clinton’s leftist rival can lose the Democratic nomination and still be a winner

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



“THE lesser of two evils is not an option. I won’t vote for evil.” So says Julie Edwards, a volunteer for the insurgent presidential campaign of Senator Bernie Sanders, explaining why she will spurn both main party candidates if—as looks almost certain—her hero loses the Democratic presidential primary and Hillary Clinton ends up battling Donald Trump. Ms Edwards was one of dozens of Sanders-backers gathered at an Indianapolis pub on May 3rd to watch the results of the Indiana presidential primary. Many, declaring themselves “Bernie or Bust” voters, pledged to write their hero’s name on to the ballot paper if he is not the Democratic nominee. Mrs Clinton is steeped in “incredibly horrendous scandals” and can never win a general election, averred Ms Edwards. Other volunteers called her “a criminal”, a “neocon” and—perhaps most damningly for some—a pragmatist.

A hard-bitten professional campaign consultant, hopping cross-country flights to snag rich donors, might find the crowd at the Union Jack Pub a little homespun. A bearded man startled babies by leading shouts of “Feel the Bern”, then, unbidden, apologised to a Native-American woman on behalf of his ancestors. But there was nothing woolly about the headlines that filled the pub’s TV screens, prompting whoops: they showed Mr Sanders beating Mrs Clinton in the Indiana primary, marking his 19th victory. More than 9m Americans have now voted for Mr Sanders (who does notably well among the young) and more than 2.4m have given him donations totalling $210m. Mrs Clinton remains well ahead, with more than 12m votes to date and an all-but-insurmountable lead in the race to accumulate delegates, as well as among the party bigwigs who cast ballots as superdelegates. Yet she is more respected than loved—helping to explain the startling success of Mr Sanders, a snowy-haired scold who thunders against global free-trade pacts, wants to break-up big banks and generally make America more like a Nordic social democracy.

Still, Mr Sanders’s power over the primary contest is fading. His fundraising dropped last month and his campaign recently laid off hundreds of staff. Even among true believers at the Union Jack Pub, many only hoped that he can still win. Attention is thus turning to how his clout will be felt from now on. While insisting that he still has a path to the nomination and will fight on for the last major prize, California’s state primary on June 7th, Mr Sanders has signalled his intent to exert power over Mrs Clinton as a nominee and president. Most directly, he wants to enshrine such policies as a $15-an hour minimum wage, a ban on natural-gas fracking and bank-bashing in the party platform approved at the Democratic National Convention.

Ben Wikler of MoveOn.org, a prominent campaign outfit of the left, suggests that Mr Sanders can still wield considerable sway by prodding Mrs Clinton to embrace progressive policies as a candidate, and even more sway when she fills big jobs in her government, citing the dictum “personnel is policy”. He credits the senator from Vermont with riding a “perfect populist storm”, at a moment when social media and digital tools have eroded the power of big media “gatekeepers” and big money donors—and when “the system has manifestly failed to deliver, for young people, for instance”.

But campaign platforms are soon forgotten and do not bring lasting change, cautions Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont who staged his own insurgency in 2004. Mr Dean briefly led the presidential primary field with an internet-driven revolt against his own party, which he denounced for supporting George W. Bush’s tax cuts and invasion of Iraq. Mr Sanders is “not thinking clearly right now” says Mr Dean, adding: “I have been where he is, this is a very difficult time.” Admitting that victory is lost is not as hard as letting down supporters “energised” around the country, recalls the former candidate. Mr Dean, who later became a party boss as chairman of the Democratic National Committee and who is backing Mrs Clinton, is sceptical about another Sanders demand: to turn all Democratic presidential contests into primary elections open to independents and non-members. That would abolish the Iowa caucuses (the quirky, low-turnout gatherings that kick off each presidential season), and “I have been there and tried that,” says Mr Dean with a hollow laugh.

The revolution will be digitised

Have no doubt that the Sandernista movement is big: his rallies can draw tens of thousands, some reciting his best-known lines along with their hero. A harder question is: how big? Has the senator merely fired up the most liberal quarter of the electorate? Or has he (as Bernie fans insist, pointing to opinion polls) found causes that inspire nationwide majorities? Mr Dean, for one, suggests that his Vermont neighbour has correctly spotted issues that worry most Americans, starting with a sense that the economy is rigged, but has not found solutions with majority support.

Perhaps surprisingly, Mr Dean (now a silver-haired grandee, interviewed at his Washington law firm) and young volunteers at the Union Jack Pub agree on how Mr Sanders may wield lasting power: by changing the party from the bottom up, even though the Vermont senator joined the Democrats to run for the White House only after years as an independent. Mr Dean founded a group, Democracy for America, that claims to have elected 100 candidates from local councils to Congress. A Sanders-backed outfit could “easily raise $200m” and elect 1,000 candidates, predicts Mr Dean. That appeals to Elizabeth Hyde, a Sanders volunteer-leader in Indianapolis, who talks of a years-long campaign to move her party leftwards, copying “infiltration” tactics long used by the Republican right. In the short term, Ms Hyde is steeling herself to vote for Mrs Clinton if she must, to stop Mr Trump. She is not alone, polls suggest. The Sanders movement may well torment Democratic centrists for years to come. But sometimes elections precisely involve picking lesser evils.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698314-hillary-clintons-leftist-rival-can-lose-democratic-nomination-and-still-be/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Venezuela: Lights out

Pollution in Mexico: Blocking traffic

Technology in Brazil: Faulty powers

Bello: Stop stealing





Articles Sections Next

Venezuela

Lights out

The country is running out of power. The regime will find ways to hang on

May 7th 2016 | PUERTO ORDAZ | From the print edition



AT 7.30pm it is pitch dark at the Orinokia shopping centre in Puerto Ordaz, in eastern Venezuela. The mall, one of the biggest in Latin America, would normally be floodlit and open until 9pm. But under a new edict from Venezuela’s government, shopping centres must close by seven. That is one of a number of measures the country’s populist regime has taken to cope with crippling power shortages. It has instigated scheduled four-hour rolling power cuts across the country, which in some areas have lasted for days. Civil servants have been told to work just two days a week. Clocks have been moved forward by half an hour, ending the Venezuela-only time zone introduced by the late Hugo Chávez, the country’s leader from 1999 to 2013. The remedy for the energy crisis, the government seems to be telling its citizens, is to do as little as possible.

For residents of Puerto Ordaz, Venezuela’s only planned city, power shortages seem like a bad joke. It was founded in the 1950s with the idea that cheap hydroelectric power would fuel industries that would make the country less dependent on oil exports. The city lies downstream from the Guri hydroelectric plant, the fourth-largest in the world, which provides around two-fifths of Venezuela’s electricity. But the reservoir is running dry. The water level is less than two metres from its “catastrophe” point, at which the generator must be switched off to avoid damaging its turbines. Unless it rains, Venezuela could be plunged into darkness within a matter of weeks.

The immediate cause is drought, worsened by El Niño, a climatic phenomenon. But that is not the whole story. This is Venezuela’s third electricity crisis since 2010. The national government, which owns the Guri plant, has not increased power generation in line with demand. It has spent billions of dollars on back-up thermoelectric projects, but failed to maintain them properly. Many are operating at far below their capacity.

Bolivarian blackouts

The power cuts add to the misery caused by inflation, which is expected to top 400% this year, and shortages of basic consumer goods. Polar, a private conglomerate that makes around 80% of Venezuela’s beer (as well as much of its food), stopped brewing on April 29th after the government turned down its request for the dollars it needs to import malted barley. At night, people express their fury by burning tyres and running wires to block traffic along the road that leads from Puerto Ordaz to San Félix, its older, poorer neighbour. “I’m a pacifist, I don’t like protesting,” says Karina, cradling a baby. “But this is unbearable.”

Such discontent is a worry for Chávez’s bumbling successor, Nicolás Maduro. About 60% of voters want him out of office by the end of this year, according to opinion polls. The opposition, which took control of the National Assembly in elections last December, is doing its best to make that happen. One idea, a constitutional amendment to shorten Mr Maduro’s term, has been blocked by the supreme court, which takes its marching orders from the regime. The government’s foes hope to get further with a referendum to recall the president from office.



In graphics: A political and economic guide to Venezuela

They have cleared the first hurdle. In only six days the opposition collected 1.85m signatures on a petition to initiate the referendum, more than nine times the 200,000 needed. Karina, once a supporter of the government, was one of the signers. On May 2nd the opposition delivered the signatures to the election commission. In theory, once the commission verifies them, opposition workers will collect 4m signatures, representing a fifth of the electorate, to launch the referendum itself. If that passes this year, with more than the 7.6m votes Mr Maduro won in the 2013 presidential election, he will have to leave office and a new election will be held.

The government can be counted on to use all the tricks at its disposal to frustrate that plan. Mr Maduro has dismissed the referendum as a plot by the “oligarchy” that now runs the National Assembly. In case the election commission does not prove to be as subservient as the supreme court, he created an entirely new “council for signature revision” to double-check its work. It will be headed by Jorge Rodríguez, the gruff mayor of a district in Caracas, who is one of his closest allies. In making the announcement, a rattled Mr Maduro repeatedly claimed that the recall process is “optional”. In fact, Chávez inserted it into the constitution adopted in 1999 as a way to justify extending presidential terms from five years to six.

Delaying the referendum might suit the government’s purposes (though not Mr Maduro’s) better than derailing it. To trigger a new presidential election, a referendum would have to be completed before Mr Maduro’s term has less than two years to run. If it happens later, the vice-president, currently Aristóbulo Istúriz, would take over for the remainder of the term. The cut-off date is disputed. Mr Maduro would argue that his six-year term began when he took over from Chávez, then suffering from cancer, in January 2013; the opposition says it started after he won the election in April that year.

A referendum that ushered into power Mr Istúriz, who is more moderate than Mr Maduro but still a loyal chavista, might delight some factions of the regime, including the armed forces. Many chavistas know that the floundering president cannot win another election in 2018. They would prefer to go into that fight with a more pragmatic, and perhaps more competent, leader. The opposition, and most Venezuelans, would like Mr Maduro to leave office, without turmoil, this year. Of all the possible scenarios, says Luis Vicente León, a pollster, that one seems the least likely.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21698257-country-running-out-power-regime-will-find-ways-hang-lights-out/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Pollution in Mexico

Blocking traffic

To clean up its air the capital has to spend more money, more intelligently

May 7th 2016 | MEXICO CITY | From the print edition



ABOUT 30 years ago Carlos Fuentes published a dystopian novel set in the near future about a city washed by acid rain. He called the town “Makesicko Seedy”. In 1992 the United Nations identified Mexico City’s air as the most polluted on the planet. It is more breathable now, thanks to the closure of an oil refinery, the elimination of lead from petrol and numerous other green measures, but still not wholesome.

In mid-March this year local authorities issued the first ozone alert in nearly 14 years. There have been two since, prompting parents to keep their children home from school. After a spike on May 2nd the “environmental commission of the megalopolis”, a regional body, ordered 40% of the cars off the road, initially for a day. The order was then extended. This provided a respite but angered drivers. Mexico City needs better ways to clean up its air.

The city’s site, at an altitude of 2,250 metres and surrounded by mountains, makes that difficult. Solar radiation, more intense at high altitude, encourages the formation of lung-damaging ozone. The mountains trap the gas. With 5.5m cars, Mexico’s capital is the world’s most congested city, according to TomTom, a maker of navigation devices. If the current rate of growth in car ownership continues, the city’s fleet will double in size over the next four years.

The government’s sticking-plaster solution is to keep some vehicles temporarily off the road. In response to the March ozone alert it tightened the rules for “hoy no circula” (“don’t drive today”), a scheme that bans cars from the city one day a week (and one Saturday a month). Before, the rule applied only to the dirtiest cars. From April to June, all cars will be confined to their garages once a week. When the air gets especially noxious, as on May 2nd, the number of banned cars doubles.

This has done some good. In addition to purifying the air, the new rules reduced traffic jams by 30%, according to Waze, a navigation app. But they have provoked off-road rage, especially among drivers of cleaner vehicles. “Customers are furious because I can’t resolve their problems,” fumes Alejandro Nuñez, a repairman. Congestion and pollution will return as the number of cars expands. If the restrictions continue, more drivers are likely to buy cheaper, dirtier cars for days when their primary vehicles are immobilised, as some did when hoy no circula was first introduced.



INTERACTIVE: From CO2 to GHG, which countries have the highest emissions?

To solve the problem, Mexico will need to spend more money more intelligently. Three-quarters of transport investment in urban Mexico goes into expanding and maintaining roads, according to the Institute for Transportation and Development Policy, a think-tank in New York. Some Mexican planners want to change that. The environmental commission advocates doubling the number of Metro lines to 24 and adding 1,000km (600 miles) to the bus rapid transit (BRT) network. The World Bank may lend 3 billion pesos ($170m) for public-transport projects nationwide, including an extension of one of the BRT lines. That will not come close to paying for the commission’s ambitious ideas, which would cost 40 billion pesos a year. Neither the city nor the federal government can afford that.

Nasty little buses

Among the most urgent needs is to do something about smog-belching, privately owned microbuses, which account for half of passenger journeys in Mexico City, says Francisco Barnés of the Centro Mario Molina, a think-tank. He proposes extending the BRT network to the busiest microbus routes and replacing dirty buses with cleaner ones on less popular routes. Other possible fixes would be more parking meters; ending a requirement that builders of new apartment blocks provide enough parking for all their residents; and a congestion charge. These would not be popular. Resistance from bus-owners and commuters may block such changes as effectively as they snarl up the city’s traffic.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21698258-clean-up-its-air-capital-has-spend-more-money-more-intelligently-blocking-traffic/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Technology in Brazil

Faulty powers

A judge shuts down WhatsApp. Chaos ensues

May 7th 2016 | SÃO PAULO | From the print edition



TO RESIDENTS of Lagarto, a town of 100,000 in north-eastern Brazil, Judge Marcel Montalvão is a hero for his pursuit of drug traffickers, a local scourge. The 100m Brazilians who use WhatsApp joke that he must be smoking something himself. On May 2nd Mr Montalvão ordered mobile-phone companies to suspend the internet messaging service for 72 hours. Its alleged offence: it failed to provide information that police had requested in an investigation into narcotics trafficking.

The judge’s order threatened to disrupt not just social life but commerce as well. What started a few years ago as merely a cheap and convenient way for Brazilians to text their friends is now a crucial consumer-to-business communications platform, observes Juliano Spyer, an anthropologist who studies Brazilians’ social-media habits. From hipsterish food-trucks to hawkers in favelas (shantytowns), businesses use it to plug their wares and take orders. “The first thing that ran through my mind when I learned of the block was: bookings!” exclaimed Paula Costa, who runs a bed-and-breakfast near São Paulo. Four in five reservations now come via the app, she says.

In this case, the law itself is not an ass. Brazil’s “internet bill of rights”, passed in 2014, enshrines the principle of “net neutrality” (which obliges network operators to treat all traffic equally). It also gives strong protections to online privacy and freedom of expression. Advocates of internet freedom laud the legislation as an example to follow.

The problem is with how it is implemented and interpreted. Regulations that specify how to apply the law have yet to be passed. Law-enforcement officials are clueless about how to interpret it, and, indeed, about how the internet works, laments Monica Rosina, a lawyer and academic who has lectured to judges, prosecutors and police officers on the subject. Though some are ignorant of technology, judges have been emboldened by their successful crusade against corruption (see article). The result, says Ms Rosina, is that “extreme measures are being treated as standard.” In December a lower-court judge in São Paulo blocked WhatsApp, which is owned by Facebook, for 48 hours on grounds similar to those invoked by Mr Montalvão.

An appeals-court judge unblocked the service well before the suspension had run its 72-hour course. He accepted WhatsApp’s argument that it simply cannot comply with Mr Montalvão’s wishes (it does not store chat histories, and the messages are in any case encrypted). He chastised his fellow judge for causing “social chaos”. Most experts agree that the blanket ban violated net neutrality (by singling out WhatsApp traffic) and freedom of expression (by curbing Brazilians’ ability to communicate). Mr Montalvão based his decision on a clause that permits “temporary suspension of activities” in narrow circumstances. His critics contend he misread it. Brazil’s biggest consumer-protection group called the ban “disproportionate and harmful”.

Some lawmakers want to prevent future disruptions by amending the law to forbid the state from blocking internet services. But a congressional committee on cybercrime, which is dominated by law-and-order conservatives, has its own ideas. It issued recommendations that would make it easier for judges to force network operators to take down entire websites or apps. WhatsAppers are not safe yet.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21698272-judge-shuts-down-whatsapp-chaos-ensues-faulty-powers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

Stop stealing

What lies behind the popular revolt against corruption?

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



EARLIER this year more than 600,000 Mexicans signed a draft anti-corruption bill drawn up by civic groups, thus forcing the country’s Congress to debate it. Popularly known as the “3-out-of-3 law”, the bill would require public officials to publish declarations of assets, taxes paid and possible conflicts of interest. On April 29th, the last day of the parliamentary session, the Senate failed to approve it and an equally important measure to grant independence to a new anti-corruption prosecutor, mainly because of the opposition of the Institutional Revolutionary Party of President Enrique Peña Nieto. Unless Congress calls an extraordinary session and the laws are passed by May 28th, Mr Peña’s vaunted new National Anti-corruption System, enshrined in a constitutional amendment last year, will become a dead letter.

The push for the 3-out-of-3 law is an example of an unprecedented popular mobilisation against corruption in Latin America. This has gone furthest in Brazil, where millions have taken to the streets to demand the impeachment of Dilma Rousseff, the president, and also to back a judicial crusade against graft at Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company, which has seen business leaders jailed and powerful politicians accused.

But it goes wider. In Guatemala street protests and the work of a UN-backed investigative commission helped to topple a president over corruption allegations last year. Protests in Honduras forced the government to accept a similar, though weaker, commission. In Chile, a party-financing scandal prompted laws against conflicts of interest. In Argentina, following a change of government, prosecutors and judges are closing in on Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, the previous president, and her associates.

Corruption has long been endemic in Latin America. Voters have tolerated politicians who “steal but get things done” (an epithet first applied to a populist governor of São Paulo in the 1940s). In highly unequal societies with rudimentary states, the poor were grateful to the few politicians who helped them. The commodity boom of the 2000s brought wealth to governments; some of that was stolen. But overall there is no evidence that corruption has got worse: polls report that slightly fewer respondents say they have had to pay bribes.

Several factors are behind the mounting intolerance of corruption. There is a bigger middle class, which is demanding accountability and wants tax revenues spent on better public services. Social media have made it easier for individual citizens to mobilise. And there has been a slow maturing of civil society.

Perhaps the least remarked development has been what Kevin Casas-Zamora, a former vice-president of Costa Rica now at the Inter-American Dialogue, a think-tank in Washington, calls “the patient building of a new normative edifice” against corruption. Many countries have adopted international conventions against bribery and in favour of open government. These have been complemented by national laws, on freedom of information, increasing the penalties for corruption and, in Brazil under Ms Rousseff, empowering investigators by allowing plea-bargaining. During 30 years of democracy, many of Brazil’s judges and prosecutors have become more independent and more professional.

That is not so everywhere. In the short term, the corruption scandals are undermining faith in democratic politics. There is a risk that anger will be exploited by populist leaders. Hugo Chávez came to power in Venezuela by posing as a crusader against corruption. In office he did his best to increase it, by curtailing the independence of the judiciary, media freedom and accountable government. Some Latin Americans still turn a blind eye to dishonesty: a poll in Lima in 2014 found that half of voters believed that the victor in a mayoral election would steal but get things done.

It is vital that the current mobilisations against corruption translate into more effective laws and stronger institutions. Deltan Dallagnol, a young Harvard-trained prosecutor who heads a task-force investigating the Petrobras scandal, told La Nación, an Argentine newspaper, that the object is “to build citizenship, especially among lower-income people, so that they understand that the money siphoned off by corruption affects the attention that the state gives to their needs.”

That was well said. Many Mexicans get the point. By blocking action against corruption, Mr Peña not only looks like a man whose party has something to hide. He is also putting himself on the wrong side of Latin American history.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21698269-what-lies-behind-popular-revolt-against-corruption-stop-stealing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




State elections in India: The fire goddess of West Bengal

Identity politics in India’s north-east: How green is my valley?

Australia’s looming election: Turnbull rolls the dice

Elections in Malaysia: Rumbles in the jungle





Articles Sections Next

State elections in India

The fire goddess of West Bengal

A local ruling party faces unexpected challenges

May 7th 2016 | KOLKATA | From the print edition



THE impressive view across the Hooghly river from her office high up in the Nabanna building must be pleasing to Mamata Banerjee. True, the other side has yet to sprout the giant Ferris wheel that Ms Banerjee, an admirer of the London Eye in the British capital, keenly wants. But in other respects the great city of Kolkata, capital of West Bengal, looks much as the state’s chief minister would wish.

Even her detractors admit that Kolkata’s crowded streets have grown markedly cleaner since Ms Banerjee’s Trinamool Congress (TMC) stormed to power in 2011, ending the 34-year reign in West Bengal of the communist-led Left Front, during which the state increasingly lagged the economic progress in other parts of India. Better yet for the chief minister, whose dress is often a plain white sari with blue trim, much of the city now basks in her trademark colours. Railings, bridges and even the safety barriers on highways; buses and bus stops; hospitals and government offices—all sport combinations of her blue-and-white. For the current election season, lampposts along Kolkata’s boulevards shimmer at night in spirals of pearl-and-cobalt fairy lights.

Ms Banerjee’s colours are a pervasive reminder of who is boss in West Bengal. Pictures of the chief minister herself are everywhere, often accompanied by slogans that play on the fact that her first name rhymes with khamata, Bengali for power or strength. The chief minister frequently appears in person, too, striding through adoring crowds, her palms pressed together in silent humility. Supporters call her “Bengal’s fire goddess”.

When voting kicked off in West Bengal at the beginning of April, the TMC’s confidence matched its visual dominance. The party holds 187 of 295 seats in the outgoing state assembly. It has sought to cement its popularity with lavish handouts: some 2.5m bicycles for high-school students, sacks of rice for the poor and government stipends for imams in a state where Muslims make up 27% of the 92m-strong population. The TMC machine, which critics say is backed in many areas by local criminal gangs, wields an intimidating presence in a state that has long been coloured by political violence. It is often said that whoever controls the ballot box controls the election. It does not help that the state police are seen as subservient to the party.

Meanwhile, the TMC’s rivals long looked a sorry bunch. The Hindu-nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, in power nationally under the prime minister, Narendra Modi, has never gained traction in West Bengal. As for the Left Front, its crushing defeat in 2011 prompted much of its own street muscle to desert to Ms Banerjee. But in a move that has shocked the hard-core Marxists, the Left Front has now entered an unlikely electoral alliance with an ancient enemy, the Congress Party, once powerful but now the much-diminished national vehicle for the Gandhi clan.



The results of voting in West Bengal will not be announced until May 19th, along with those of three other states holding elections, including neighbouring Assam (see article). Opinion polls before the election, as well as exit polls, are not allowed. But, just possibly, Ms Banerjee is facing a shift in mood among voters.

For a start, fate has recently been unkind to the TMC. In March an independent journalist released videos showing more than a dozen party leaders casually accepting cash bribes from a bogus company seeking favours. Soon afterwards, one part of a controversial new flyover in central Kolkata collapsed, killing 27 people and raising questions about government contracts and shoddy construction standards. The flyover had already come under fire for being over-budget and supremely ugly.

Tales of extortion and corruption under the TMC resonate among middle-class voters, while in some districts criminality by TMC street thugs has turned poorer voters against Ms Banerjee’s party. And to general surprise, the Left Front’s alliance with Congress appears to be quite effective. The former rivals efficiently divided constituencies among candidates and have mounted a strong grassroots campaign.

Ms Banerjee’s toughest challenge, however, comes from outside the state. Aware of West Bengal’s reputation for politically motivated violence, India’s national election commission has been unusually energetic. To ensure adequate policing and monitoring of this year’s vote, it divided the state into six regions and staggered the voting over five weeks, with the final stage held on May 5th. The commission has also used its power to remove local election officials and police chiefs, appointing its own replacements. Police from outside the state have bolstered local forces on election days, mounting mobile and stationary patrols and detaining suspected party thugs.

As a consequence, this election has, to date, been the most peaceful in West Bengal’s recent memory. Yet the chief minister has not taken kindly to the measures. She has lashed out at the election commission and accused the police of “unleashing terror”. She has also threatened retaliation against unhelpful officials when she is returned to power. “I am gentle to those who are good,” she warned at a recent rally, “but if anybody shows red eyes to me he will have to face the consequences.”

Political analysts in Kolkata predict a shrunken majority for Ms Banerjee rather than an outright loss. Still, the suspense before the election result is notably high.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21698250-local-ruling-party-faces-unexpected-challenges-fire-goddess-west-bengal/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Identity politics in India’s north-east

How green is my valley?

The BJP promises to sniff out intruders in exotic Assam

May 7th 2016 | GUWAHATI | From the print edition



FOLLOWING the crooked finger of the Brahmaputra river east and north towards its Tibetan origin, Assam looks like no other place in India. Its lush riverine lands have attracted incomers since ancient times. The result is a medley of peoples of varied languages, dress, cuisines—and political interests.

Yet in the current state election the prize will go either to the incumbent Congress party or to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of the prime minister, Narendra Modi. For the first time, it is making inroads into India’s north-east, as the spectre of illegal immigration from Bangladesh threatens to realign politics in the BJP’s favour. The third parties that represent specific Assamese groups have been shunted into supporting roles, setting the stage for a battle royal between India’s two chief national parties. Should the BJP win in Assam, which with 33m people is the biggest of the north-east’s seven states, the party will be able to claim a brand that now works in every corner of the country.

Mr Modi’s familiar emphasis on the economy goes down well in Assam. But turning the state’s complicated human terrain to the advantage of his party, which has its roots in the Hindi-speaking north and west, requires attention to local detail. The Assamese are anxious to preserve their cultural identity, a mix that combines the easternmost Indo-European stock with ethnic groups of Tibeto-Burman and Tai origin (ie, related to present-day groups in Thailand and Laos), clusters of endemic tribes, and also the “tea tribes” brought by the British from east-central India to work plantations. The BJP’s standard appeal to Hindu-first Indian nationalism never found a wide audience in a hybrid state with occasionally secessionist tendencies.



But Assam also happens to be 34% Muslim, more than any state bar Jammu and Kashmir. Over the past quarter-century the proportion of Muslims has grown rapidly, even as the proportion of Assamese speakers has dipped below 50%. Here the BJP’s strategist, Amit Shah, scented opportunity, claiming in November that the state government was conspiring with a smaller Muslim party, the All India United Democratic Front, to let Bangladeshis pour over the border and change the demographics in the party’s favour. Bangladesh, Mr Modi has also claimed, sounding like an Indian Donald Trump, was sending intruders over the border; his government, given power in the state, would round them up and kick them out. Bengali-speaking Muslims feel threatened, even though many live in communities that have been in Assam for generations, if not centuries. Many have decamped from Congress, their usual party, to the Muslim third party, because it is devoted to their protection.

Though the greatest number of the state’s Bengali-speaking Muslims are descendants of immigrants who arrived under British supervision in the first decades of the 20th century, no one really knows how many have entered Assam illegally since Bangladesh was founded in 1971. Supposedly to determine the number, a National Register of Citizens is being compiled—for Assam only.

Publication of its findings has been postponed several times before the election and will not happen now until after the vote is declared on May 19th. The chances are that relatively few Bangladeshis will be decreed to be in Assam and due for deportation. After all, why would great numbers of poor Bangladeshis want to move to Assam in the first place? Its living standards have improved greatly under the government of the chief minister, Tarun Gogoi, yet they still lag far behind those of Bangladesh. Still, that truth sits uncomfortably with those keen to work up communal divisions for electoral gain.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21698249-bjp-promises-sniff-out-intruders-exotic-assam-how-green-my-valley/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Australia’s looming election

Turnbull rolls the dice

The prime minister gambles that this week’s budget will win the election

May 7th 2016 | CANBERRA | From the print edition



HOURS after his treasurer, or finance minister, unveiled the annual budget, Malcolm Turnbull, Australia’s prime minister, confirmed what for weeks had been an open secret: that he would call a general election for July 2nd. And so the budget laid out by Scott Morrison on May 3rd is less about the fiscal priorities for the coming year than it is the basis for Mr Turnbull’s bid for a new political mandate. That is rather a lot to lay on any budget. But having failed to deliver the “substantial change” that he promised last September when knifing his predecessor, Tony Abbott, as leader of the (conservative) Liberal Party and prime minister, Mr Turnbull has mainly himself to blame.

Gone is Mr Abbott’s rhetoric about fixing the previous Labor government’s “debt and deficit disaster”. Instead Mr Morrison called his document “not just another budget”, more an “economic plan”. The budget deficit of A$40 billion ($30 billion), or 2% of GDP, will fall only slightly next year, to be followed by deficits until at least 2020. Abandoning its pledge to produce surpluses, Mr Morrison now merely says that the budget will be balanced “over time”.

This is candid, at least. Sustained by trade with China, Australia is entering its 26th year of continuous economic growth. The government’s forecast for growth in 2016-17 is a respectable 2.5%. But that forecast was pared back; and a sharp slowdown in Chinese demand, along with falls in the prices of iron ore, coal and gas, Australia’s chief exports, mean that the resource sector’s fabulous profits from the boom in China are a thing of the past. It is probably right that there should be no rush to plug the deficit. For one thing, net government debt, at 19% of GDP, is remarkably low. And now signs of softness are appearing in parts of the economy. In a surprise move hours before the budget, the central bank cut interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point, to 1.75%, citing “unexpectedly low” inflation. It may well move again.

Natural resources were responsible not only for much of Australia’s growth in recent years, but also for much government revenue. Mineral exports will remain important: thanks in part to heavy investment, Australian resource firms are among the lowest-cost producers. But their extra capacity and output has played a part in pushing down commodities prices worldwide. So the country needs to find new sources of growth.

The budget partly reflects the mantra of Mr Turnbull, a self-made millionaire, that offering incentives to innovators is the key. The budget projects a cut in corporate taxation. From July the rate for small businesses with a turnover of less than A$10m will fall from 30% to 27.5%; after ten years the rate for all businesses, big and small, will be 25%.

Australian businesses have long called for such cuts. Meanwhile, the second-highest rate of income tax was pushed out from those earning A$80,000 to A$87,000—helping some 500,000 Australians, the treasurer said. But many others may wonder what is in the budget for them. This is perhaps why Mr Morrison also espoused more popular causes, such as promising punitive taxation for multinational companies deemed to be using loopholes to divert profits to other jurisdictions and so avoid tax. He also promised more infrastructure spending, including a planned freight-rail link between Melbourne and Brisbane, so taking lorries off the roads.

The budget rejected reform in an area that will feature in the campaign: housing. Low interest rates are not the only thing that has encouraged average house prices to nearly double over the past ten years. The crazy practice of “negative gearing”, which allows investors in property to write nearly everything off against tax, has also helped push up prices beyond the reach of Australians in their 20s and 30s (many of whom, even if they are able to buy a property, still have to live with their parents to afford it). Yet Mr Turnbull calls the idea of repealing negative gearing “reckless”, knowing that it would anger property-owners—and possibly alarm banks, heavily exposed to mortgages.

The Labor opposition wants to end most forms of negative gearing. More broadly, Bill Shorten, the Labor leader, intends to campaign on a theme that Mr Turnbull is merely a smoother version of the abrasive Mr Abbott, but just as unfair. Meanwhile, his shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, says he intends to prove to Australians that left-leaning Labor is also the party of fiscal probity.

Mr Turnbull’s campaign hinges on how cleverly he can counteract this. Australia’s fourth prime minister in three years, he at first offered hope to a cynical electorate of ending the country’s political shambles. Recent opinion polls place Labor ahead after second-preference votes. More voters still nominate Mr Turnbull over Mr Shorten as their preferred prime minister, and more still think the Liberal-National coalition, not Labor, will win the election. But it could be more closely fought than seemed likely a few months ago. The coalition holds a comfortable majority. Should it win with a much reduced one, then far from being the solution to Australia’s troubled politics, Mr Turnbull could conceivably become part of the problem—and become as vulnerable to a knifing as Mr Abbott was nine months ago.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21698298-prime-minister-gambles-weeks-budget-will-win-election-turnbull-rolls-dice/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Elections in Malaysia

Rumbles in the jungle

A cakewalk in Borneo is a boon for Najib Razak—at least for now

May 7th 2016 | KUCHING | From the print edition



IN A hut on stilts on the island of Borneo, a dozen skulls hang in a cage. They are those of long-dead victims of the Dayaks—indigenous tribes whose members make up the majority in Sarawak, a sprawling Malaysian state. Once thought to harbour protective spirits, the heads are now tourist curios. Few indigenous people still live in the communal dwellings such relics guard, and those who remain hang Christian crosses on their doors.

This month many Malaysians would like to see the Dayaks take one last scalp. Sarawak’s state election on May 7th is a chance for voters to rebuke Najib Razak, Malaysia’s unpopular prime minister, who has spent much of the past year denying that hundreds of millions of dollars which entered his bank accounts were wangled from an ailing national investment firm. Investigations into 1MDB’s dealings are under way in half a dozen countries; some of its borrowings are in default. Yet parties loyal to Barisan Nasional, Mr Najib’s coalition, will probably retain a crushing majority in Sarawak’s state assembly. That prospect illuminates the prime minister’s resilience, which outsiders find bizarre.

Sarawak is one of two Malaysian states in the northern part of Borneo, abutting the tiny kingdom of Brunei. Matters which enrage voters in Peninsular Malaysia, 500 miles (800 kilometres) across the sea, often feel distant. Victor, a shopkeeper in the town of Bau, says he doesn’t know much about 1MDB: it is “a national issue”, not a local one, he explains. Instead, the topics that irk Sarawakians include shabby road and power networks, land-grabbing loggers and the royalties which Petronas, the state oil firm, pays for access to its wells.

Maintaining Sarawak’s support is becoming essential for Barisan, which in various forms has ruled Malaysia since independence in 1957 but whose popularity among urbanites is collapsing. Mr Najib has visited the state more than 50 times since 2009, impressing locals. Sarawak’s biggest party, the PBB, forms the second-biggest bloc in Mr Najib’s federal coalition; half of its MPs hold cabinet posts. At the general election in 2013, parties from Sarawak delivered 25 seats to the government—whose winning majority was just 22.

Lucky then that polls in Sarawak hand the incumbent a huge advantage. Limited access to the internet means state-controlled newspapers retain great influence. Canvassing the vast interior is hard without helicopters or speed boats, observes James Chin, a political scientist. Years of gerrymandering have doubled the size of the state assembly. Loyal Malay-Muslim areas enjoy a glut of seats; rebellious ethnic-Chinese ones suffer a paucity. Of 11 new seats being added this year, Barisan will snap up ten.

Unsophisticated rural voters are routinely bought with gifts of cash and other goodies. Sanjan Anak Daik, a candidate from the opposition Democratic Action Party, says some are led to believe that grants and subsidies can be demanded back if they vote against the government. An old man waiting for treatment at a grotty clinic in the small town of Siburan—a stop on Mr Sanjan’s campaign trail—says the opposition will never win if all they hand out is leaflets.

This year Barisan is also getting a legitimate boost from the wild popularity of Sarawak’s newish chief minister, Adenan Satem. A survey in January found that Mr Adenan’s approval rating has climbed above 80%; billboards near Kuching, the state capital, boast that “Adenan fever” is rife. In part voters are simply pleased to see the back of his predecessor (and former brother-in-law) Taib Mahmud, who held power for three decades and on whose watch Sarawak’s precious rainforests were plundered. But he has also softened up locals with a barrage of populist policies, including an end to toll roads and new protections for the environment.

His canniest move has been to back growing calls for the federal government to grant Sarawak greater autonomy, co-opting a cause long championed by the opposition. Playing up the state’s distinctiveness has helped Mr Adenan argue that 1MDB’s woes are not relevant to Sarawakians—and to ban from Sarawak scores of opposition figures who, he hints, will bring problems from the peninsula. Opposition parties, for their part, have made a tough job trickier by squabbling over seats, resulting in undignified multi-cornered fights.

Mr Najib’s coalition will sweep the polls. The victory will probably be peddled as proof that the prime minister retains popular support. But the government’s advantage in Sarawak is slowly eroding. Barisan’s share of the vote fell from more than 70% at state elections in 2001 to only 55% in 2011, notes Faisal Hazis, an academic. An old man sitting outside a shop in Siburan says this election is creating more hullabaloo than usual. He thinks the opposition has given locals a much better understanding of how their state is run.

The big opportunity for Mr Najib’s opponents is not to oust Sarawak’s immovable rulers, but gradually to weaken the state’s allegiance to Barisan. Among other disenchantments, Sarawak’s many Christians are disturbed by the Malay-Muslim chauvinist rhetoric which Malaysia’s government increasingly tolerates. If federal elections keep getting tighter, Sarawak’s MPs may be tempted to defect—dumping Barisan from power in exchange for more autonomy or a greater share of oil. For years a firm friend of the ruling party, Sarawak may one day think for itself.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21698308-cakewalk-borneo-boon-najib-razakat-least-now-rumbles-jungle/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Overhauling tax policy: Central tendency

NGOs and religion: Charity ends at home

Enforcing cultural purity: Exterminate the foreign names

Banyan: The 15-year hitch





Articles Sections Next

Overhauling tax policy

Central tendency

A new tax should boost both service sectors and the central government

May 7th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition



“SUCCESS at the start of battle is of course good. But we dare not claim victory yet or let our guard down.” These words, spoken by a Chinese official last week, might have described military efforts to claim territory in the South China Sea or the government’s latest crackdown on foreign ideology (see article). In fact, they were about fiscal policy. The head of the State Administration of Taxation was praising the smooth launch of an expanded value-added tax (VAT). Its roll-out marks the completion of the biggest but also most protracted reform of China’s taxation system in 20 years. It has as much to do with politics as the economy.

On May 1st the government extended VAT from the sale mainly of goods to all major service sectors, including construction and finance. It replaces a business tax based on gross revenues. Under the value-added system, companies may deduct many of their input costs. The VAT rate is higher (for example, 11% for property developers, compared with a business tax of 5%), but the deductions should end up saving them money.

The move may reduce tax receipts by as much as 500 billion yuan ($77 billion) this year. It has led some analysts to characterise it as a fiscal stimulus to counter slower growth, since it will leave companies with extra cash to invest. Yet the short-term impact may be overstated. Tax enforcement in China is patchy, and smaller businesses often understate earnings to save on their tax bills. To obtain VAT deductions, companies will need proper receipts of costs, which in turn will bring more transactions to the government’s attention. Companies will enjoy a lower effective tax rate, but face pressure to declare more income.



In the long run, the tax change is the right move for the economy. China is on the way to joining more than 140 countries with full VAT regimes, according to EY, an accounting firm. It has applied a VAT on its manufacturers since 1994, recognising it as a fairer way to tax companies. But the exclusion of most service sectors tilted the playing field against them, reinforcing China’s overdependence on industry over the past two decades. An industry-dependent growth model has now run out of steam, with services accounting for a bigger share of GDP than manufacturing. A more sensible tax was long overdue.

Politics is to blame for why the switch took so long. The reform exposes cracks between central and local governments that lie at the heart of the Chinese fiscal system. Since the early 1990s policies have placed more and more revenues in the hands of the centre, while saddling local governments with the vast majority of expenditures, from health care to infrastructure. To make up for a shortfall, local governments have relied heavily on sales of land—one factor fuelling a manic construction boom in recent years.

Services offered a rare, reliable stream of revenues for local governments. With a business tax on services, they kept 100% of the take. They feared the VAT change would be modelled on the VAT on manufacturing, from which they receive only 25% of revenues, the remainder going to the central government. So they resisted the reform and delayed its implementation. With pilot programmes dating back to 2012, businesses had at first expected it to go into force last year.

Local opposition to the reform appears to have yielded some benefits. Rather than a 25% share, local governments will get half of all revenues from the new services VAT. What is more, the finance ministry has promised to make transfer payments that will ensure that local governments lose no money from the new tax.

But mother still holds the purse strings

Yet the reform’s completion actually feeds into a renewed centralisation of taxing and spending since President Xi Jinping took office in 2013. Much as local governments are happy to get transfer payments, it implies that officials in Beijing have more control over the purse strings. The central government has also promised to take on additional expenditures, for instance, picking up the tab for more public services and funding more investment in infrastructure. Its share of total government spending, which fell for more than a decade, may well have bottomed out.

The wisdom of centralising expenditures is debatable. Too much can be counter-productive in a big and diverse country. Decentralisation of the other half of the fiscal equation—giving local governments more powers to raise revenues—might have been better. But under a controlling Mr Xi, there was little doubt about which side would come out on top.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21698266-new-tax-should-boost-both-service-sectors-and-central-government-central-tendency/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

NGOs and religion

Charity ends at home

China’s leader guards against nasty foreign influences

May 7th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



DENG XIAOPING once dismissed worries about unwanted foreign influence by saying that when you open a window, of course the flies come in, along with the fresh air. China’s current leader, Xi Jinping, is less insouciant as fly-swatter-in-chief. Witness, in the two past weeks, a newly published speech he gave to the Central Party School, a new law governing foreign non-governmental organisations (NGOs), signs of an unwelcome policy shift towards religions deemed to be too “foreign”, and even, on a lighter note, a ban on landlords naming buildings in China after foreign places (see article).

Mr Xi has long been suspicious of Western ideas (except Marxism-Leninism). But his speech to the party school in Beijing last December, published in a party magazine, Qiushi, on May 1st, was unusually insistent. He repeatedly warned educational institutions not to deviate from the party line and not to “spread Western capitalist values”. They did not sound like the words of a reformer.

And these were not just words. On April 28th the parliament passed a long-debated law concerning foreign NGOs. It imposes onerous registration and reporting requirements on them. All foreign NGOs must report to the Public Security Bureau (ie, the police) and promise not to “endanger China’s national unity…or ethnic unity”—however the authorities choose to define that. More onerous, charities must find an official sponsor from a list to be issued by the government. Charities worry that these sponsors, presumably public agencies, could keep them from activities the government does not like, such as those to do with human rights or labour law. Foreign NGOs will also be banned from raising money in China, which they fear will limit their activities further.

It could have a big impact on civil society, given that much of the work on environmental, women’s, minority and gay rights is done by foreign NGOs. In March the parliamentary spokeswoman, Fu Ying, a relative liberal, affirmed that China’s 7,000 foreign NGOs bring the country valuable expertise. But how many will continue to do so once the law goes into effect next January remains to be seen.

As for religion, on April 22nd Mr Xi convened a big meeting on handling it. Such a gathering happens about once every 15 years and usually signals significant policy shifts. Just before this one, the government decreed that retired party officials should not be members of religious organisations, one more example of tighter party discipline (working officials are already banned from belonging to any religious group). Now the meeting talked about “Sinicising” religion, meaning believers should pay more attention to traditional Chinese culture and identify themselves more closely with China’s “national aspirations”—as defined by an avidly atheist party.

This process seems to be aimed mostly at China’s growing numbers of Christians since, of the other officially recognised religions, Buddhism and Taoism are viewed as culturally Chinese anyway, while Islam is seen through the lens of state security. In the past two years the provincial government of Zhejiang, on the east coast, has removed over 1,500 crosses from churches. It is possible that the big gathering will give a green light to similar actions elsewhere.

Mr Xi is not slamming the door on the outside world. China remains the world’s largest exporter and the second-largest destination for foreign direct investment. But views of the world that offer alternatives to Mr Xi’s increasingly assertive ideology are being constrained. This affects not only foreign NGOs and churches but also universities, where foreign textbooks are restricted; Apple, which recently closed its online book and film store in China; and Western publications (including The Economist) whose distribution in China is curtailed and websites and apps more frequently blocked. In worrying about the flies, Mr Xi risks keeping out the fresh air.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21698292-chinas-leader-guards-against-nasty-foreign-influences-charity-ends-home/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Enforcing cultural purity

Exterminate the foreign names

Xi Jinping’s latest purge

May 7th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition

Jackson Hole: but Hebei not Wyoming

A RIDDLE is making the rounds online: “This morning I go for a drive and pass by American Gardens, Victorian Town, Cannes Water, Vancouver Square, Roman Holiday, Nottingham, Provence and Paris Spring: where am I?”

The answer can only be China. Western-sounding names are commonly used to lend the apartment complexes, towers and gated compounds that have gone up over the past two decades—almost all architecturally adrift and hideously ugly—an air of the international and exotic.

But fear is now rippling through the creative-naming departments of bubble-era property companies. For in March the minister of civil affairs, Li Liguo, called for Western and other “bizarre” property names to be expunged as part of a State Council determination that such names damage—what else?—“national sovereignty and dignity”. In April the Communist Party mouthpiece, the People’s Daily, reinforced the criticism by declaring that foreign property names undermine Chinese cultural tradition.

Weird names for housing developments—think “Merlin Champagne Town” and “Oriental Yosemite”—exist across China. The names in Chinese are generally the closest phonetic representation of the English words, sometimes with the English below for show (a floral, cursive or Gothic script is preferred). Beijing has Venice (Weinisi) Gardens and Florence (Foluolunsa) Town, while Shanghai boasts Thames (Taiwushi) Town and Harvard (Hafo) Apartments. Huizhou, a city in Guangdong province in the south, has complexes called Evian (Yiyun), Imperial Hall Boston (Boxitanuo) and Oriental Babylon (Babilun).

It is not the first diktat against foreign-sounding place names—an earlier regulation from 1996 technically forbade them. Nor were details given about how the latest one is to be enforced. But the measure comes on the back of a spate of official statements that put Chinese culture and “socialist core values” first, while cracking down on the foreign or strange. (President Xi Jinping has also called for an end to “weird architecture”, which will worry some Western architects who have prospered in China.)

Mr Li’s decree has been met with mockery as well as patriotism. “Why not demolish all Western-style apartment blocks…so as not to toady to foreign powers?” wrote one contributor to an online forum. Another commentator wondered whether “ ‘Smog Towers’ has already been taken?”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21698293-xi-jinpings-latest-purge-exterminate-foreign-names/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

The 15-year hitch

A pact from 2001 stirs trouble between China and the West, and between America and Europe

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR China’s leaders it is as if, having signed a postdated cheque in their country’s favour, Western countries are threatening not to honour it. Their excuses—that the cheque was only ever provisional, that their domestic politics make it impossible and that times have changed anyway—serve only to confirm the impression of defaulters wriggling off the hook. So when, as seems likely, not all the world’s big economies grant China “market-economy status” by the 15th anniversary of its accession to the World Trade Organisation in late 2001, China will cry foul and an almighty row will ensue. China will probably take the dispute to the WTO for settlement. This does not mean it is in the right.

China argues that geopolitical and domestic economic considerations are clouding a clear legal obligation. It may also sense an opportunity: to divide the China policies of the West’s two most important components, America and the European Union. More than a decade ago, it gave up hope that it might persuade the EU to lift the embargo on arms sales to China imposed after the Tiananmen killings of 1989. American disapproval put the kibosh on that. Now, however, it may, to American dismay, win “market” status unilaterally from Europe.

At issue is the interpretation of China’s accession agreement to the WTO. Article 15 allows countries to treat China as a “non-market economy” when weighing accusations that it is dumping products abroad—ie, exporting at an unfairly low price. When an alleged dumping country has market status, complaining countries have to compare its export prices with those in its domestic market. For China and other non-market economies, they are allowed to use other similar countries as comparison.

This matters. No country is accused as often as China of dumping (it is the current target of 28 out of 38 anti-dumping investigations by the European Commission). And WTO rules allow members to impose hefty punitive tariffs on dumped products. However, Article 15 provides that if Chinese producers can prove that market conditions prevail in their industry, then the importing country has to use Chinese prices as a comparison. And, it goes on, “in any event” the non-market presumption will expire 15 years after China’s accession—ie, on December 11th 2016.

It amounts, says China, to a guarantee of market status by that date. That is not, however, what the agreement says. Rather, it says that importing countries will lose the right automatically to treat China as a non-market economy for anti-dumping purposes. That is not the same as according it full market status under their domestic laws. China does not enjoy market status in the EU, America or Japan, the world’s three biggest economies not counting itself, nor in other giants such as Canada, India and Mexico. A lot is hanging on the interpretation of Article 15.

When China joined the WTO all those years ago, it appeared bound on a course of market-oriented reform. So the present debate was not foreseen. Yet later, in 2008, a European Commission assessment deemed China to have failed to meet four out of five criteria that the EU sets for winning market status. Since then, despite the Communist Party’s decision in 2013 to let market forces play a “decisive” role, and despite the continued growth of the private sector in China, there has been no fundamental transformation of its economic structure. In 2014 a body set up by America’s Congress to monitor the security implications of economic relations with China noted that many witnesses had told it that “China is not currently a market economy and is not on the path to become one in the near future.”

China is of course right, however, that more than purely legal factors will sway other countries’ decisions. In 2001 China accounted for 4.4% of global merchandise exports. By 2015 the proportion had tripled. As China’s economic clout has grown, so has fear about its impact on jobs elsewhere. In this respect, it is unfortunate for China that the debate is coming to a head at a time of panic in an industry China dominates: steel.

Last year China produced 803m tonnes—50.3% of the global total—and exported 112m tonnes. The world’s second-biggest producer was the EU, with 166m tonnes. Even if China carries out its declared plans to close a lot of steel mills, at the cost of hundreds of thousands of Chinese jobs, it will still have annual excess capacity of 200m tonnes or more. This is great for steel consumers, but threatens the jobs of steelworkers, of whom there are 328,000 in the EU alone. What is more, the closure of steel plants provokes atavistic fears about whether Western manufacturing has a future. To many Europeans and Americans, even national identity may seem to be at stake.

On both sides of the Atlantic, anti-China diatribes are becoming more common. Britain’s Conservative government is accused of sacrificing the steel industry to toady up to China. In America Donald Trump, who accuses China of “raping” America and wants to impose a 45% tariff on Chinese imports, is now the all-but-certain Republican presidential nominee.

Three-way split

It seems unlikely, in this climate, that America will change its laws to grant market-economy status to China. In Europe the decision is harder to call. Britain, the Netherlands and the Nordic countries are likely to be in favour, with some Mediterranean countries, notably Italy, against. In the end, some in Washington fear, Europeans may be tempted to give China what it wants for the sake of commercial advantage and to avoid a quarrel.

If so, that would recall the tussle over the arms embargo. It would also be in keeping with Europe’s role as a distant, detached observer of the geopolitical tussle under way between China and America for strategic primacy in Asia. So the worst outcome of an obscure wrangle over China’s status in the WTO may not be a blazing row with China so much as the widening of an already worrying rift in the transatlantic alliance.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21698265-pact-2001-stirs-trouble-between-china-and-west-and-between-america-and-europe/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Iraq unravels: The ungovernable country

Syria’s war: Spiralling out of control

Syrian refugees in Jordan: Peace, bread and work

Jobs in Africa: In praise of small miners

South African idols: Who owns Mandela?





Articles Sections Next

Iraq unravels

The ungovernable country

Iraq is in desperate need of responsible leaders

May 7th 2016 | AMMAN AND CAIRO | From the print edition



EVEN before America sealed it off with blast walls and razor wire, the area now known as the Green Zone in central Baghdad was viewed with a mixture of fear and loathing. Saddam Hussein, Iraq’s brutal late dictator, adorned his palaces with monuments to himself. After toppling him, the American-led coalition moved into one of these—the Republican Palace—and the Green Zone developed around it. The fortifications were meant to be temporary; a response to an insurgency outside. But as the Americans withdrew, Iraq’s new leaders replaced them in the citadel—and as the main target of an angry public.

It has been 13 years since the fall of Saddam, but many Iraqis are still struggling to get by. Successive governments, detached from the people, have produced little more than staggering levels of corruption and incompetence. Idle officials sit in air-conditioned offices even as the population lacks basic services. Progress seemed possible last year, when Haider al-Abadi, the prime minister, introduced a reform agenda, ostensibly backed by the entire parliament. But MPs’ swift reversion to bickering merely fuelled public outrage, which boiled over on April 30th, when hundreds of Iraqis stormed the Green Zone.

After smashing some furniture in parliament, and beating one of its members, the protesters quickly retreated. But their actions deepened Iraq’s worst political crisis since the fall of Saddam in 2003.

The proximate cause is a dispute over cabinet posts, which are divvied up between political blocs based on sect and ethnicity. The blocs have mostly plundered the ministries under their control. Mr Abadi has tried to shrink the cabinet from 22 ministers to 16 (he previously cut 11 posts), and to replace the political appointees with technocrats who might actually do their jobs. His efforts are backed by America, Iran and Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, Shia Islam’s chief religious authority. He also has the support of Muqtada al-Sadr, a mercurial Shia cleric whose followers dominate the protest movement.

Sadr and sadder

Still, nearly all of Iraq’s political parties cling to the old system, which guarantees them a share of power and its spoils. So even before Mr Abadi’s five least-contentious nominees were confirmed on April 26th, some lawmakers had already hurled water bottles and left the assembly. Days later, a vote on several new nominees was postponed for lack of a quorum.

Forming another will be tough: Kurdish members have returned to their autonomous region, where the crisis is encouraging more talk of independence, and Mr Sadr is off visiting Iran. The speaker says he will try to hold a new session of parliament on May 10th. But some fear it hardly matters and that the country is so divided and corruption so entrenched that it has become ungovernable. Although the prime minister can keep paying salaries, and continue the war against Islamic State (IS), with or without the legislature, there is little anyone can do to fix the Iraqi state.

Mr Abadi had hoped to repair some of the damage wrought by his sectarian predecessor, Nuri al-Maliki. But it may be too late. Tensions are growing between communities, and within them. Shia groups such as the Badr organisation, backed by Iran, and the Sadrist movement battle for influence, while Mr Maliki plots a comeback. In the north the Kurds squabble among themselves. And the jihadists of IS kill more of their fellow Sunnis than anyone else. Emma Sky, a former adviser to the American military in Iraq, suggests viewing the conflicts as “a struggle for power and resources in a collapsing state. A Hobbesian world of all against all.”

Ms Sky says that some Iraqis are reminded of the last days of the monarchy in 1958 when another elite refused to reform, and was overthrown. Mr Sadr has fomented insurrection. “I’m waiting for the great popular uprising and the great revolution to stop the march of corrupted officials,” he has said. More protests are set for May 6th. But the Sadrists may not actually want to topple the government. “They have used their anti-establishment appeal to strengthen their position in the establishment,” says Maria Fantappie of the International Crisis Group, a think-tank.

The economy, meanwhile, is unravelling. The government gets most of its money from oil sales, but the price of the stuff has collapsed. Parliament passed a budget of 107 trillion dinars ($100 billion) for 2016—and projects a deficit of 24 trillion dinars. Officials are hoping for loans from the IMF and World Bank, but the political crisis threatens those, too.

More than 70% of public spending will go to the salaries and pensions of 7m public employees, up from 1m under Saddam. Many sit at empty desks. Mr Abadi has cut the pay of some public employees. But others have been given raises, and politicians will not let him lay anyone off.

Iraq’s war with IS costs millions of dollars each year, and illustrates how the country’s problems compound each other. “If the government was not so messed up, they would have kicked these guys out a year ago,” says Kirk Sowell of Inside Iraqi Politics, a newsletter. During past incidents of unrest, Mr Abadi has withdrawn army units from Anbar province, where IS is strong, in order to secure Baghdad.

The fight to recapture the city of Mosul, Iraq’s second largest, began on March 24th. On May 3rd jihadists counterattacked, breaking through Kurdish defences, killing an American. The eventual liberation of Mosul would damage IS, yet, as Ms Sky notes: “the main lesson of the Iraq surge of 2007-09…was that if the politics do not come together, tactical successes are not sustainable, and things fall apart.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698256-iraq-desperate-need-responsible-leaders-ungovernable-country/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Syria’s war

Spiralling out of control

Attempts to end the war are failing

May 7th 2016 | BEIRUT | From the print edition



“OUT of control,” is how John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, described Syria’s war this week. “A miracle that is now fragile,” said Staffan de Mistura, the UN envoy to Syria, on the partial ceasefire that had brought a degree of calm since it came into force on February 27th.

Violence in Syria is rapidly escalating. Since April 21st the regime has been blasting Aleppo, the country’s biggest city. On April 27th it bombed al-Quds hospital, killing more than 55 people, including Muhammad Wassim Moaz, one of the city’s few remaining paediatricians. In February Médecins sans Frontières, a medical charity, stopped giving the co-ordinates of hospitals it supports to the Syrian and Russian governments. It worries that pro-Assad jets are deliberately targeting them.

The rebels are not blameless. They have intensified their shelling of the government-held part of the city, making life more dangerous for civilians there. On May 3rd a mortar shell fired by rebels killed three people in a hospital. The rebels said they were aiming at a tank nearby.

The regime’s attacks on Aleppo galvanised rare international outrage at Bashar al-Assad, who until recently had been seen by many governments as a lesser evil than Islamic State (IS). A social-media campaign entitled “AleppoIsBurning” sparked protests from Syria to Chicago, after it emerged that a new temporary cessation of fighting that was declared on April 30th excluded Aleppo, the very place that needed it most. Amnesty International and other human-rights groups have called on the UN to impose sanctions on those who deliberately attack hospitals, or otherwise treat the Geneva conventions as blotting paper. On May 3rd the UN Security Council passed a resolution urging members to prosecute those responsible for such crimes.

America, Russia and the UN are now running round trying to salvage the recent partial ceasefire. An extension of the truce to include Aleppo was announced late on May 4th, but it was not clear how it would deal with rebels fighting alongside Jabhat al-Nusra, the local al-Qaeda affiliate. This group is excluded from the ceasefire, along with IS, even though mainstream rebels are often intermingled with it. (They refuse to fight shoulder-to-shoulder with IS because it is too bloodthirsty.)



The rate at which people are dying from the fighting is climbing back to where it was before the ceasefire (see chart). At least 200 people have been killed in regime strikes in the past fortnight alone in Aleppo. If the truce is ineffective—and the parties could not even agree when it was to have started—it is unlikely that peace talks in Geneva will reconvene. (They ended in acrimony last month.)

Furthermore, two assumptions behind the talks are looking shaky. The first is that Russia wants to broker a fair deal between the parties. Although it says it is keen to do so, and has sometimes appeared annoyed at Mr Assad’s stubbornness, its actions have been aimed at giving the regime a military advantage. It is in any case unclear how much leverage Moscow has over Damascus should it wish to force a deal.

The second assumption is that America no longer insists that Mr Assad should immediately relinquish power. Yet it will be almost impossible to bring Syria’s war to a close so long as its chief instigator, who is responsible for most of the roughly half a million war deaths, remains secure.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698255-attempts-end-war-are-failing-spiralling-out-control/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Syrian refugees in Jordan

Peace, bread and work

Jobs for Syrian refugees help them and their hosts, and slow their exodus

May 7th 2016 | AMMAN | From the print edition



FAWZI HAMAMA pulls four months’ worth of electricity bills out of a plastic bag, wondering how he will ever pay them. Since fleeing from Syria to Jordan three years ago, he has sold the gold he gave to his wife as a dowry. The family of four now survives on handouts from international agencies. That does not cover rent on their flat, let alone bills. “I may be kicked out of my home at any time,” he says.

Poverty and rootlessness have become facts of life since the forces of Bashar Assad, Syria’s president, began raining rockets down on Mr Hamama’s hometown in northern Syria at the start of the war. He abandoned his house and job as a driving instructor, and the family fled. In Jordan, he first settled in a refugee camp. Then he was “bailed out” by a relative and allowed, like most Syrian refugees, to move to a flat in Amman, the capital.

Mr Hamama has recently learned to repair refrigerators and air-conditioners on a course paid for by the British government. All he now needs is permission from the Jordanian authorities to work. “We Syrians don’t want sympathy or aid. Just give us work permits,” he says.

That desire makes him a potential beneficiary of an initiative being considered by the European Union and Jordan that could pioneer a new way of dealing with refugees in overstretched host countries. The “Jordan Compact”, agreed in London in February, recognises that the small country has borne a disproportionate burden of hosting refugees, and that other countries have only limited resources to help it. Instead of more aid, it offers a trade-off: the EU will allow more Jordanian goods, such as textiles, into its market if Jordan allows refugees to work in special economic zones (SEZs) or industries that don’t employ many Jordanians.

The SEZs, born out of an export deal with America in the 1990s, currently employ temporary immigrants from Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and elsewhere in South Asia. Most of them are seamstresses in textile factories, such as those in Ad-Dulayl Industrial Park, near Amman, who make clothes for American brands, including Under Armour and LL Bean. They sit behind row after row of sewing machines, ten hours a day, six days a week. Their own headscarves, dresses and shawls from a variety of cultures are far more vibrantly coloured than anything they are stitching.

The managers of one factory, Needle Craft, say they would be happy to employ Syrian refugees, noting that many come from a part of Syria near Aleppo that used to have a garment industry based on home-grown cotton. Needle Craft says it would provide refugees with food and accommodation, as well as pay.

European officials argue that letting Syrians work in such places would provide them with skills to help rebuild their war-shattered country when the conflict ends. It could also help the Jordanian economy, which has suffered during the Syrian conflict, as has that of another neighbouring refugee haven, Lebanon (see chart). Proponents of the initiative hope that Jordanians, too, could find new white-collar jobs in the SEZs.



Europe’s motive is not entirely altruistic. It also hopes that by encouraging employment in Jordan it will slow migration to richer countries. “Providing hope where refugees already are…is the best assurance that they won’t gamble everything, including their lives, to come to Europe,” says Justine Greening, Britain’s international development secretary.

Still, there are pitfalls. European officials will ease some rules on Jordanian imports relating to where goods are made, but they are anxious to ensure that countries such as China do not take advantage to sneak their own textiles into Europe.

Jordanian officials hope the initiative will mark the start of a new way of dealing with a refugee problem that has long weighed on their country. Its ruler, King Abdullah, wittily describes Jordan as being stuck “between Iraq and a hard place”. Previously the hard place was Israel; since the Arab-Israeli war of 1948, huge numbers of Palestinian refugees have settled in Jordan. Now it is Syria; an estimated 1.4m Syrians now live in Jordan, alongside some 6.6m Jordanians.

The Wana Institute, a Jordanian think-tank, notes that there is a “serious flaw” in the traditional way of dealing with refugees. Host countries, including poor ones such as Jordan, are required by international law not to expel refugees who face a genuine threat of persecution. Yet the rich world is not obliged to offer financial support. For decades the kingdom has had no choice but to hold out a begging bowl for international help. This has distorted its economy and made it dependent on aid.

Like their host country, the refugees too tend to become reliant on handouts. Almost 70 years after 1948, many Palestinians (and their descendants) are still supported by the UN.

British officials say that the Syrian refugees are likely to spend 5-10 years in Jordan. Yet offering them jobs is sensitive in a country such as this, where the unemployment rate is above 14% (and almost twice that for women). It would also feed the perception that immigrants are an economic burden on host countries. “We have a joke here,” says a local businessman who supports giving jobs to refugees: “The Egyptian is cleaning, the Syrian is selling, the Iraqi is buying, and the Jordanian is watching.”

To assuage such fears, Jordan hopes to attract new foreign investment to take advantage of its access to Europe’s market. Companies including Asda, a British subsidiary of Walmart, an American retailer, and IKEA, a Swedish home-furnishing store, have flown to Jordan to take a look.

A senior European official says there is “real urgency” to finish the negotiations within the next few months so that the scheme can get under way. If it works, Lebanon may be able to get similar support to provide jobs to refugees on its farms and in its construction industry. Mr Hamama is surprisingly upbeat, for all his hardships. “If I could get a decent job and a decent wage, I wouldn’t even consider going to another country,” he says.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698260-jobs-syrian-refugees-help-them-and-their-hosts-and-slow-their-exodus-peace/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Jobs in Africa

In praise of small miners

A boom in artisanal mining offers lessons in development

May 7th 2016 | ANGOVIA | From the print edition

From early mornin’ till night

ON THE outskirts of the western Ivorian town of Angovia, Joseph Bado hunches over a pile of gold-laced stone, pulverising it with a hammer. Mr Bado, who is in his mid-30s, was born in a farming village in central Ivory Coast. Frustrated by his meagre earnings in the cocoa fields, he left in 2003 to become a miner. His travels took him to neighbouring Ghana and Mali before he returned to Ivory Coast in 2013, drawn by its own nascent gold boom. “You can work for years in cocoa and not get anything. You won’t even have food,” says Mr Bado.

Informal mining settlements like Angovia’s, a series of hills dotted with tattered tarpaulin-covered shelters and pockmarked by deep pits, have been unexpectedly popping up in recent years across the west African country. For many years Ivory Coast’s economic fortunes were tied to agriculture. After independence in 1960 it became the world’s largest producer of cocoa. Few gave much thought to what treasures might lie deeper in its ochre-red soil.

But a slump in cocoa prices and a jump in those of minerals prompted a boom in artisanal mining. From a base of virtually nothing at the turn of the century, the government reckons there are now some 500,000 small-scale gold miners.

Ivory Coast was one of the last guests to the African mining party, arriving just before the music was turned down. Yet across the continent there has been a surge in small-scale mining. The World Bank reckons that the number of artisan miners in Africa has grown from about 10m in 1999 to perhaps 30m today. Among the minerals they dig out with rudimentary tools are gold, diamonds and emeralds.

Angovia’s filth and grime may not, at first glance, commend it. But researchers are concluding that small-scale mining may offer a more attractive path out of poverty than either farming or moving to already overstrained megacities. In Tanzania, for instance, liberalisation of the country’s once dismal socialist economy in the 1980s helped spark the spectacular growth of towns in the country’s gold- and emerald-mining regions.

In the Tanzanian town of Kahama, once a sleepy trading outpost, the population has more than trebled to about 250,000 in the past 15 years, town officials say. An industrial mine that started commercial operations in 2009 has contributed jobs and infrastructure, but locals say small-scale gold mining has driven the town’s explosive growth. Today, the mayor boasts, there are ten banks, 40 petrol stations and more than 300 guesthouses.

For many governments and do-good development agencies, informal mining towns are the very definition of unsustainable—dirty and disorganised, with transient populations. Most miners work clandestinely, since they do not have a legal right to dig. Working conditions are generally poor. Young men, and sometimes children, may be lowered down a flimsy mine shaft 60 metres deep on a rope. Deadly accidents are common. So is the use of mercury, a pollutant, to extract gold.

Some informal mines support killers. Many militias in the Democratic Republic of Congo’s lawless east at least partly finance themselves with proceeds from illicit mining. Some towns, including Angovia, have seen violence between newcomers and existing residents. And sometimes conflict can break out with formal mining companies. AngloGold Ashanti, a South African mining firm, said its plans to invest in rehabilitating Ghana’s Obuasi gold mine, one of Africa’s oldest, have been put on hold since illegal miners invaded it earlier this year.

Governments have responded to the growth of informal mining settlements in two ways. One is to evict the diggers. Ivory Coast’s government, for instance, says it has shut down more than 280 illegal sites since last year. More common, however, is for governments and aid agencies to pretend these new mining towns do not exist. The UN agency and NGO signs that line so many roads in rural Africa are conspicuously absent when the scenery turns from verdant fields to mines.

Both responses are misguided. Small-scale mining is not a curse. On the contrary, it creates jobs in some of the poorest places on earth. Globally, artisanal mines employ about ten times as many people as industrial ones. Moreover, small mining towns are less affected by the commodity boom-and-bust cycle than are towns that depend on large-scale capital investment. Big foreign mining firms tend to retrench quickly when markets turn down; small local miners tend to keep digging. Also, small miners’ earnings tend to be spent locally. In central Mozambique, for instance, increased legalisation of formerly illicit gold mining over a decade has led to a farming renaissance in many villages, alongside booms in construction and trade.

Governments that allow miners to legalise their operations see several benefits. They can keep a closer eye on labour and environmental conditions, and collect millions of dollars in taxes that would otherwise not be paid. In return, they sometimes offer miners basic services such as water and sanitation.

Other bodies are pitching in. The World Bank is working with the African Development Bank to make geological data available to African miners. The American government and European Commission are financing projects to help miners obtain advanced equipment. Some recall that small-scale mining has been an engine of development before. Among other things, it created the cities of San Francisco, Johannesburg and Melbourne.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698262-boom-artisanal-mining-offers-lessons-development-praise-small-miners/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

South African idols

Who owns Mandela?

The ANC has gone from minting heroes to jealously guarding their images

May 7th 2016 | JOHANNESBURG | From the print edition

A national treasure

SOMETIMES even a revolutionary government can seem out of touch. The African National Congress (ANC), which has ruled South Africa since 1994, feels this problem acutely. In the bad old days of apartheid its leaders were unjustly imprisoned and widely admired, even as they broke rocks on Robben Island. Now they are more likely to be fighting corruption charges (like President Jacob Zuma) or living it up in a way their constituents could never afford. At a party in 2012 the then-deputy president of the ANC, Kgalema Motlanthe, told the crowd: “The leaders will now enjoy the champagne, and of course they do so on your behalf through their lips.”

To take voters’ minds off the present, the ANC likes to invoke the memory of struggle heroes such as Nelson Mandela. But amid fierce campaigning ahead of local elections that are planned for August 3rd, control of history is a competitive business.

A newish left-wing opposition party, the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF), is keen to align itself with the icons of the past. Last month it held a lecture on the life of Solomon Mahlangu, a member of the ANC who was hanged by the apartheid government. The ANC was outraged. Mahlangu’s family asked a court to stop the event, accusing the EFF of using his legacy as “an election tool”. The South African Communist Party, a political ally of the ANC, said the EFF was “stealing” revolutionary symbols.

For its part, the ANC is happy to claim heroes from other parties. Last year its leaders flocked to the grave of Steve Biko, who founded the Black Consciousness Movement (a rival to the ANC) to commemorate his death at the hands of apartheid police. They were outdone, however, by the EFF, which arranged a more exuberant rally nearby. The EFF’s firebrand leader, Julius Malema, claimed to be Biko’s true ideological heir.

The jostling over the past involves not just the recruitment of dead heroes but also their scions. The DA scored a coup in April when Ghaleb Cachalia, the son of two prominent anti-apartheid figures, quit the ANC. He joined the DA and said he would run as its mayoral candidate in Ekurhuleni, a huge industrial city near Johannesburg that is currently controlled by the ANC.

After more than two decades of rule by a single party, South Africa is at last seeing the emergence of competitive politics. The battle for votes is fierce: the ANC may lose control of several big cities, including Johannesburg and Port Elizabeth. If past polls are any guide, even Nelson Mandela (who died in 2013) will be caught in the fray. He was a devoted member of the ANC, but a leaflet in 2014 for the Democratic Alliance, the main opposition party, showed him embracing Helen Suzman, a staunchly anti-apartheid member of parliament for a party that preceded the DA. The ANC retorted with a snarky poster pointing out that it had “so many” of its own struggle heroes that there was “no need to borrow”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698205-anc-has-gone-minting-heroes-jealously-guarding-their-images-who/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




NATO and the European Union: Buddy cops

France at war: Aux armes

Turkey’s prime minister: No room for moderates

Repressing Islam in Russia: Salafis mustered

Germany’s migrant complex: Doppelgänger envy

Charlemagne: Visa wars





Articles Sections Next

NATO and the European Union

Buddy cops

New threats are forcing NATO and the EU to work together

May 7th 2016 | BRUSSELS | From the print edition



THEIR headquarters are separated only by a three-kilometre taxi ride across Brussels, and over the years they have declared their shared interests and common values any number of times. But despite having 22 members in common, NATO and the EU have always found it easier to talk about co-operating to than to do so. That may be about to change.

Leaders of both institutions hope that NATO’s biennial summit in Warsaw this July will mark a new era of partnership to defend Europe. NATO’s secretary-general, Jens Stoltenberg (pictured), a former prime minister of Norway, describes it as a “landmark” summit that must respond to big changes over the past two years in the threats Europe faces. Terrorists have slaughtered rock fans in Paris. Syria’s civil war has sent a wave of refugees into Europe. Russia is waging “hybrid war” in the east, achieving its aims with a mix of conventional force, political subversion and disinformation. All these problems are forcing NATO and the EU to find new ways of working together. “We have realised,” says a NATO official, “that we only own part of the tool-box.”

The EU and NATO have managed to cooperate in the past. More than a decade ago, the EU took over stabilisation missions in the Balkans that use NATO’s command headquarters and planning capabilities. These arrangements allow NATO to support EU-led operations in which the alliance as a whole is not engaged. NATO and the EU also tried to form a civil-military partnership in Afghanistan, and both have deployed naval forces to fight Somali pirates since 2008.

But the tendency has been for the two organisations to work in parallel rather than together, leading to wasteful duplication and muddle. In part this is due to the long-running row between Turkey (a member of NATO but not of the EU) and Cyprus (a member of the EU but not NATO) over the former’s occupation of the northern part of the island since 1974. Whenever possible, Cyprus thwarts attempts at cooperation. Meanwhile, America and the alliance’s more Atlanticist members, such as Britain, have always mistrusted Franco-German plans for establishing an EU military planning headquarters (and derided notions of an EU army).



However, the urgency of the new threats facing Europe may be forcing change. “We now have a real reason to work together,” says one NATO official. The hybrid warfare techniques that Russia used to annex Crimea, and to wrest control of eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region away from Kiev, require a response different from the force-on-force confrontations envisaged during the cold war. Diplomatic, communications, military and economic assets must all be used in concert. “It is a more blurred line between peace and war,” says Mr Stoltenberg.

The first challenge, when faced with a hybrid threat, is to understand what is happening and to know where your vulnerabilities are. That means that NATO and the EU must share intelligence and analyse it together, and ensure that both can protect their networks from cyber-attacks. It also means protecting critical infrastructure, such as eastern Europe’s energy supply, and using joined-up communications to counter disinformation.

Mr Stoltenberg is expecting three things to come out of the summit. The first will be a joint statement from him and his EU counterparts on hybrid, maritime, and cyber-security co-operation. He describes it as “an expression of will”. The second is the creation of a playbook for dealing with a range of hybrid-warfare scenarios, to speed up decision-making and answer in advance questions about who does what. The third will be linked EU-NATO exercises next year to test reactions to an emerging hybrid-warfare threat.

How the two alliances will respond to the chaos enveloping Syria, Iraq and Libya is less clear. If the new national-unity government in Libya asks for it, NATO and the EU will provide help building up both military and civil institutions. The refugee crisis led to a more urgent request from Germany, Greece and Turkey for help from NATO. The alliance is working with the EU’s Frontex border agency to stem illegal trafficking and migration by means of intelligence gathering and surveillance in the Aegean Sea and at the Turkey-Syria border. A NATO official describes it as “a challenge of strategic proportions” that requires the use of armed forces. Mr Stoltenberg points to Greek and Turkish officers serving on the Aegean flotilla’s German flagship as an example of NATO-led co-operation between the EU and Turkey.

Security threats are pushing NATO and the EU to improve their relationship. But many will remain sceptical until EU politicians take the issue more seriously. Ian Kearns, director of the European Leadership Network, a think-tank, says: “There is a lot of activity at the official level, but the big challenge is political.” He questions whether the playbook idea can work; in a real crisis, sluggish EU decision-making might prevent anyone from following the script quickly enough. The “game-changer”, he says, would be a deal on Cyprus.

The Americans think more NATO-EU co-operation would be nice, but what they really want is for their allies to spend more on defence. Mr Stoltenberg agrees that it is not “sustainable” for America to cover 72% of the alliance’s spending. But he notes that European defence budgets did, at least, stop falling last year; 16 member countries actually increased them. “It is,” he says, “the first step in a long journey.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698248-new-threats-are-forcing-nato-and-eu-work-together-buddy-cops/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

France at war

Aux armes

Between missions abroad and at home, French military power is stretched thin

May 7th 2016 | LA DEFENSE | From the print edition



A TRIO of soldiers in full combat gear advances in triangular formation, heads swivelling from left to right. On this bright spring afternoon, the unit has been deployed to patrol La Défense. But this is not a military site. It is a shopping-mall and office-tower district to the west of Paris, named after a statue commemorating the capital’s defence during the Franco-Prussian war. The soldiers are part of Operation Sentinelle, patrolling the streets under France’s state of emergency.

When the operation was first launched, patrolling transport hubs and places of worship after the terrorist attacks in January 2015, the idea was to reduce its size as the threat subsided. After terrorists struck Paris again last November, however, President François Hollande imposed a state of emergency, and Sentinelle was reinforced to its full quota of 10,000 troops. The government is now seeking a third extension of the state of emergency to cover the European football championships this summer. Jean-Yves Le Drian, the defence minister, says the operation will continue “as long as necessary”.

For military planners, this is a challenge. Sentinelle is the biggest military operation on home soil since the Algerian war in the 1960s. The French army had planned the capacity to provide 10,000 soldiers for a domestic emergency, but not permanently. Now the strains are showing. General Pierre de Villiers, chief of the French armed forces, said recently that the army was operating “at its limit”.

To try to meet the challenge, last year Mr Hollande raised defence spending by €3.8 billion ($4.4 billion) over four years and expanded France’s operational ground force from 66,000 to 77,000. But the extra soldiers will take time to train. Meanwhile, the army has had to make do. Some exercises have been cancelled. The number of training days between missions has shrunk far below the NATO norm of 90. Last year 70,000 French soldiers took part in Operation Sentinelle, some serving five or six rotations. There is “a risk of being worn out between domestic and foreign operations”, said Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet, a centre-right MP, who recently visited French troops in the Sahel.

Meanwhile there have been complaints about “rustic” camp conditions in Paris, and a lack of beds. Some soldiers are camping in empty former defence-ministry offices. Families, a report noted, seem less tolerant of absences when soldiers are sent to patrol Paris rather than on missions abroad. Morale needs managing, too. The terrorist attacks have prompted a surge in new recruits, but it is not obvious that they signed up to patrol shopping centres.

In the longer run, France may have trouble maintaining its activist defence and security policy abroad. Other European countries that deploy a heavy military force at home, such as Italy, do not also aspire to project force outside their neighbourhood. In 2013 France dispatched 4,500 troops to beat back an Islamist incursion in Mali; America’s RAND Corporation, a think-tank, called it a model expeditionary force. It sent another 2,000 troops to the Central African Republic, to control a “pre-genocidal” situation. France was the first European country to join the American-led coalition striking Islamic State in Iraq, and later Syria.



Overstretch could curb the capacity to respond to new threats. “Our technical capacity is very good,” says General Vincent Desportes, a former army officer and critic of Operation Sentinelle. “But clearly France is in no position to commit to any further adventure.” French expeditionary culture is hardy: in Mali, where soldiers endure desert conditions without optimal supplies or equipment, the army “makes coping with austerity a point of pride”, notes RAND admiringly. But there is a pressing need for more attack helicopters and drones.

Mr Le Drian has described facing the new threat as “entering a different era”. A parliamentary report last year referred to a “change in paradigm”. The most recent strategic defence review, though, was in 2013; it is already outdated. If France’s domestic operation becomes permanent, say analysts, the government will need to do much more than just reverse defence cuts.

France’s pull-out from Afghanistan in 2014 did not much affect the allied mission there, observes Camille Grand, director of the Foundation for Strategic Research, a think-tank. But had it not intervened in Mali, “where our troops are involved in real fighting”, there would have been serious consequences for regional and ultimately European security. France is one of the few Western countries that still projects force abroad. But with its new domestic-security worries, it will need to spend more to continue doing so.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698289-between-missions-abroad-and-home-french-military-power-stretched-thin-aux-armes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Turkey’s prime minister

No room for moderates

Ahmet Davutoglu, architect of the EU-Turkey migrant deal, is forced out

May 7th 2016 | ISTANBUL | From the print edition



FOR Turkey’s prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, May 4th began on a good note. In the morning the European Commission, the European Union’s executive arm, endorsed a proposal to lift visa restrictions for Turks travelling to the bloc’s Schengen zone as of June. For Mr Davutoglu, who had made visa-free travel a key condition for enlisting Turkish help in stemming illegal migration to Europe, the relief was short-lived. By the evening, it was clear the prime minister was out of a job.

The man who pulled the carpet from under his feet was the same one who appointed him less than two years ago: Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Tensions between the increasingly authoritarian Mr Erdogan and his prime minister have simmered for months. The two disagreed over the future of peace talks with Kurdish insurgents, and over Mr Erdogan’s plans to change the constitution to give the presidency executive powers, cementing his grip on government and his own Justice and Development (AK) party.

They also clashed over the management of the economy, and Mr Erdogan’s crackdown on critics. (Its latest victims, two journalists, were sentenced to two years in jail last week for republishing a drawing from Charlie Hebdo, a French weekly, featuring a weeping Prophet Muhammad.) Mr Erdogan has accused his prime minister of stealing the spotlight. “During my time as prime minister it was announced that Schengen travel would come into force in October 2016,” he said recently, referring to the visa talks. “I cannot understand why bringing it forward by four months is presented as a triumph.”

Signs that Mr Davutoglu was fighting for his political life emerged last Friday when AK’s executive body stripped him of the right to appoint provincial party officials. Over the weekend, an anonymous blogger believed to be a member of Mr Erdogan’s inner circle suggested that the prime minister had reached his expiry date. Mr Davutoglu, the blogger alleged on a website named “The Pelican Brief”, had crossed his boss by criticising the arrests of academics and journalists and by declining to drum up support for Mr Erdogan’s executive presidency—and by giving an interview to The Economist last year.

On May 5th, a day after the two men met in Mr Erdogan’s 1,100-room palace, AK’s executive council gathered to settle the prime minister’s fate. It was not clear at press time whether he would resign immediately. But in the coming weeks, AK is expected to hold an extraordinary congress to elect Mr Davutoglu’s successor as party leader. Likely candidates include Binali Yildirim, the transport minister, and Berat Albayrak, the energy minister (who also happens to be Mr Erdogan’s son-in-law).

The bookish Mr Davutoglu, a former foreign minister, may have quietly sparred with Mr Erdogan on occasion, but generally tried to play down divisions. His ouster suggests there is no tolerance left for opposition to the president inside his party. It also reveals the price that Mr Erdogan is willing to pay to pursue his agenda. Within hours of his meeting with the prime minister, the Turkish lira plummeted by almost 4% against the dollar, the biggest such drop since 2008. Fears spread that the EU, which had found in Mr Davutoglu a sensible interlocutor and a channel to bypass his abrasive boss, would lose its appetite for engaging with Turkey.

Mr Erdogan appears not to care. No groundwork has been laid for Mr Davutoglu’s departure. To many AK supporters, who saw their prime minister propel the party to a thumping win in elections last autumn, his abrupt ouster seems puzzling. Ozer Sencar, the chairman of Metropoll, a polling company, said it shows Mr Erdogan wants a referendum on his executive presidency this year: “(Mr Davutoglu) presented an obstacle. He had to go.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698290-ahmet-davutoglu-architect-eu-turkey-migrant-deal-forced-out-no-room-moderates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Repressing Islam in Russia

Salafis mustered

A crackdown drives Dagestan’s Muslims towards Islamic State

May 7th 2016 | KHASAVYURT AND MAKHACHKALA | From the print edition

A pattern of repression

IT WAS prayer time at the Northern Mosque in Khasavyurt, a town in western Dagestan, when troops in black balaclavas arrived one day in February. “They said: ‘This mosque is closing—turn off the lights and hand over the keys’,” recalls one of the congregants. The next day Muhammad Nabi Magomedov, a local imam, led some 5,000 Salafi believers in a march on city hall, chanting “Allahu akbar!” and “Return our mosque!” In early April the security services came for Mr Magomedov, arresting him on terrorism charges.

Once in custody, the imam was told to shave off his beard. Then six men took him into a room. “One said: ‘Get on your knees’,” Mr Magomedov later told a member of Russia’s prison oversight committee, who shared details of their conversation with The Economist. “I said, ‘I won’t get on my knees’.” The men beat up Mr Magomedov, sending a clear signal to the ultra-conservative Salafi community: there will be no dialogue. “It’s a shame,” says Rasul, one of Mr Magomedov’s young followers. “He was one of the peaceful ones.”

Since last autumn, the authorities in Dagestan have ramped up pressure against Salafis. They have reason to worry: as Moscow launched air strikes in support of Syria’s government, the Islamic State (IS) declared a holy war on Russia, took credit for downing a Russian passenger jet over Egypt and released a video threatening “a sea of blood” in Russia itself. Officially, some 900 Dagestanis have left for Syria. Independent experts say the true figure may be as high as 4,000. Even the conservative estimate means that relative to its population, Dagestan has supplied nearly eight times more jihadists than Belgium, the leading source of European foreign fighters. Most fighters who stayed in Dagestan have switched their allegiance from the Caucasus Emirate, a regional insurgent group linked with al-Qaeda, to IS, which last year claimed the Russian North Caucasus as one of its provinces.

So far, IS has failed to launch a big attack on Russian soil. In fact, the exodus of radicals to Syria led to a drop-off in the ongoing low-level insurgency in Dagestan: casualties fell 46% in 2014 and a further 51% in 2015. Yet the past six months have seen a series of smaller attacks, including car bombings, suicide-attacks on police and a deadly shooting at an ancient citadel in Derbent. Violence and flows of money are picking up, says Akhmet Yarlykapov of the Moscow State Institute of International Relations. IS runs several Russian-language media outlets, and Russian officials fret about recruitment. While Mr Magomedov was leading his protest, IS released a video calling on Dagestanis to resist the mosque closures by force.



The Russian government makes no distinction between non-violent Salafis and the radical underground. According to Magomedrasul Saaduev, chief imam of the main state-endorsed Sufi mosque in Makhachkala, the region’s capital, “Moderate Salafism will always remain soil for extreme Salafism.” Police have expanded the use of terror watch-lists, or profuchet. The 15,000 people on the lists are tracked closely and can be detained at any time, forced to give blood and DNA samples and to submit to interrogation. “They ask: ‘When are you going to Syria?’” complains one Salafi man on the profuchet. Last autumn the authorities shut down Makhachkala’s main Salafi mosque. To the south, in Derbent, another Salafi mosque was set on fire.

In Khasavyurt, city officials claim that the Northern Mosque was a place where IS found recruits. Khaibulla Umarov, the town’s deputy mayor, argues that arresting Mr Magomedov helped pacify his followers: “People grasped that the state exists.” More probably, the state’s actions will exacerbate extremism. Sweeping up moderate voices “removes the buffer that stands between young people and those calling for violence,” says Irina Starodubrovskaya, an expert on the North Caucasus. As space for legal Salafi activity shrinks, the community will be driven underground and online, where radical voices have more sway.

Mr Magomedov, whose sermons in Khasavyurt drew thousands, spoke out publicly against IS. Indeed, he was even threatened by extremists. While he and his associates continue to insist on peaceful methods, they warn that his mistreatment plays into the extremists’ hands. “If a rational person...wanted maximally to radicalise the fundamentalist Muslim community,” argues Ekaterina Sokirianskaia of the International Crisis Group, “they would need to use exactly these methods.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698111-police-shut-dagestans-salafi-mosques-believers-head-fight-islamic/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Germany’s migrant complex

Doppelgänger envy

For some Germans, refugees seem like more daring versions of themselves

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



AS THE flood of refugees who arrived in Germany last year has tapered to a trickle, scholars have begun to examine the challenges the migrant crisis poses to German identity. Social scientists are looking at public attitudes. For example, in the aftermath of last winter’s assaults in Cologne, much was made of German fears of Middle Eastern migrants’ sexual behaviour. Research by Marc Helbling, a sociologist in Bamberg, finds that the belief that migrants are sexually dangerous is concentrated among German men and women who are “benevolent sexists”—those who regard women as a weaker sex in need of male protection. This view is more common on the right than on the left.

Others are looking more deeply into how the migrant crisis has affected the national psyche. Matthias Wellershoff, a psychoanalyst in Cologne, has noticed that the crisis forms the emotional backdrop for many of his patients’ complaints. Headlines during the crisis reflected only the most extreme reactions: a euphoric “welcome culture” among some Germans and a xenophobic backlash by others. But judging by what they say on the couch, most Germans’ feelings are subtler and more conflicted.

Many, Mr Wellershoff says, seem to feel a counterintuitive sort of envy. For them, the migrants are “the active ones, the courageous, those who venture forth,” he says. “We, or 99% of us, are not courageous or active.” Most Germans go dutifully about their routines in an efficient but over-regulated economy, doing what is expected of them rather than what they want. They, too, often feel a need to escape.



INTERACTIVE: Where in Germany offers the best opportunities for refugees?

Indeed, like the migrants, Germans often try to escape by heading for Greek beaches. Of course, Germans on package holidays experience those beaches very differently from Syrians in dinghies. The refugees face mortal peril and an uncertain future. The Germans are temporary refugees from a life of material and political security that leaves them feeling boxed-in and depressed. Many Germans would like to change their lives, but cannot bring themselves to do so; the refugees have upped sticks and left. Some Germans see refugees as freer than themselves, and this secret admiration can turn into irritation or depression.

Individual Germans handle these emotions in different ways. In Mr Wellershoff’s practice, those who have not felt welcome in their own lives react “allergically” to the term “welcome culture”. Some become envious: why do the refugees get free bus tickets? Others want to erect barriers, physical or metaphorical, and keep migrants away.

But many of Mr Wellershoff’s patients transcend both naive attempts to deny that migration creates problems, and fantasies of fence-building. “I myself have the same feelings sitting on my chair behind my couch listening to them,” he says. As German philosophy has recognised since the days of Hegel, it is in confronting the Other that one begins to understand oneself.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698284-some-germans-refugees-seem-more-daring-versions-themselves-doppelg-nger-envy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

Visa wars

To keep asylum-seekers out, the European Union must let 75m Turks in

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN Macedonia was granted visa-free access to the European Union’s Schengen area in 2009, its citizens popped champagne corks in the streets. Last week, as Turkey passed a last-minute flurry of laws to win the same prize, MPs brawled in the National Assembly. Now, as the European Commission proposes waiving visas for Turkey in a deal to send back migrants from the Greek islands, it stands accused of rewarding a serial human-rights violator and undermining its own values.

The decline tells a story. Over the years the EU has run out of tools to influence its neighbours. The most powerful was the promise of enlargement, but that has run out of steam; the club has struggled just to digest its eastward expansions in 2004 and 2007. Creating regional associations short of membership made elites happy, but often did little for ordinary citizens.

That left the prospect of visa-free travel as the last card in the deck, and for those Balkan countries that won it a few years ago, it succeeded. Laws improved and bureaucracies were streamlined. There were hiccups: last year Balkan Roma seeking a few months of benefits surged into rich countries like Germany, making unwarranted asylum claims. But these were quickly fixed by judicious rule changes.

Now Turkey, Ukraine, Georgia and Kosovo are all in line for visa waivers later this year. From the EU’s perspective, loosening visa rules for neighbours is a triple win. To obtain it, countries must pass better laws on matters like border control and data protection. The process encourages pro-EU, reformist forces in sometimes unstable countries. Perhaps most importantly, it encourages commercial and cultural exchange, and removes a source of grievance from people otherwise forced to endure long queues at embassies and mind-numbing piles of paperwork. “It is sometimes hard for outsiders to understand just how important this is for us,” says Natalie Sabanadze, Georgia’s ambassador to the EU.

Seen in this light, the proposal to exempt Turks from visa requirements looks positive. Turkey began negotiations to join the EU in 2005; its outraged politicians never fail to point out that it is the only candidate country still on the visa list. For their part officials in Brussels argued that visa liberalisation would bind Turkey closer to EU norms; would strengthen the hand of its pro-European prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, against the increasingly autocratic president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan; and would enable ordinary Turks to visit their relatives, zip around on Interrail trains and sell their wares at German trade shows. In other words, it would work for Turkey as it has for other beneficiaries.

Not so fast. The tourism and business links that visa-free travel will foster are an unalloyed good. But Turkey is on a dangerous path that a mere visa process will not derail. Mr Erdogan, determined to quash dissent, has detained journalists and academics under anti-terrorism laws. Asli Aydintasbas, of the European Council on Foreign Relations, points out that the legislation Turkey passed in the 2000s as part of its EU membership bid, which was still on track back then, has hardly stopped Mr Erdogan’s march towards illiberalism. As for Mr Davotuglu, this week he was squeezed from power by his irascible boss. That places the future of the migrant deal he negotiated with the EU in jeopardy.

Note the irony. Traditionally conceived, visa liberalisation is the sort of policy that might be designed by a foreign minister steeped in Joseph Nye’s theory of soft power. But in Turkey’s case, granting visa-free access to 75m people is simply the price paid by the EU to keep irregular migrants away. And extra safeguards will be put in place to forestall abuses, such as overstaying visas. Call it the revenge of the interior ministers. Once the stuff of geekery, their preoccupations—border security, asylum rules, passport technology—are now driving EU policymaking. “Before last year migration was like transport policy,” says one EU official. “Too boring for the alpha politicians.” Now it dominates summits.

The approach is infectious. This week the commission also proposed a radical revision of the EU’s rules on asylum-seekers. The plans include a complex formula to redistribute asylum-seekers around the EU from countries facing a huge influx, as Greece did last year. Countries that refuse to take their share will face big fines, and the EU asylum office’s role will be greatly expanded. The proposals are so far-reaching that Britain urgently sought an exemption ahead of its referendum on EU membership. (This was eventually secured in a weekend frenzy of phone calls between London and Brussels.) All involve a transfer of powers to Brussels; none would have been countenanced a couple of years ago. The business of migration, asylum and security, long the side act of EU policy, is becoming the main show.

All along the watchtower

The switch will not be easy. The commission’s asylum plans must now be discussed by Europe’s governments. Many, particularly in the continent’s eastern half, will not take kindly to orders from Brussels to receive refugees, or to the threat of fines. (A previous relocation plan flopped last year.) The deal with Turkey must be approved by governments as well as by the European Parliament, which never misses a chance to assert its independence from grubby politicking. Both will scrupulously monitor Turkey’s attempts to meet the five outstanding “benchmarks” that remain before visa-free travel may be granted. On one of them, Turkey’s draconian anti-terrorism laws, it is hard to see Mr Erdogan reversing course to a degree that will satisfy MEPs. Should the visa bid fail Mr Erdogan has vowed to tear up the migrant deal, and Mr Davutoglu will not be around to protect it.

A policy paradox is emerging for the EU. Europe’s governments have learned the hard way that they can manage the hot potatoes of migration and asylum only by co-operating. And yet it is because these issues matter so much that politicians are reluctant to cede control. There are big battles to come.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698253-keep-asylum-seekers-out-european-union-must-let-75m-turks-visa-wars/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




EU referendum campaign: The eternal quest for youth

Leicester’s success: Foxes and tigers

Brexit brief: City blues

Working hours: Nice work if you can get it

Migration crisis: Rebels with a cause

Port Talbot steelworks: Either ore

The rental market: Full house

Bagehot: The loneliness of Ken Livingstone





Articles Sections Next

EU referendum campaign

The eternal quest for youth

So far opinions have barely shifted. That means the outcome will depend on turnout by young voters

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THIS week’s local elections, the results of which were due after The Economist went to press, will be parsed for what they mean for Jeremy Corbyn, the embattled Labour leader (see article). But they will also be analysed as a guide to the more crucial vote on European Union membership soon after, on June 23rd. Referendum campaigning will now step up a gear.

What is notable about opinion polls on the referendum is how little they have moved (see chart). Barring the odd blip, the Remain side has a small lead. Reforms David Cameron brought back from Brussels—the start of a prime ministerial campaign to stay in—and a Treasury report on the economics of leaving the EU appear to have had no impact. Nor has the advice of America’s president, Barack Obama, against Brexit. The number of “don’t knows” is still over 10%, but predictions that most will vote Remain are less sure.



Polls find a clear majority of Tory voters favour Leave, whereas some two-thirds of Labour voters back Remain. Only a third of better-off adults are for Leave, against half of the poor. Above all there is a big age gap. Discounting “don’t knows”, two-thirds or more of older voters support Brexit, compared with only one-third of younger ones. In this respect Britain is unlike other countries, where older voters favour the EU more than younger ones do. John Curtice, a political analyst at Strathclyde University, suggests some older British voters who in 1975 voted to stay in the common market want to rectify their error.

This puts a premium on turnout. Backers of Brexit are more committed and more likely to vote. As in elections, the old vote more than the young. The two main campaigns, Britain Stronger in Europe (BSIE) and Vote Leave, disagree about almost everything else, but they agree on turnout. If it is below roughly 60%, Leave will win; if above, it will be Remain. This should worry Mr Cameron. Unlike the Scottish independence vote in September 2014, when turnout was exceptionally high at 85%, the EU campaign has engendered only limited passion so far—and the little there has been is mostly on the Leave side.

Voters’ divisions also affect the issues that campaigners choose to concentrate on. The Remain side talks up the risks of Brexit for the economy and jobs, because young people worry more about these. A barrage of reports to this effect have emerged from the Bank of England, the Confederation of British Industry and the IMF. Most recently the Treasury suggested Brexit would cost the average family £4,300 ($6,245) a year by 2030. Days later the OECD, a think-tank of mostly rich countries, said that the cost in 2020 would be equivalent to an extra tax of £2,200 on every household.

With another Treasury paper on the short-term costs of Brexit due soon, Leavers are avoiding the subject. On alternative trading arrangements Michael Gove, the justice secretary, incurred ridicule by noting that even Albania had free trade with the EU. This week Lord Lawson, a former chancellor, wrote in an essay for Politeia, a London think-tank, that the alternative to EU membership was simply non-membership. But most Leavers have conceded that the short-term effects of uncertainty would be negative. So they focus instead on taking back sovereignty and curbing immigration, two issues that resonate particularly with older voters.

The campaigns range beyond the central issues of the economy, sovereignty and migration. In many ways the underlying question is what sort of country voters want. Brexiteers appeal to old nostalgics and also to the angry and dispossessed who are attracted to populist parties in Europe and to Donald Trump in America. That is one reason to worry that, despite claims to the contrary by people like Mr Gove and Boris Johnson, outgoing mayor of London, a vote to leave would mean a more closed, inward-looking Britain. Yet although Mr Cameron told a parliamentary committee on May 4th that he wanted a big, bold Britain, the Remain side hardly trumpets a more positive future, relying heavily on stressing the risks of Brexit.

Both sides lay claim to the patriotism label, just as both insist a vote for them is the way to retain the status quo (a harder line for Brexiteers to sustain). And both bring in extraneous matters in support of their cause, ranging from the Brussels bombings to the woes of the Port Talbot steelworks to the merits of a transatlantic trade deal. Two examples stand out. One was when Theresa May, the home secretary, said that, although she backs Remain for security reasons, she wants to pull out of the European Convention on Human Rights, an idea promptly slapped down by none other than Mr Gove. The second is general scaremongering over the funding of the National Health Service, a sacred cow that is now paraded in all political arguments, however irrelevant it may be.

The NHS argument is, of course, yet another bid to win over older voters. But it is the young who will decide the outcome. Will Straw, executive director of BSIE, says his group has established 72 branches in universities, and insists that much is being done to raise voter registration and encourage postal voting. Mr Cameron, too, wants to appeal to the young, speaking this week of “a choice for a generation”. But the young need more inspiration from the left.

It is striking how feeble the official Labour Party’s engagement in the campaign has been so far. Most trade unions back Remain and Mr Corbyn has given a dutiful speech in favour. Emma Reynolds, an energetic pro-European backbencher, promises that, after the local elections, the party will focus more intensively on the issue. Yet voters suspect, rightly, that Mr Corbyn is at heart a Eurosceptic. And many Labour supporters object to the idea of rescuing Mr Cameron from his folly in calling the referendum. The vote will remain hard to predict right up to the day itself.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698270-so-far-opinions-have-barely-shifted-means-outcome-will-depend-turnout-young/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Leicester’s success

Foxes and tigers

There are lessons to learn from the city as much as from the football club

May 7th 2016 | LEICESTER | From the print edition

Richard III: my kingdom for a fox

FOR 20 years the English Premier League has been dominated by glamorous foreign players paid for by Russian oligarchs and Arab sheikhs, to the exclusion, some feel, of local players and fans. So the country woke up with a collective smile on its face on May 3rd, after Leicester City Football Club clinched the title for the first time. Leicester, known as the Foxes, are among the league’s least glamorous clubs, based in one of the nation’s least fancy cities. At the start of this season bookmakers gave odds of 5,000 to 1 on a Leicester title, longer than those on Jeremy Corbyn—the bearded, Marxist leader of the Labour Party—becoming the next James Bond.

Now, the world is beating a path to Leicester’s door to find out how they did it. Management theories abound (see Schumpeter). What people might find is that it is not just the football club, but the city (population: 340,000) that has plenty to share. Leicester was for good reason chosen as the first stop on the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee tour of the country in 2012. In some ways it is the epitome of modern Britain. Locals argue that the footballing triumph is but the validation of Leicester’s re-emergence as a city; a mix of long-term ambition and unflashy, organic growth.

“Leicester clothes the world” was the slogan when the city was full of hosiers and bootmakers; in 1936 it was named as the second-richest city in Europe. But in the 1980s Leicester lost almost all this to cheap overseas competition. Rebuilding the devastated economy has been a painful task, but is now bearing fruit.

The development of a strong entrepreneurial culture has been important. Leicester has the fastest business growth rate outside London, and its gross value added, a measure of economic output, rose 22% between 2009 and 2014. This has spawned plenty of jobs, sucking newcomers in; between 2001 and 2011 its population grew by 17%, the fourth-highest rate in the country.

Immigration has contributed much. In 1972 when Idi Amin kicked Asians out of Uganda, 30,000 of them, mainly Gujaratis, settled in Leicester, where they set up their own businesses. Crown Crest, a large retail chain, was founded by immigrants. Another family made a fortune selling toilet rolls. Leicester is now one of only three towns and cities outside London to have a majority non-white British population.

The city’s universities are among the country’s most entrepreneurial. Undergraduates are encouraged to develop their own startups, and the universities award seed money to “incubate” them. Local politics have helped too. Leicester is one of only five cities in England with a directly elected mayor: Labour’s Sir Peter Soulsby, in office since 2011, says this enables him to take fast executive action when opportunities arise. The council was quick to exploit the unearthing of the remains of King Richard III under a car park in 2012, and brilliant at marketing the find to tourists.

The council has also encouraged small businesses, says Jon Prest, managing director of a local media design company. It matches up companies with properties and landlords, and has created a Cultural Quarter to help revive the city centre. Sir Peter says he has avoided getting Leicester swallowed up into any sort of regional devolution deals. Keeping its local identity while drawing on its global links is the Leicester way.



INTERACTIVE: Flying foxes - footballing pay and performance

The same could be said about the Foxes. Romantics see the team’s success as a serendipitous triumph of character over money, the yeomen of England vanquishing the overpaid glamour boys. There is indeed plenty of home-grown talent in the Leicester team, but the Foxes, too, have their own foreign billionaire owner, Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha, of Thailand’s King Power group, who bought the club in 2010. Unlike others, however, he has not splashed out on star players to boost his profile, but has invested for the long term, spending £100m on infrastructure, such as a training ground and youth academy, and on scouting for overlooked talent.

The total cost of Leicester’s regular team (£25m, or $36m) is less than a quarter of what Manchester United spent on new players last summer. “This year’s success has come sooner than expected,” says a spokesman. Nor is Leicester’s success limited to football. The city’s rugby union team, the Tigers, is England’s most successful.

The Foxes will look to emulate the Tigers’ long-term success. Even if they do not, they have given hope to the unsung clubs of English football, as their city has done the same for unheralded English towns.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698271-there-are-lessons-learn-city-much-football-club-foxes-and-tigers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit brief

City blues

The financial-services industry would be one of the biggest losers from Brexit

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THE place with most at stake in the Brexit debate may be the City of London, Britain’s financial hub. Although the European Union’s single market in services is incomplete, it clearly works in wholesale financial services. Today London is more obviously the financial centre of both the EU and the euro zone than it was 20 years ago, inspiring much jealousy among potential rivals like Paris and Frankfurt. José Manuel Barroso, a former European Commission president, bluntly told a recent conference organised by UK in a Changing Europe, an academic network, that, post-Brexit, “London could no longer be the financial capital of Europe.”

According to TheCityUK, a lobby group, almost 2.2m people work in financial and related services such as accounting and the law, two-thirds of them outside London. They produce nearly 12% of GDP, 11% of the country’s tax take and a net trade surplus of £72 billion ($104 billion). Financial services have taken a third of foreign direct investment in Britain since 2007, most of it coming from the EU. Some 250 foreign banks operate in London, and over 200 foreign law firms have offices across Britain.



A Brexit study by PwC, an accounting firm, for TheCityUK concludes that gross value-added in financial services would fall by 5.7-9.5% by 2020 and employment by 70,000-100,000. The sector would grow more slowly and some firms would relocate to other EU financial hubs. The main cause would be the loss of “passporting rights”. These allow any British-based bank or investment firm to trade across Europe: without them, firms would have to set up separately capitalised subsidiaries inside the EU. A study by Frontier Economics for London First, another lobby group, also finds that total British trade in services would fall by £67 billion-92 billion a year.

Brexiteers dismiss all this as scaremongering. London was a financial centre, they say, long before Britain joined the EU. Indeed, membership has been damaging by imposing stupid rules. Gerard Lyons, economic adviser to the mayor of London, argues that Europe cannot replicate the City: the real competitors are New York, Singapore and Hong Kong, not Paris or Frankfurt. Brexiteers say their opponents also claimed 15 years ago that the City would suffer if Britain did not join the euro. No wonder, they conclude, that City opinion is divided, with many bankers and hedge-fund managers backing Brexit.

This last claim is wrong. Repeated surveys find that most current practitioners want to remain in the EU. It is hard to find a single bank in favour of Brexit. It is true that hedge-fund bosses like Crispin Odey and Paul Marshall are big contributors to Vote Leave, the main pro-Brexit campaign. But David Harding, founder of Winton Capital Management, is one of the biggest backers of Britain Stronger in Europe, the chief pro-Remain group, and he is not alone.



INTERACTIVE: The Economist's “Brexit” poll-tracker

The case against EU red tape is also unconvincing, not least because the City has thrived inside the club (see chart) and the 2008 financial crash led to demands for more not less regulation. Brussels can be annoying, especially when it sets limits on bankers’ bonuses. But most of today’s regulations stem from international accords like the Basel rules on bank capital or domestic proposals in the Vickers report into bank structure. As an EU member, Britain has often improved clumsy draft regulations coming from Brussels. Were it to leave, it would lose any influence over the EU’s planned capital markets union.

As for Europe’s ability to compete, Chris Cummings, chief executive of TheCityUK agrees that nowhere can challenge the City as a whole. But the risk is that chunks of the industry would migrate. Dublin and Luxembourg are strong in fund management, for instance. The most immediate threat is to clearing and settlement of euro trades, which the European Central Bank has already tried to relocate into the euro zone, only to be rebuffed by the European courts. Were Britain to leave the EU, it would lose this judicial protection. The profits from clearing and settlement are crucially important to financial exchanges.

It is true that concerns about the City were rife when Britain refused to join the euro. But the loss of passporting rights matters far more than being out of the single currency. Fears over the City’s future are one reason why sterling has been so wobbly this year. Some in the City reckon it could fall by another 20-30% post-Brexit—the betting on which may explain why a few hedge funds back the idea.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698267-financial-services-industry-would-be-one-biggest-losers-brexit-city-blues/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Working hours

Nice work if you can get it

Britons are getting more leisure time. That may not always be a good thing

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



GLOBALISATION has not been kind to Britons’ work-life balance. Foreign competition has increased, encouraging people to work harder. British businesses must meet demands from customers based in different timezones. The internet allows people to check in with work colleagues at any time. Professional types, with legal and financial skills in demand across the globe, have in recent decades come under the greatest pressure to slog.

Some data suggest that the long-term decline in British working hours, from at least the end of the nineteenth century (when the average working week was 60 hours), was slowing or even reversing by the 1990s. Newspapers talk fearfully of the emergence of a “cult of overwork”, driven by new technology. The latest evidence seems to show that such worries are justified. Since 2011 the average number of hours that people spend at work has risen by 3%, according to data from the Office for National Statistics.

Yet interpreting recent trends is complicated by the financial crisis. The number of hours worked slumped during the recession: firms won fewer contracts and bartenders were offered shorter shifts. As the economic recovery took hold, it is hardly surprising that hours rose a little. Over a slightly longer time-frame, however, the notion that Britons are working ever harder does not stand up. The average full-timer now spends an hour less working per week than they did in the 1990s. (The data take into account extra work that people do at home—checking e-mail first thing in the morning, for instance—since they are based on surveys of what people say they do, not what employers reckon.)

In addition, the number of Britons putting in long shifts is falling. In the early 2000s about a quarter of workers laboured for more than 45 hours a week, but by 2015 this had dropped to about a fifth. Even highly skilled people, those most likely to be in high-pressure jobs, may be feeling a little calmer. Between 2000 and 2015 the proportion of workers with a degree above a bachelor’s who worked more than 60 hours a week fell from 7% to 5%.

All this may reflect a shift in employers’ attitudes towards work. Some bosses are acting on a body of econometric evidence suggesting that working fewer hours makes people more productive, both on a per-hour basis and over a full week. Goldman Sachs, a bank, recently told its young charges that they need not work on Saturdays. On two days a week, those working at Agent Marketing, a firm based in Liverpool, now work for just six hours. “We cut through a lot of the admin which takes up time, to focus on actual project delivery,” says Paul Corcoran, the managing director.

Improved technology may force some people to check e-mails in bed, but it can liberate others. In recent years the rate of home-working has risen—about 14% of workers are based at home, up from 11% in 2000. People working on a laptop from the kitchen take things easier than they would if they were in an office.

Legal changes also play a role. The working-time directive (WTD), a European Union plan to limit the working week to 48 hours that was introduced in Britain in 1998, may have reduced time spent at work, according to a government report from 2014. The WTD may also have encouraged workers to take more holiday, the report finds. Survey data suggest that there are fewer workers than in the early 2000s who work more than they would like to. All this may be having a positive impact on health: the incidence of work-related stress has fallen by a tenth in the past decade.

However, the fall in working hours may have a dark side. Despite six years of post-recession growth (and a record low jobless rate of about 5%), underemployment—particularly of those with low skills—is a problem. According to David Blanchflower of Dartmouth College and David Bell of Stirling University, the number of hours people say they would like to work is higher than the number they actually do. The gap between the two is likely to have risen further in the first quarter of 2016, as fears over Brexit cause the economy to slow. Some Britons may be taking a more enlightened approach to working hours, but others may simply be struggling to make ends meet.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698285-britons-are-getting-more-leisure-time-may-not-always-be-good-thing-nice-work-if-you-can/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Migration crisis

Rebels with a cause

The government concession over lone child refugees shows where Britain’s true opposition lies

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

Refugees to England in another era

TO DESCRIBE the Conservative Party as the dominant force in British politics would be an understatement. The opposition Labour Party under Jeremy Corbyn, its unelectable leader, is irrelevant—especially when it is having one of its sporadic crises (see article). The real battles over power in Britain are taking place within the Tory fold, not on its flanks. For the foreseeable future the leadership of the Conservative Party comes with an official residence: 10 Downing Street.

So it is easy to forget that the party has a slender working majority of just 18 seats. Occasionally reality comes calling, as in the days leading up to May 4th, when David Cameron finally announced that he would relax rules preventing lone child refugees in continental Europe from seeking asylum in Britain. Currently the country only takes in such migrants directly from camps in the Middle East. From the continent it has taken just a small handful who have relatives in Britain. Now, the prime minister has confirmed it will accept young, lone migrants who registered in France, Italy or Greece before March 20th. The exact number will be decided in consultation with local councils.

This was a departure from past policy. On April 25th the government had whipped its MPs to vote against an amendment put forward by Alf Dubs, legislating for the admission of 3,000 lone child refugees. Lord Dubs is a Labour peer who came to Britain as a six-year-old in the Kindertransport rescue programme in 1939. The amendment failed by 276 votes (mostly Labour and Scottish nationalists) to 294 Tory ones. James Brokenshire, the immigration minister, deployed the usual line in opposition to the amendment: Britain’s focus is on helping displaced people in the Middle East and on limiting the “pull factors” persuading them to venture across the Mediterranean Sea in rickety boats.



INTERACTIVE: European asylum, acceptance and denial

There are political reasons for this stance. The EU referendum in June may turn on which side best defines the choice before the electorate. The Remain campaign says it is a vote on the economy; the Leave campaign portrays it as a vote on immigration. Mr Cameron, whose legacy as prime minister depends on a Remain vote, wants to deny his opponents their ammunition. Moreover, Britain has a vast international aid budget that it struggles to spend. So it is natural to focus on improving conditions in Middle Eastern camps rather than taking in large numbers of refugees.

Yet now the government has broken from this strategy. While it claims that the March 20th cut-off will discourage other refugees from trying to cross the Mediterranean, the decision to accept children from the continent sets a precedent and is thus a U-turn. Why has Mr Cameron done this? Not because of Labour. The decisive factor was the prospect of a Tory rebellion. Many of the 30 or so Conservative rebels had met with Mr Brokenshire on May 4th. Already Stephen Phillips, a popular MP, had written to colleagues urging them to support the watered-down Dubs amendment that cleared the House of Lords on April 26th. Especially influential was an editorial in the Daily Mail, the loudest anti-immigration voice on Fleet Street, urging the government to make an exception for unaccompanied refugee children.

All of which carries a lesson for Labour’s leadership and political idealists of all shades. Campaigners in the party (most notably Yvette Cooper, the former shadow home secretary) along with those beyond it (like Sir Erich Reich, another Kindertransport veteran) deserve credit for helping to change the mood. But ultimately Mr Cameron’s U-turn was a function of the power of Tory MPs. Change pushed by the opposition is a possibility; change pushed from within government, a certainty.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698286-government-concession-over-lone-child-refugees-shows-where-britains-true-opposition/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Port Talbot steelworks

Either ore

Britain’s biggest steel mill is up for sale

May 7th 2016 | Port Talbot | From the print edition

The dragon still roars, but for how long?

THE two giant blast furnaces at Port Talbot were still pouring out large volumes of molten iron this week. Every few minutes large “torpedoes” full of the stuff, the size of large lorries, emerged from the two plants to be moved by rail to where it will be processed into steel sheets. But it wasn’t quite business as usual, for May 3rd was the deadline for prospective buyers to register an intention to buy the plant.

Tata Steel, the current owner, has been losing more than £1m ($1.45m) a day on Port Talbot, and is therefore selling it, together with the rest of its British operations. Two groups have emerged as possible buyers, but whether either of them can produce a sustainable future for Port Talbot is questionable. At stake are about 4,300 jobs and the future of steelmaking in Britain.

One contender is a management buy-out, led by Stuart Wilkie, a senior manager at Tata Steel, and Roger Maggs, the chair of Port Talbot’s Waterfront Enterprise Zone. Their newly-formed Excalibur Steel wants to revive the “turnaround plan” presented and rejected by Tata Steel’s board in Mumbai in March. This would include various efficiency measures intended to make producing new steel at the two blast furnaces profitable by the end of 2017, continuing the work of the present owners. They hope to fund the £200m-400m they may need to complete the buy-out with a combination of government funding, bank loans and by asking present and past employees to invest up to £10,000 each in the project.

Lined up against them is Liberty House, a steel firm led by Sanjeev Gupta, from a family of Indian billionaires. His plan involves increasing the amount of steel that the plant produces out of scrap metal from the current level of around 20% of its output, and away from producing steel from raw coke and iron ore. This would eventually involve installing energy-efficient electric arc furnaces of the sort seen in “mini-mills” in America. These have lower labour costs and can easily be switched on and off to cope with changing demand.

Mr Gupta argues they could be viable at Port Talbot; such equipment is already in operation in nearby Cardiff. While the profitability of new steelmaking is highly vulnerable to coal, iron-ore and steel prices on global commodity markets, margins on melting down scrap are much more stable. And there is plenty of this available: Britain produces 9m tonnes of scrap a year, of which two-thirds is smelted abroad due to Britain’s high energy prices.

Recycling this scrap at home would be much greener than exporting it abroad to places such as Turkey where less environmentally-friendly forms of energy are used. And not only does this save on green miles transporting the stuff in and out of Britain, but also means that Britain would need to make less steel from iron ore, a carbon-intensive process; Port Talbot is one of the most polluted places in the country.

As the bids presently stand, the management buy-out’s is the least convincing. If Tata Steel, a well-capitalised multinational with global expertise in technology and marketing cannot turn Port Talbot round, a poorly-funded management buy-out with little expertise in global marketing or supply chains will hardly do better.

Mr Gupta’s plan appears more viable, because it attempts to find a sustainable model for the industry in the long term. But even so, Liberty House would still need some help from the government to reduce the labour, energy and environmental costs of the plant, in particular by removing the carbon taxes from the electricity his arc furnaces would use.

But here the government is bound to be helpful. David Cameron, the prime minister, paid a surprise visit to Port Talbot on April 26th and reiterated his government’s pledge to do “all it can to support the sustainable future of steelmaking” at the plant. Mr Cameron is mindful of the impact of job losses if Port Talbot were to close. Mr Gupta must therefore be hopeful that he can strike a good deal with ministers to sweeten his takeover.

Most workers at the plant probably favour the Excalibur plan, as it preserves the status quo, and with it most of the jobs. However, they want to examine carefully the terms on which they might be asked to invest in the new project. Under the management buy-out’s plan, if steel prices drop, the workers could find themselves without their jobs or their savings. And any dowry given to the firm that could have been spent retraining workers would be wasted in a repeat of the collapse of Rover, a Midlands carmaker that went bust five years after a similar buy-out in 2000.

While Mr Gupta’s plan may involve some job losses much sooner, it will give time for workers to retrain and other firms in the area to grow. Although some steelworkers may move away to projects such as HS2, a high-speed railway, there are plenty of opportunities in Swansea and in Cardiff, which is the top city in Wales for job creation. Steel has traditionally dominated the local economy. Now other industries must take the lead.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698288-britains-biggest-steel-mill-up-sale-either-ore/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The rental market

Full house

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



IN A red-hot housing market, a “For Sale” sign does not stay up long. But since the crash, it has often been replaced upon completion by a “To Let” sign. England’s housing stock has swelled by 1m since 2008 but, with poor returns for investors elsewhere, private rentals grew by 1.3m. Owner-occupation fell by 2%. Attempts to build even more housing and increase home-ownership have failed. A new 3% tax on buy-to-let homes may do little when prices are climbing 8% a year, as they did to February. Meanwhile, Barclays became the first high-street lender to offer a 100% mortgage to new home-buyers since 2008. Conditions apply, but as the average home now costs ten times median earnings, boosting demand but not supply looks foolhardy.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698287-full-house/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

The loneliness of Ken Livingstone

Anti-Semitism in the Labour Party does not reflect British society at large

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



IN HIS book “Submission”, Michel Houellebecq, a French author, conjures up a France of 2022 ruled by an anti-Semitic alliance of spineless socialists and conservative Islamists. The country gets its first Muslim president, causing Jews, including the narrator’s girlfriend, to flee to Israel. When the novel appeared last year some called it bold satire; others said it was Islamophobic. Its timing heightened its inflammatory effect, coming out on the day of the attacks on Charlie Hebdo, a satirical magazine, and followed two days later by killings at a kosher supermarket.

To judge by some recent newspaper headlines (especially in America), one might think Britain were becoming the France of Mr Houellebecq’s lurid imagination: “Britain’s raging anti-Semitism scandal”, “Is it time for the Jews to leave Europe?”, “Why the Labour Party won’t confront British Muslim anti-Semitism”.

The subjects of these stories, it is true, have a faintly Houellebecquian aura: in the past weeks each day has brought a new example of what some in the party insist on calling its “issues around anti-Semitism”. A Labour councillor suggests Islamic State is an Israeli front. Another compares Israelis to Nazis. The co-chair of the Oxford University Labour Club resigns and claims many of its members “have some kind of problem with Jews”. Jeremy Corbyn, the party’s far-left leader, a self-declared friend of Hamas and a former presenter on Iran’s Press TV, only reluctantly suspends Naz Shah (an MP in Bradford) for suggesting that Israel be “transported” to America. To crown it all Ken Livingstone, a leading Corbynista and the former mayor of London, unburdens himself of the assertion that Hitler supported Zionism before he “went mad and ended up killing 6m Jews”.

Coming at a time when anti-Semitic attacks in Britain have risen (some Jewish schools now hold terror-attack drills), these developments have the country’s Jews understandably worried. Jay Stoll, of the Jewish Labour Movement, describes a Passover service during which, before prayers, the rabbi pointed to Mr Livingstone’s comments as proof that they “may not be so secure” in Britain. It is thus tempting to lump Labour’s ongoing moral degradation in with the broader rise of anti-Semitism in Europe.

In truth, however, the British picture is more complex. According to Jonathan Boyd of the Institute for Jewish Policy Research, anti-Semitic sentiment among Britons is “fairly stable in general”, whereas “levels of antipathy among non-Jews towards Jews are higher in more or less every European country but the UK”. Jonathan Arkush, president of the Jewish Board of Deputies, agrees that although communal anxieties have increased—partly because of the attacks in Paris and Brussels—the public’s attitude towards Jews is “not fundamentally changing” and the government is committed, in word and deed, to protecting them.

Britain remains a much better place to be a Jew than France, where just leaving the house wearing a yarmulke is much riskier than it is across the Channel. In London (unlike Paris) the old establishment’s antipathy to Jews (Harold Macmillan once moaned that Margaret Thatcher’s cabinet contained more “old Estonians” than old Etonians) has gone. While one source says some 5,000 French Jews have moved to Britain in the past few years, there is, Mr Arkush notes, no question of British Jews leaving for, say, Israel in large numbers. When Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, urged them to do so, several Jewish groups issued a terse rebuff rejecting his entreaty and its premise.

Far from metastasising through British society, anti-Semitism is largely confined to certain pockets within it. One is the electorally moribund far right. Large parts of British Islam are another, where antipathy to Jews becomes especially prominent when nerves jangle in the Middle East (for example during the Gaza crisis of 2014, when a placard reading “Hitler would be proud” loomed above a peace march in London). And then—only sometimes linked to Islamic anti-Semitism—there is the far left.

There, too, the picture is more nuanced than the headlines suggest: it is not clear whether socialist anti-Semitism is now on the rise, or just noisier and more prominent than before. Asking Jewish Labourites what they make of it all, Bagehot frequently encounters the observation that the comments and opinions now making the news have long existed among spittle-flecking old lefties—for whom Israel’s alliance with America relegates Jews, even British ones, to the very bottom of the hierarchy of victims deserving sympathy—and in depressed northern towns, like Bradford, with large, Labour-voting Muslim populations. By winning the party leadership last September Mr Corbyn, in the words of Howard Jacobson, a Jewish writer, merely emboldened and gave new voice to “something that had been there all along”. Mr Arkush agrees: “What has become so plain for everyone to see in the past weeks is something the Board of Deputies has been warning about for some time, but has not been heeded.”

No submission

The rise of anti-Semitic incidents should worry Britons—and guard against any complacency born of the comparison with other European countries. Yet visions of a monolithic anti-Semitism sweeping British society are unhelpful. First, they are flat-out inaccurate and alarmist. Second, they distract attention from the ugly exceptionalism of those narrow segments of British life where the virus stubbornly thrives, and as such let the likes of Mr Corbyn off the hook. (Labour’s leader, in whose circle Mr Livingstone’s implicit conflation of Israeli government policy with Jewishness is virtually de rigueur, can barely bring himself to admit that the problem exists.) Third, the suggestion of a blanket anti-Semitism taking hold of the country gives London’s former mayor and his ilk headlines they do not deserve. Mr Livingstone is not some tribune of social change but an embittered old man whose views are still gratifyingly repellent to the vast majority of Britons. By his solitude may he be known.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698264-anti-semitism-labour-party-does-not-reflect-british-society-large-loneliness-ken/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




Our crony-capitalism index: The party winds down

Corporate ownership and corruption: How to crack a shell





Articles Sections Next

Our crony-capitalism index

The party winds down

Across the world, politically connected tycoons are feeling the squeeze

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



TWO YEARS ago The Economist constructed an index of crony capitalism. It was designed to test whether the world was experiencing a new era of “robber barons”—a global re-run of America’s gilded age in the late 19th century. Depressingly, the exercise suggested that since globalisation had taken off in the 1990s, there had been a surge in billionaire wealth in industries that often involve cosy relations with the government, such as casinos, oil and construction. Over two decades, crony fortunes had leapt relative to global GDP and as a share of total billionaire wealth.

It may seem that this new golden era of crony capitalism is coming to a shabby end. In London Vijay Mallya, a ponytailed Indian tycoon, is fighting deportation back to India as the authorities there rake over his collapsed empire. Last year in São Paulo, executives at Odebrecht, Brazil’s largest construction firm, were arrested and flown to a court in Curitiba, a southern Brazilian city, that is investigating corrupt deals with Petrobras, the state-controlled oil firm. The scandal, which involves politicians from several parties, including the ruling Workers’ Party, is adding to pressure on Brazil’s president, Dilma Rousseff, who is facing impeachment on unrelated charges.

A Malaysian investment fund, 1MDB, that is answerable to the prime minister, is the subject of a global fraud probe. Supporters of Rodrigo Duterte, the front-runner to win the presidential election in the Philippines on May 9th, hope he will open up a feudal political system that has allowed cronyism to flourish. In China bosses of private and state-owned firms are now routinely interrogated as part of Xi Jinping’s purge of “tigers” (a purge that has left Mr Xi’s family well alone). Worldwide, tycoons’ offshore financial cartwheels have been revealed through the Panama papers.



The economic climate has been tough on cronies, too. Commodity prices have tanked, cutting the value of mines, steel mills and oilfield concessions. Emerging-market currencies and shares have fallen. Asia’s long property boom has sputtered.

The result is that our newly updated index shows a steady shrinking of crony billionaire wealth to $1.75 trillion, a fall of 16% since 2014. In rich countries, crony wealth remains steadyish, at about 1.5% of GDP. In the emerging world it has fallen to 4% of GDP, from a peak of 7% in 2008 (see chart 1). And the mix of wealth has been shifting away from crony industries and towards cleaner sectors, such as consumer goods (see chart 2).



Despite this slowdown, it is too soon to say that the era of cronyism is over—and not just because America could elect as president a billionaire whose dealings in Atlantic City’s casinos and Manhattan’s property jungle earn him the 104th spot on our individual crony ranking.

Behind the crony index is the idea that some industries are prone to “rent seeking”. This is the term economists use when the owners of an input of production—land, labour, machines, capital—extract more profit than they would get in a competitive market. Cartels, monopolies and lobbying are common ways to extract rents. Industries that are vulnerable often involve a lot of interaction with the state, or are licensed by it: for example telecoms, natural resources, real estate, construction and defence. (For a full list of the industries we include, see article.) Rent-seeking can involve corruption, but very often it is legal.

Our index builds on work by Ruchir Sharma of Morgan Stanley Investment Management and Aditi Gandhi and Michael Walton of Delhi’s Centre for Policy Research, among others. It uses data on billionaires’ fortunes from rankings by Forbes. We label each billionaire as a crony or not, based on the industry in which he is most active. We compare countries’ total crony wealth to their GDP. We show results for 22 economies: the five largest rich ones, the ten biggest emerging ones for which reliable data are available and a selection of other countries where cronyism is a problem (see chart 3). The index does not attempt to capture petty graft, for example bribes for expediting forms or avoiding traffic penalties, which is endemic in many countries.



The rich world has lots of billionaires but fewer cronies. Only 14% of billionaire wealth is from rent-heavy industries. Wall Street continues to be controversial in America but its tycoons feature more prominently in populist politicians’ stump speeches than in the billionaire rankings. We classify deposit-taking banking as a crony industry because of its implicit state guarantee, but if we lumped in hedge-fund billionaires and other financiers, too, the share of American billionaire wealth from crony industries would rise from 14% to 28%. George Soros, by far the richest man in the hedge-fund game, is worth the same as Phil Knight, a relative unknown who sells Nike training shoes. Mr Soros’s fortune is only a third as large as the technologyderived fortune of Bill Gates.

Developing economies account for 43% of global GDP but 65% of crony wealth. Of the big countries Russia still scores worst, reflecting its corruption and dependence on natural resources. Both its crony wealth and GDP have fallen in dollar terms in the past two years, reflecting the rouble’s collapse. Their ratio is not much changed since 2014. Ukraine and Malaysia continue to score badly on the index, too. In both cases cronyism has led to political instability. Try to pay a backhander to an official in Singapore and you are likely to get arrested. But the city state scores poorly because of its role as an entrepot for racier neighbours, and its property and banking clans.

Encouragingly, India seems to be cleaning up its act. In 2008 crony wealth reached 18% of GDP, putting it on a par with Russia. Today it stands at 3%, a level similar to Australia. A slump in commodity prices has obliterated the balance sheets of its Wild West mining tycoons. The government has got tough on graft, and the central bank has prodded state-owned lenders to stop giving sweetheart deals to moguls. The vast majority of its billionaire wealth is now from open industries such as pharmaceuticals, cars and consumer goods. The pin-ups of Indian capitalism are no longer the pampered scions of its business dynasties, but the hungry founders of Flipkart, an e-commerce firm.

In absolute terms China (including Hong Kong) now has the biggest concentration of crony wealth in the world, at $360 billion. President Xi’s censorious attitude to gambling has hit Macau’s gambling tycoons hard. Li Hejun, an energy mogul, has seen most of his wealth evaporate. But new billionaires in rent-rich industries have risen from obscurity, including Wang Jianlin, of Dalian Wanda, a real-estate firm, who claims he is richer than Li Ka-shing, Hong Kong’s leading business figure.

Still, once its wealth is compared with its GDP, China (including Hong Kong) comes only 11th on our ranking of countries. The Middle Kingdom illustrates the two big flaws in our methodology. We only include people who declare wealth of over a billion dollars. Plenty of poorer cronies exist and in China, the wise crony keeps his head down. And our classification of industries is inevitably crude. Dutch firms that interact with the state are probably clean, whereas in mainland China, billionaires in every industry rely on the party’s blessing. Were all billionaire wealth in China to be classified as rent-seeking, it would take the 5th spot in the ranking.

The last tycoons

A possible explanation for the mild improvement in the index is that cronyism was just a phase that the globalising world economy was going through. In 2000-10 capital sloshed from country to country, pushing up the price of assets, particularly property. China’s construction binge inflated commodity prices. In the midst of a huge boom, political and legal institutions struggled to cope. The result was that well-connected people gained favourable access to telecoms spectrum, cheap loans and land.

Now the party is over. China’s epic industrialisation was a one-off and global capital flows were partly the result of too-big-to-fail banks that have since been tamed. Optimists can also point out that cronyism has stimulated a counter-reaction from a growing middle class in the emerging world, from Brazilians banging pots and pans in the street to protest against graft to Indians electing Arvind Kejriwal, a maverick anti-corruption campaigner, to run Delhi. These public movements echo America’s backlash a century ago. The Gilded Age of the late 19th century gave way to the Progressive Era at the turn of the 20th century, when antitrust laws were passed.

Yet there is still good reason to worry about cronyism. Some countries, such as Russia, are going backwards. If global growth ever picks up commodities will recover, too—along with the rents that can be extracted from them. In countries that are cleaning up their systems, or where popular pressure for a clean-up is strong, such as Brazil, Mexico and India, reform is hard. Political parties rely on illicit funding. Courts have huge backlogs that take years to clear and state-run banks are stuck in time-warps. Across the emerging world one response to lower growth is likely to be more privatisations, whether of Saudi Arabia’s oil firm, Saudi Aramco, or India’s banks. In the 1990s botched privatisations were a key source of crony wealth.

The final reason for vigilance is technology. In our index we assume that the industry is relatively free of government involvement, and thus less susceptible to rent-seeking. But that assumption is being tested. Alphabet, the parent company of Google, has become one of the biggest lobbyists in Washington and is in constant negotiations in Europe over anti-trust rules and tax. Uber has regulatory tussles all over the world. Jack Ma, the boss of Alibaba, a Chinese e-commerce giant, is protected by the state from foreign competition, and now owes much of his wealth to his stake in Ant Financial, an affiliated payments firm worth $60 billion, whose biggest outside investors are China’s sovereign wealth and social security funds.

If technology were to be classified as a crony industry, rent-seeking wealth would be higher and rising steadily in the Western world. Whether technology evolves in this direction remains to be seen. But one thing is for sure. Cronies, like capitalism itself, will adapt.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21698239-across-world-politically-connected-tycoons-are-feeling-squeeze-party-winds/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Corporate ownership and corruption

How to crack a shell

Ownership registries could help to end the corporate secrecy that fosters corruption. But current plans are not promising

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



JOHN CHRISTENSEN runs the Tax Justice Network, a group that campaigns against tax evasion and corruption. A decade ago, its message fell on deaf ears. No longer. After the Panama papers leak last month, Mr Christensen says international media were camped at his door for days, seeking his views on how to stop dodgy dealings.

Corruption has flown up policy agendas, thanks to the work such crusading groups have done to reveal the extent of hidden offshore wealth to angry voters facing austerity. On May 12th Britain will host an anti-corruption summit. Officials from around 30 countries, including America, Brazil and Nigeria, will attend.

Discussion will range from secret ownership of offshore firms to corruption in sport. It will, no doubt, end with a forceful declaration; commitments may be harder to extract. Campaigners are hoping for progress on corporate transparency, disclosure of payments in oil, gas and mining, and co-operation in cross-border corruption cases.

Cracking open shell companies is the most important of these. There is a correlation between graft and these anonymous vehicles: take investigations into a suspected multi-billion-dollar theft from 1MDB, a Malaysian state fund, which are focused on shell companies in the Seychelles and Caribbean. Tracing illicit funds to a shell’s bank account is of little use if you cannot identify the individuals who control it. This worries business people as well as policymakers: a recent survey of corporate leaders in 62 countries by EY, an accounting firm, found strong support for more openness in ownership; legitimate firms want to know whom they are trading with.

International standards on “beneficial” owners (the real people, as opposed to other firms, behind firms) have been tightened, but remain quite loose. The information should be collected somewhere, whether in registries or by company-formation agents, and made available to “competent” authorities when requested.

Practice varies greatly. Some offshore centres, including Jersey, have had (non-public) registries for years, having set them up under pressure after scandals—though they rely heavily on regulated formation agents to collect, verify and update information. In America, by contrast, agents are not licensed, and ownership information is not collected, let alone verified.

Momentum is shifting towards central registries. A new European Union directive calls on members to set these up and to make the data available to police, tax authorities and others with a “legitimate interest” (such as investigative journalists). Britain has gone further: it launched a public registry last month. Other countries, including Australia and the Netherlands, plan to do the same.

In principle, openness seems a fair exchange for the privilege of limited liability. But there are problems in practice. Those registries already up and running tend to be purely archival: they do not verify incoming information because of the cost. This tempts money-launderers to lie.

Britain plans criminal penalties for false declarations. But unless declarations are checked—and resources are stretched already—ne’er-do-wells may take their chances. Formation agents have little incentive to push for accurate information: monitoring of the industry, which falls under HM Revenue & Customs, is scant.

Britain’s overseas territories argue against public registries, partly on privacy grounds but also because they consider their “gatekeeper” model to be more robust. This places a duty on law firms, trust companies and other registration agents to collect and certify beneficial owners’ identity documents. The offshore centres argue that leaning on regulated entities, close to the client, is more practical and effective than relying on registries, which are further removed from the action and do not face the threat of licence suspension.

In Jersey, ownership information and the source of funds must be verified at registration. The regulator also makes checks, including to ensure that formation agents update information when ownership changes. By comparison, vetting on the British mainland is “rubbish”, says a regulator who has worked in both systems.

There are problems with the gatekeeper model, to be sure. Ownership information can get lost along chains of intermediaries. Some (though very few, it seems) conspire with crooks. Enforcement is patchy: Jersey has jailed rogue formation agents, but the British Virgin Islands does no more than pull licences, and even then only rarely.

Nevertheless, research suggests that, for all the criticism, offshore financial centres have done more to comply with beneficial-ownership rules in recent years than their onshore peers. That may be surprising in the light of the Panama papers and other leaks—but much of what they contain is 15 or even 20 years old. The most comprehensive study, “Global Shell Games” by Michael Findley, Daniel Nielson and Jason Sharman, was conducted in 2012. The authors e-mailed 3,773 formation agents around the world, posing as consultants looking to set up untraceable firms. Agents in offshore centres, they found, were much less willing to deal with them than service providers in OECD countries. Not a single one in Jersey or the Cayman Islands took the bait; dozens did in America.

The authors concluded that blacklisting had forced offshore centres to get tougher, whereas OECD countries had never faced equivalent pressure and could get away with being laxer. That could change with public registries—if more big countries follow Britain’s lead, and if both policing and punishment are strong. But Mr Sharman is not reassured by the blueprints on the table. Self-declaration without verification is, he reckons, the public-registry model’s weak point. As currently designed, it risks being “completely ineffectual”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21698241-ownership-registries-could-help-end-corporate-secrecy-fosters-corruption/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Special report: Finance in China




Finance in China: Big but brittle

Banks: Breaking bad

Shadow banks: Dark and stormy

Capital markets: Risky returns

Politics: Power to the party

Global impact: Nowhere to hide

The way forward: Pain and prosperity





Articles Sections Next

Finance in China

Big but brittle

China needs to free up its financial system, even if it hurts, says Simon Rabinovitch

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THE HEAD OFFICE of Sheyang Rural Commercial Bank is a reassuringly solid building. Its grey stone façade and arched doorways convey a feeling of prosperity, a splash of high finance in this small county town in eastern China where grain fields nip at the edges of factories. But look a little closer, and you will still find a couple of scars from the bank’s near-collapse two years ago. One is a digital sign running in a loop over the entrance: “Treasure your hard-earned money, avoid the temptation of high returns, stay far from illegal financial schemes.” The second is a prize draw for cars, a pair of gleaming white Kias on a red platform outside the bank. “Deposit 100,000 yuan today and win the chance to drive a new car home,” blares the announcement. The bank is fighting to attract customers because it knows all too well what it is like to lose them.

Decades of heady growth had put money into the pockets of Sheyang’s residents. But China’s big banks had little time for the countryside. Farmers who wanted to buy homes or start companies struggled to get loans. Illegal lenders stepped into the gap; they collected cash from those with idle savings and lent it out, often at double-digit interest rates. Business boomed. As locals put it, the lenders sprouted up like bamboo shoots after a spring rain—until a few years ago, when a harsh wind uprooted them. The economy was slowing and investment plans relying on superfast growth fell apart. Borrowers could not pay back what they owed. The unregulated lenders started defaulting on their depositors. Panic spread. In March 2014 it was rumoured that even Sheyang Rural Commercial Bank, which is owned by the government, was low on cash.

This was enough to spark China’s first bank run in years. Crowds gathered outside its branches, waiting for hours in the drizzly chill to get their money out. Bank managers stacked up bricks of 100-yuan notes (China’s largest denomination) to show they had sufficient cash. Yet fear travelled like a virus, infecting another nearby bank. On the third day of the panic the China Banking Association, an industry group, entered the fray and declared the rural banks to be healthy—in effect, pledging to stand behind them. That ended the run. It had taken the full weight of the nation’s banks acting in concert to restore calm.

One county’s travails might not seem worth making a big fuss about. After all, the deposits at Sheyang Rural Commercial amount to just 13.5 billion yuan ($2.1 billion), barely 0.01% of the total in banks nationwide; and the problems were successfully contained. But the run raised troubling questions. How could the authorities have let so many illegal lenders operate? Why were they suddenly collapsing? If they were in such bad shape, were proper banks safe? Was China on the brink of a financial crisis?

The scale of potential trouble in China is immense. Its banking sector is the biggest in the world, with assets of $30 trillion, equivalent to 40% of global GDP

Sheyang’s bank run is just one of a series of problems to reveal cracks in the Chinese financial system in recent years. Others include a cash crunch in 2013, a wave of shadow-banking defaults in 2014, a stockmarket collapse in 2015 and a surge of capital flight at the start of 2016. Underlying it all, China has seen a dramatic rise in debt, from 155% of GDP in 2008 to nearly 260% at the end of last year, according to an estimate by The Economist. Few countries have gone on borrowing binges of that magnitude without hitting a crisis.

The scope for potential trouble in China is immense. Its banking sector is the biggest in the world, with assets of $30 trillion (see chart), equivalent to 40% of global GDP. China’s four biggest banks are also the world’s four biggest. Its stockmarkets, even after the crash, together are worth $6 trillion, second only to America’s. And its bond market, at $7.5 trillion, is the world’s third-biggest and growing fast.



A cocoon of regulations limits direct foreign involvement in China’s financial system, but connections are deepening by the day. Given its economic heft, serious problems could easily dwarf the global consequences of any previous emerging-markets crisis. Even the mild yuan depreciation at the start of this year (1% against the dollar in one week) sent shock waves around the world, upsetting stocks, currencies and commodities. Just imagine the effects of a big one.

Still, it is worth recalling that predictions of financial doom in China have long been wrong. Because of the nature of the system—the state owns both the banks and their biggest borrowers—the government is in a much better position to dictate outcomes than those in most other countries. Until recently the financial system has been very conservative. Plain-vanilla bank lending is the dominant form of credit; exotic products such as securitised loans that caused havoc in rich economies barely exist in China. Moreover, liquidity buffers are strong: residents have historically had little choice but to stuff their cash in banks, and a semi-closed capital account has made it hard for them to send money abroad.

All these controls have allowed China systematically to gather up its people’s savings in its banks and use the money to build infrastructure, factories and homes, fuelling economic growth. When lending has gone badly wrong, as it did in the 1990s, the state has recapitalised its banks and fired up the lending machine again. Not best practice for an advanced economy—but, as Taiwan and South Korea have shown, it can be a supremely effective model for development.

Crunch time

Even so, China’s status quo cannot be sustained for ever. Returns on capital are declining. It now takes nearly four yuan of new credit to generate one yuan of additional GDP, up from just over one yuan of credit before the global financial crisis. As the population ages and the economy matures, growth is bound to slow further.

At the same time, bad debts from the past decade’s lending binge are catching up with banks. Given slower growth, it will be tougher to clean them up than it was 15 years ago, when the country was booming. Moreover, the edifice of control is getting shakier: shadow finance is eating away at the power of state-owned banks, and the capital account has sprung leaks that regulators are struggling to plug.

China has, in other words, reached a level of development where it needs a more sophisticated financial system, one that is better at allocating capital and better suited to the market pressures now bubbling up. The government pays lip service to this, and indeed some reforms point in the right direction: it is deregulating interest rates; the exchange rate, though still managed, is more flexible; defaults are chipping away at the notion that the state will guarantee every investment, no matter how foolish.

Yet the state has held the levers of finance so tightly for so long that the loosening of its grip generates new dangers. Coddled banks are being plunged into competition. People who once had few outlets for their savings have many choices, each riskier than the next. Companies probe for weakness in the mesh of regulations, with the government seemingly always one step behind. In the past year alone, it has spent nearly $200 billion to prop up the stockmarket; $65 billion of bank loans have gone bad; financial frauds have cost investors at least $20 billion; and $600 billion of capital has left the country.



This report will argue that China is faced with two unpalatable options. One is that it moves more boldly to free up its financial system. That would be the right thing to do for the future but would release pent-up perils now; defaults would climb, banks would rack up losses and many shadow lenders would go bust. The other is that China eschews reform and instead tries to patch up its current system. That would be easier in the short term, but the inexorable accumulation of debt would sap the economy’s vigour and raise the spectre of a fearsome crash.

In practice, the government has wavered between the two options. In good times, when the economy behaves as it should, it plods ahead with reforms. But at the first whiff of trouble it tends to lose its nerve, building up much bigger problems a few years hence. China needs to move faster, even at the cost of greater turbulence today.

Some good at least came of the Sheyang bank panic. China introduced nationwide deposit insurance last year, trying to reassure savers that their money is safe, no matter what happens to their bank. Banks have also raised their game, as demonstrated by the car giveaway at Sheyang Rural Commercial Bank. People again line up at its doors, only this time to put their cash in the bank, not take it out. But financial fragility is surfacing nearby. Grass encroaches on the lot of a textile company that defaulted on a bond last year. And on the county’s outskirts, apartment blocks stand empty, totems to the debt that looms over China’s financial system.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21697983-china-needs-free-up-its-financial-system-even-if-it-hurts-says-simon-rabinovitch-big/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banks

Breaking bad

With dud loans much higher than reported, banks must brace for trouble

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THE VIDEO PANS from the empty lot outside the factory to the interior, where metal parts lie in a heap, detritus of a bankrupt steel company. Playing cards litter the ground. Over the desolate scene, soft piano music plays and a narrator describes the floor plan and location: “An exceptionally good choice to set up an office.”

It is an advertisement of sorts. The factory was collateral on a loan made by Agricultural Bank of China (AgBank) to Hanquan, a steel company that went bust. A court in Tianjin, the northern city that was home to Hanquan, is auctioning it off on AgBank’s behalf. As defaults go, it was not a particularly big one; the asking price for the property is 77.6m yuan ($12m). But just two years earlier AgBank had declared Hanquan a top-rated AAA customer and the local government had praised it as a pillar of its industrial zone. Then a nationwide construction slowdown did for the company, and its loan soured.

For China’s banks, this is a small pointer to a much bigger concern. Non-performing loans (NPLs)—those which borrowers cannot repay—have reached a total of 1.3 trillion yuan, doubling in just two years (see chart). Even so, official data show that dud loans amount to only 1.7% of total loans, well within accepted safety margins. The problem, a familiar one in China, is that no one much believes these figures. How lenders deal with the bad debt piling up on their books is the most urgent question hanging over Chinese banks. If this is mishandled, the country’s hard-earned financial stability could evaporate.



Dodgier than it looks

There is plenty of evidence that bad loans are higher than the banks have disclosed, probably much higher. Alongside the steep rise in NPLs, there has been an even larger increase in “special-mention loans”, which in theory are still good but not cast-iron. Added together, NPLs and special-mention loans already make up 5.5% of the banks’ loans. At a recent conference in Shanghai an investor with Oriental Asset Management, a distressed-debt buyer, said the NPL ratio at smaller banks was as high as 10%. That might have shocked the crowd a few years earlier, but on this occasion it barely raised an eyebrow.

Given China’s explosive lending growth since the global financial crisis of 2008, this outcome was drearily predictable. The economy’s debt load has more than tripled over the past seven years. It is implausible that so much credit could have been prudently allocated in such a short time; large amounts were bound to be wasted or stolen.

What happens now is far from clear. Bad loans, even lots of them, do not automatically translate into a crisis, especially not in a country where the government has so much control. In normal markets banks might slow their lending; in China the government directs banks to continue lending and provides them with the liquidity to do so. This gives it flexibility to solve the problems, but does not magically make them disappear.

Broadly speaking, China has three options for tackling its banks’ NPLs. The first and most seductive choice is to suppress the bad news. This is the most damaging in the long term, but it has been China’s default mode for the past five years. Methods include booking loans as investments or classifying them as “overdue but not impaired” for months on end. The most widespread practice—and one not confined to China—is to refinance bad loans with new ones in the faint hope that business might improve. If it does not, this “extend-and-pretend” banking only makes the debt burden worse.

China is nearing this point. Interest payments swallowed about two-fifths of all new credit issued in the past three years. In 2014 some 16% of China’s 1,000 biggest companies owed more in interest than they earned before tax, according to The Economist’s analysis of S&P Global Market Intelligence data. Bad debt, though superficially contained, is thus becoming a millstone around the economy’s neck. Less credit is going to good firms for productive uses, clogging the gears of growth.

The second option is to clean up the bad loans, with the government taking charge and spreading the cost around. Many investors think China will eventually adopt this solution, as past form suggests. In the late 1990s two-fifths of loans in China had gone bad and banks were technically bust. The finance ministry pumped fresh capital into the banks, which carved off large chunks of their dud loans and sold them at par to “bad banks”. The effect was salubrious, freeing the banks to resume lending and preparing them for stockmarket listings.

China is trying something similar now, though only in part. In the past two years the government has handed licences to more than 20 new regional bad banks. It has also orchestrated a swap whereby banks will exchange up to 15 trillion yuan of high-yielding local-government loans, many of which might have gone bad, for low-yielding, safe bonds.

However, a full-blown bail-out would be more damaging this time. To fund the rescue 15 years ago the government imposed a hidden tax on households, pushing deposits into banks at artificially low interest rates. That held back consumption. Roaring growth acted as a palliative, boosting incomes and shrinking the relative size of bad debts.

Today the trade-offs would be starker. A tax, hidden or not, to fund the bail-out would set back China’s efforts to encourage consumption. It could monetise the costs, but that would add to capital-outflow pressures, which it has been trying to resist. Moreover, a second big rescue within two decades would make it harder for China to modernise its banks, leaving them reliant on the state. “If things go really bad, we can do it again. But we want to avoid it,” says Li Daokui, a former central-bank adviser.

A third option is for banks to recognise the bad loans on their books and replenish their capital themselves. This would be best for China’s long-term development, even if it hurt to begin with. Some quiet progress has been made. AgBank’s auction of the loan to Hanquan, the bankrupt steel company, is one of many that banks have attempted over the past year. Some have started bundling NPLs into securities to speed up their disposal. The government is also encouraging banks to convert bad debt into equity in their troubled borrowers.

Benjamin Fanger of Shoreline Capital, a fund company that invests in Chinese distressed debt, has been through this before. He set up his firm in 2004 when assets from the previous credit blow-up were just going on the market. Despite all the worries about the economy now, he thinks the bad assets tell a different story. “Last time the debt was garbage,” he says. “Now it’s companies with real business.” Loans are better secured, collateral is worth more and the financial ecosystem—banks, courts and investors—is more developed, if not quite mature yet.

Encouraging though that is, most NPLs sold so far consist of loans to private enterprises. Yet the biggest share of bank lending—nearly 50%—goes to state firms, and banks are more likely to roll these over than push them into default. Besides, the final tally of NPLs is sure to exceed investors’ appetite. Huarong, the largest of China’s bad banks, has publicly called for cheap funding from the government to help it digest the distressed debt coming its way.

There is no easy way out for China’s banks

To prepare for write-offs, banks have been raising equity; their loss-absorbing capital is about 11% of assets. But the pressure on them is increasing. Their cash set aside to cover impairments fell from nearly three times their NPLs in 2013 to less than double last year—and that was based on the artificially low official NPL level, not the real one. In short, there is no easy way out for China’s banks. Sooner or later they will need to take big losses, and the government will have to help repair the damage.

Degrees of pain

How bad will things get? Some expect little short of Armageddon. Kyle Bass, founder of Hayman Capital, a hedge fund, made headlines this year with his estimate that China would need $10 trillion—almost 100% of its current GDP—to recapitalise its banks. Implicit in this doomsday prediction is the view that NPLs are gargantuan: some think that, as in the 1990s, nearly half of all loans will go into default.

But that is an extreme assumption. A more realistic assessment is that half of banks’ assets—their reserves at the central bank, government bonds, loans to the biggest state firms and liquid money-market funds—are lower-risk. The fact that banks are already disposing of bad loans shows that China is further ahead than in the late 1990s. And thanks to a national savings rate of nearly 50%, banks still have a strong funding backstop from plentiful deposits. That gives them time to deal with their problems—a luxury they need to use well.

Analysts at China International Capital Corp, a local investment bank, predict that the worst outcome would be bad loans of $1.5 trillion—still a lot, though an order of magnitude smaller than the ultra-bearish view. But as David Cui at Bank of America Merrill Lynch argues, specific estimates are beside the point. Investors have little faith in China’s banks, pricing their stocks at a 30% discount to the stated value of their assets. The government, Mr Cui reckons, must recapitalise them on a scale to win over investors; the exact size will, in effect, be determined by the market’s reaction.

As though this were not difficult enough, Chinese banking is getting more competitive. The “big four” banks’ share of sectoral assets has fallen from 54% a decade ago to less than 40% today as smaller institutions nip at their heels. For many years the central bank enforced a spread between lending and deposit rates that provided banks with a handsome guaranteed profit. Last year it liberalised interest rates. It is phasing in deregulation to give the banks time, but the trend is clear: interest margins, which five years ago were about 3%, are heading towards 2%. At the same time the government has allowed several private companies, including deep-pocketed tech giants such as Tencent, to establish banks. For now they are constrained by regulations, but hope soon to join battle with lumbering state-run ones.

All this is putting Chinese banks under pressure to find new ways to generate profits. On balance this ought to be a good thing, nudging them to lend to private companies and consumers who are willing to borrow at higher interest rates than state firms. It is also forcing them to improve their services to attract more customers.

At the headquarters of Shanghai Rural Commercial Bank (SRCB), which despite its sleepy-sounding name is one of China’s 30 biggest lenders, with some 600 billion yuan in assets, employees are drawing up plans to expand the banks’ offerings. Some branches now stay open until 8pm to cater to people who work late. But the quest for profit is also pushing banks to take on new risks. Xu Li, the SRCB’s president, says one idea is to make better use of its balance-sheet—code for investing more aggressively. “Before, we mainly invested in government bonds. Now we want to get into corporate bonds in a big way,” he adds.

Many smaller banks are racing to expand, using volume to make up for thin margins. Whereas the assets of big national banks grew by 10% last year, those of city-focused banks increased by 25%. Risks could ripple through the sector. Smaller banks have started to turn to the interbank market for funding if they cannot get it from deposits, and big banks often end up providing it. “Interconnectedness among banks is increasing,” says Frank Wu of Moody’s, a rating agency.

Regulators are still trying to swaddle the banks, forcing them to keep plenty of cash in their vaults and limiting their loans to weak industrial sectors. Yet banks are straining to break free. They have devised a mixture of off-balance-sheet solutions to get around the rules. The products are not as complex as the subprime debt securities in America that sparked the financial crisis in 2008, yet there is much toxic bilge swirling around China’s banks. And as global investors learned almost a decade ago, what lurks in the shadows can come back to haunt them.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21697979-dud-loans-much-higher-reported-banks-must-brace-trouble-breaking-bad/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Shadow banks

Dark and stormy

A repressed financial system has sprouted high-risk alternatives to banks

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



AFTER LI HUI’S husband died in a car accident a decade ago, she received an insurance payout of 800,000 yuan. The money could not begin to make up for his loss, but Ms Li, a soft-spoken pensioner, thought it would at least help tide her over for the rest of her life and provide a nice inheritance for her daughter. Yet relying on savings alone is difficult in China. The cost of housing, food and travel has risen steeply, whereas interest rates on bank deposits have barely kept pace with inflation. For a risk-averse woman who likes yoga and oil painting, decent investment options are limited. Playing the stockmarket, she knew, was foolhardy.

Then one day Ms Li came across the Fanya Metals Exchange. On its platform she could lend money, at an annualised interest rate of 13%, to buyers of rare industrial metals. Fanya seemed exotic but safe. It advertised partnerships with China’s biggest banks and flaunted its connections with the government, including endorsements from officials who pledged to support it. She poured in her savings.

Last year disaster struck: Fanya suspended all withdrawals. The value of its stocks of metal had collapsed. Up to 43 billion yuan vanished from the exchange under suspicious circumstances. Investors hoping for a comfortable retirement became protesters overnight, picketing outside banks and government offices. Regulators distanced themselves from the wreckage. They declared Fanya an illegal venture and intimated that people should have done their homework before investing in it.

Just beyond the conservative confines of China’s banking system, there is a much rowdier parallel universe: shadow banking. This is where borrowers and industries shunned by banks look for funding. In some corners, promised investment returns run to double digits. Regulators look the other way.

Lengthening shadows

Until the early 2000s banks accounted for nearly all lending in China, but in the past five years their share has come down to just three-fifths of all new credit. On a conservative estimate, China’s shadow financing now adds up to 40 trillion yuan, nearly two-thirds of GDP. Compared with advanced economies, this is modest: America’s shadow-banking sector is 1.5 times the size of its GDP. But China’s shadow assets have increased by more than 30% annually over the past three years, compared with less than 10% for the rest of the world, according to the Financial Stability Board, a global grouping of regulators.

In theory shadow banks should seek higher returns but also take care to manage risks. In practice it often does not work out like that

Shadow banking in China covers everything from private investment companies to peer-to-peer lenders. To varying degrees they all function like banks, intermediating between savers and borrowers. But there is one crucial difference: whereas the government guarantees bank deposits, shadow lenders are supposed to stand on their own. In theory they should seek higher returns, but also take care to manage risks. In practice it often does not work out like that. Some, such as Fanya, are reckless. Worse, lines between them and the banks are blurred, with bank assets funnelled through them. Dangers lurking in the shadow system could thus easily contaminate the banking sector.

China’s boom in shadow banking had an innocent enough start. In 2010 regulators reined in bank lending after the credit binge that helped lift the economy out of the global financial crisis. Projects from highways to apartment blocks were left half-finished. To see them through to completion, regulators tolerated an expansion in non-bank financial institutions. It was a workaround that seemed to shift risk away from the banks yet kept credit flowing.

The most prominent of the shadow lenders were trust companies, versatile institutions that could lend money and take direct stakes. Trusts charged higher rates on loans than banks and also offered higher returns to their wealthy investors (the minimum investment is 1m yuan). Today they hold assets of 16 trillion yuan, more than the insurance sector.



At first trust products were straightforward. Unable to count on state backing, trust companies demanded plenty of collateral, typically keeping loan-to-value ratios at less than 50%. Investors were warned that if products failed there would be no bail-out. But when defaults started in early 2014, investors got their principal back. “The customer actually has to write out a sentence saying ‘I assume all the risk’,” grumbles a bank regulator in Beijing. “But when real losses arise, they say, no, your sales people told me it’s 100% guaranteed.” Usually it was not the government that rescued investors but trusts themselves: they did not want their reputations damaged.

Regulators tried to mitigate the risks by forcing trust companies to set up a communal insurance fund. They also pressured shareholders to recapitalise their firms. In a narrow sense, the strategy was successful: trust companies have evolved into something more akin to wealth managers, pitching themselves to prospective clients as firms with the deftness to navigate China’s choppy markets. “Rather than just doing lending, we are expanding into securitisation, private equity and advisory services now,” says Wang Bo, CEO of Hwabao Trust.

But far from spelling the end of China’s shadow banking, this has created space for other, often riskier forms to establish themselves. One of the fastest-growing segments of this market has been entrusted lending: loans made by one company to another through banks as agents. Banks help with loan management but do not shoulder any risk. Entrusted lending in China reached 10.9 trillion yuan at the end of last year, up 60% since the start of 2014.

Many entrusted loans look more like cash management (loans to subsidiaries) than anything deeply dangerous. But there is also plenty of lending by suppliers to cash-strapped buyers, and about a fifth of the total consists of high-interest loans to property developers. This means that the debt problems of hard-up companies can infect their healthier peers. One indicator of the potential spread is the growing chain of unpaid corporate bills: in 2007 China’s 1,000 biggest companies took an average of 61 days to pay their invoices, but by last year that figure had risen to 117 days, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence.

Online finance is also booming. As in other countries, supporters argue that they bring sorely needed innovation to the Chinese economy. Banks have been slow to lend to small businesses and consumers, partly because they lack information about personal credit histories. Online lenders help fill this gap, armed with algorithms and data to assess creditworthiness. In China, with the right connections, they can acquire GPS records, point-of-sale-machine data and even internet search histories.

Some online firms appear to be living up to the innovation story, though their footprint is still small. Lufax, backed by Ping An Group, has built a comprehensive online investment platform; its clients can put cash into peer-to-peer (P2P) loans or equity and bond funds. Ant Financial, an affiliate of Alibaba, an e-commerce giant, controls an array of online finance companies. Many of these describe their businesses with the same missionary zeal as do their peers abroad. “The philosophy behind the business was and remains today that everyone deserves access to credit,” says Tang Ning, CEO of CreditEase, whose P2P arm listed in New York last year.

Other online lenders operate in far murkier territory. Yinpiao lets people make loans to businesses collateralised by bankers’ acceptances. These products, which resemble post-dated cheques, have been plagued by fraud. Ezubao, until recently China’s biggest P2P firm, was declared a Ponzi scheme this year; it had faked many of its 50 billion yuan in loans. Failure has been shockingly common: more than a third of the 4,000 P2P platforms launched in recent years have collapsed. Online lending amounts to about 500 billion yuan—just 0.5% of bank lending, but up more than tenfold over the past two years.

The risks in online finance, trusts (in their purest form) and entrusted loans are all supposed to reside outside banks. Whatever the dangers, this should make for a more diversified financial system, a good thing. But two huge pieces of the shadow-banking puzzle are directly tied to banks, meaning that much of the apparent diversification is illusory.

The first is loans that actually sit on banks’ balance-sheets in different guises. The most common are trust beneficiary rights (TBRs) and directional asset-management plans (DAMPs). Despite their technical-sounding names, these are simply loans booked as investments. For TBRs, a trust company acts as the custodian of the loan; for DAMPs, brokerages do. But in both cases it is banks that provide the financing, receive the income and face the risks. Jason Bedford of UBS, a bank, estimates that these shadow loans were worth more than 12 trillion yuan midway through last year, or roughly 16% of standard loans, up from just 4% in 2012.

Why would banks bother with them? One reason is that capital requirements to back up investments are much lower than for their standard business: they need hold only a quarter as much capital as for loans. The wheeze also enables them to get round government diktats about sectors they should or should not lend to. More worryingly, banks can use the instruments to mask bad loans, because disclosure requirements for investments are much less stringent than for loans. If things go badly, banks’ losses on their shadow books could be far more serious than disclosed so far.

The second piece of the shadow-banking puzzle is the “wealth-management” assets that banks hold off their balance-sheets. With deposit rates capped, banks needed to find a way to attract customers who wanted higher yields. Starting a decade ago, banks have sold wealth-management products (WMPs) as products akin to deposits, often with interest rates a couple of percentage points higher than for normal bank accounts. Sales of WMPs have surged. At the end of 2015 there were 23.5 trillion yuan of WMPs outstanding, more than double the figure just two years earlier.

To deliver the higher yields, banks themselves need more profitable assets. In many cases they invest in shadow loans through trust firms. A growing portion of their cash has also ended up in stock investments. Not all WMP funds are risky; many go into bonds. Regulators have tried to deal with the dangers by capping “non-standard credit assets” (read: shadow loans) to 35% of WMP funds, a sufficiently low threshold to be safe.

But as ever there are loopholes. If banks sell a shadow loan to another bank and buy it back through the interbank market, it counts as a standard asset. And so long as banks do not guarantee the principal of these products, they need not report them on their balance-sheet. Nearly three-quarters of all WMPs fall into this non-guaranteed category. “They can be viewed as a hidden second balance-sheet, but with poor disclosures and few reserves or capital to cushion losses,” says Grace Wu of Fitch, a rating agency.

Where danger lurks

As the kings of China’s financial jungle, banks ought to have their pick of clients, ensuring that their shadow assets are generally sounder than those of other lenders. But it is striking that the banks with the biggest shadow-loan books are mid-sized institutions—those that have been expanding their market share most aggressively. WMPs account for about 15% of deposits at the biggest banks but over 40% at mid-tier banks.

Moreover, the vaunted liquidity buffers of China’s financial system are fraying. The average maturity of WMPs is just 113 days. But many back much longer-term loans. This means that banks must constantly sell new WMPs to retain their funding base. Optimists think the liquidity risks are manageable: if savers were to lose faith in WMPs, their cash would probably flow back into bank accounts. But some institutions, such as Industrial Bank, whose WMPs account for nearly 60% of its deposits, could suffer acute pain. And Industrial Bank is no bit player: it has more than 5 trillion yuan in assets, which in America would be enough to make it the fifth-biggest bank.

Five years ago Chinese shadow banking was driven mainly by companies that could not get bank loans. Now the main impetus comes from ordinary people looking for higher returns. Perhaps Li Hui, the Fanya investor, should have known better than to trust a rare-metals exchange promising a 13% yield. The same cannot be said for the millions now buying WMPs: these products are created and sold by banks, and even if the banks do not guarantee them, customers view their support as implicit.

It is a vicious cycle. Seeing savers’ insatiable appetite for these products, banks feel compelled to create yet more. As a result, they are straying deeper into the shadows: distant enough from conventional banking to offer higher rates but close enough that their customers still feel reassured. Shadow banking, far from being a new kind of efficient lending, has spread hidden risks throughout the economy. So China is now turning to its capital markets instead, hoping they will make its financial system smarter and more transparent.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21697985-repressed-financial-system-has-sprouted-high-risk-alternatives-banks-dark-and-stormy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Capital markets

Risky returns

China is struggling to unleash the power of stocks and bonds

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



JUST BEYOND CHARLIE CHEN’S perch, Shanghai looks every inch the global financial centre it aspires to be. Skyscrapers shimmer in the spring light, capped by the names of some of the world’s biggest banks and insurers. On the pavement below, smartly dressed workers scurry from the crowded rush-hour subway to their offices in Lujiazui, the city’s financial district. The small team at MegaTrust Investments, Mr Chen’s firm, quietly taps away at computer terminals, reviewing overnight price movements and building trading models.

But anyone with a passing interest in business news will know that for all of Shanghai’s glistening modernity, its markets are still in their infancy. They are beset by corruption, price manipulation, insider information, government intervention and a mob-mentality trading style, all of which makes their counterparts in New York, London and Hong Kong, volatile as they are, look like paragons of orderly behaviour. “We like that the market can be so irrational. Otherwise it would be more efficient and we wouldn’t be able to beat it,” says Mr Chen. His flagship fund has averaged a tidy 45.5% net annual return over the past three years.

From a narrow perspective, it is easy to shrug off the dysfunctions of China’s markets. They are largely sideshows to the real economy. Investors have limited exposure to them and companies obtain relatively little funding from that source. Banks are the beating heart of the financial system.

But for China to develop properly, it must get its capital markets right. With a thriving stockmarket, companies could fund themselves with more equity, not just debt. A healthy bond market would take pressure off overburdened banks. Just as significant, transparent markets are needed to help investors price capital properly and press companies to improve their governance.

China’s stockmarket is often likened to a casino. Wu Jinglian, a respected local economist, once quipped that this comparison was unfair to casinos: at least they have rules. The propensity for wild swings and lawlessness has been on full display over the past year. Blue-chip stocks more than doubled in an orgy of debt-fuelled buying before crashing, landing not far from where they started. Officials panicked, ordering big shareholders to refrain from selling, pumping money into the market and drafting state-owned brokerages and banks into a “national team” to buy shares. They also detained dozens of investors, bankers and regulators in investigations of the market mayhem; at least two others committed suicide before the authorities could get to them.



Less in the global eye but potentially more dangerous, the Chinese bond market is growing explosively. Bond issuance last year reached 12.5 trillion yuan, up from 7.7 trillion in 2014. Despite the huge volume of offerings, spreads between yields on AAA-rated corporate bonds and government bonds fell to historic lows of less than 0.4 percentage points this January. A narrowing of spreads implies that investors see less risk of default in bonds, a prognosis which is hard to square with the slowing economy. Spreads have at least widened a bit lately, but yields for any company believed to have government backing, whether public or private, are still uncannily low.

Part of the reason for the bond rally is familiar from the stock bubble: leverage. In the case of bonds, investors have used repurchase agreements to multiply their investments (buying a bond with their own funds, then borrowing against that bond to buy yet more). Credit-rating agencies, which did not exactly cover themselves in glory in the lead-up to the 2008 financial crisis, are far weaker in China. Regulators have yet to accredit the big global agencies (Moody’s, S&P and Fitch) to provide ratings for onshore bonds. Instead, these are rated by domestic agencies, whose judgment has been highly dubious. In spite of falling profits and soaring debt loads, they upgraded ratings on 656 bonds last year and downgraded only 126.



Analysts typically point to the heavy presence of retail investors as an explanation for the madness of China’s markets, suggesting that more professional investors would bring greater stability and sanity. It is true that small-time investors are the dominant force in the stockmarket, accounting for roughly 80% of trading volume. Yet a larger share of professionals by itself is unlikely to be the solution. Institutional investors in China are not seasoned veterans. “I don’t know a single bond trader with more than five years of experience,” jokes one in his late 20s, exaggerating only slightly.

Moreover, many of the biggest investors play by the same rules as the smaller punters. The arrest last November of Xu Xiang, head of Zexi Investment, provided a rare glimpse of one of the masters of the game. Mr Xu was a leading member of the zhangting gansidui (go-for-max kamikaze squad): investors who pump up stocks, lure in unsuspecting money and then sell out after a few of days of gains. He had managed an eye-watering 3,200% return since 2009. But his outsized gains last summer even when the market crashed proved too much for the authorities: police charged him with insider trading and price manipulation. Even so, many would-be Zexis are waiting in the wings. When the regulators last year made it easier for fund managers to set up, some 20,000 of them registered for business, a fourfold rise in a year.

Voices of reason

Amid all the neophytes and kamikazes, there is an emerging class of investors with ample experience in global markets that is now plying its trade in China. Charlie Chen, like many in the industry, spent years working for foreign fund houses before founding MegaTrust, which now manages about $400m in assets. His seven analysts each meet about 200 companies a year. They sift through shareholding structures to work out who really controls them, a bottom-up approach to research that is rare in China. Shen Yi, a former trader with Goldman Sachs, is part of a cohort that has started to apply quantitative trading strategies to the domestic market, which is rife with the kinds of inefficiencies that are fertile ground for quants.

The bond market is also attracting serious players. Edmund Ng, formerly the Hong Kong Monetary Authority’s head of direct investment, last year launched a firm, Eastfort Asset Management, to trade Chinese bonds. The recent opening of the interbank bond market (the main bond market) to foreign institutional investors will bring in even more serious money over time.

The government is also looking to insurance firms to play a bigger role. By their nature, these are long-term, patient investors, just the kind that China lacks. Regulators have steadily loosened constraints on insurers, letting them lift their exposure to equities to 30% (the current industry average is 15%). With more aggressive marketing they have more than doubled their assets under management over the past five years, to nearly 13 trillion yuan.

The infrastructure around these firms is improving. Wind Information, a data provider, is trying to turn itself into the Bloomberg of China. Both Bloomberg and Reuters themselves have dramatically increased their Chinese-language offerings. Suntime tracks the returns of thousands of private fund managers. Sycamore Investment Services provides valuations of hard-to-price securities traded off exchanges. Small advances have been made even in the legal arena. Courts in big cities are getting better at handling disputes over investments that go wrong. “Previously, court personnel might not have even understood what arbitration was for,” says Violet Ho of Kroll, a consultancy.

Still, it would be naive to expect Chinese markets to mature of their own accord without major reforms. After all, foreign investment banks from UBS to Goldman Sachs have been underwriting stocks and bonds in China for the better part of a decade, but have had limited influence on the behaviour of their onshore peers. Investment quotas for large global institutions have also had little effect. And some of China’s insurers, the big domestic institutional hope, more resemble risk-taking shadow banks than prudent investors. They have been selling short-term investment products, offering returns in excess of 6%, and piling heavily into stocks. In one prominent case last year, Baoneng, until then almost unknown, used heavy leverage to fund a 30 billion yuan purchase of shares in Vanke, a property developer.

The rules of engagement in China’s markets need to change. These are some of the commonly heard suggestions: the government should stop micromanaging the timing and pricing of initial public offerings; clear the way for investors to short individual shares; make it easier for private companies to issue bonds; develop credible rating agencies; draft an effective bankruptcy law; and attract more experienced professionals into regulatory agencies. But at the root of all of these, and indeed underpinning a great many of the dysfunctions in China’s financial system, is something that is not easily changed: a belief that, when all else fails, the state will always be there to rescue investors from their mistakes.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21697984-china-struggling-unleash-power-stocks-and-bonds-risky-returns/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Politics

Power to the party

The state wields extensive control. So why is the financial system so unruly?

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



IF YOU SCOUR the annual reports of China’s biggest banks, you will find hardly a mention of the Communist Party. There are passing references to the “Party Discipline Office” in descriptions of the banks’ internal structures, and the biographies of a few executives note that they graduated from the “Party School”. But that is about it. Only when you get to Citic Bank, the ninth-largest by assets, is there any suggestion that the party might play an important role. The first four of Citic’s objectives for 2015 read like those of banks anywhere in the world: improve management, increase profits, control risks and boost efficiency. Its fifth and final objective, though, is quite distinctive: “Comprehensively strengthen construction of the party”.

In all countries there is a gap between what banks and regulators reveal to the outside world and what happens behind the scenes. In China that gap is wider than usual. The party’s unchallenged, spectral position at China’s apex gives it a tight grip on the financial system but also causes many of its ills. The key to understanding the party’s influence is that it does not simply sit atop China’s financial institutions. At the highest levels, it is them. The same people often hold senior roles in both their firms and the party.

As far back as 1995 the Chinese government declared that banks were to be commercial entities, focused on making money and responsible for their losses. When the government invited foreign firms to take stakes in the country’s biggest banks in the early 2000s and encouraged them to list on stock exchanges, its ambition was to instil a businesslike mindset. Hard-nosed investors would scrutinise their books and put pressure on them to perform well.

Up to a point, this has worked. China’s banks, brokers and insurers have acquired the patina of profit-focused banks. They file regular statements to stock exchanges and publish glossy annual reports. Their results are reviewed by international auditors such as KPMG and PwC. Their risk-control departments stress-test their balance-sheets. Over the years they have become leaner: Agricultural Bank of China, for one, has cut back from 50,000 branches in 2000 to less than half that today.

The greater of two goods

But if considerations of social stability and market efficiency clash, the former almost always wins. When the global financial crisis erupted in late 2008, banks had to toe the party’s line and finance the government’s mammoth stimulus. When the stockmarket crashed last June, state-owned brokers were ordered to buy shares and banks were made to lend to them. Bankers have “a political duty to comply” with their masters, notes Richard McGregor in his book, “The Party”.

Though concealed in banks’ stock-exchange filings, the party’s hand is visible in bankers’ daily lives. If you step out of the lift on a Chinese bank’s executive floor, you will often see signs pointing to the president’s office in one direction and to the office of the discipline inspection committee (the body in charge of enforcing party rules and rooting out corruption) in the other. In much the same way that Xi Jinping is presented to foreigners as China’s president but described domestically as general secretary of the Communist Party, so bankers wear two hats. The person whom investors know as chairman is also known internally as the bank’s party secretary.



Like the heads of other state-owned corporations, China’s titans of finance are moved among institutions whenever the party’s organisation department sees fit. In the first decade of the 2000s at least 43 senior cadres shifted from one top financial firm to another, according to Chen Li of the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Dozens more flitted between regulatory agencies and financial institutions. In America and Britain there is an old—and to critics, repugnant—tradition of regulators leaving office to join firms they once supervised. Rules to prevent conflicts of interest work only partially. But in China the whole point is to fuse the elite together. Regulators and financial firms are meant to work towards the common goal of building a prosperous nation.

However, just because the party is in control does not mean that it has things under control. Last summer’s stockmarket crash and the capital flight of recent months are only the latest examples of its frailties. Crudely put, shadow banking has evolved in recent years through firms devising investment products that get around regulations; the government slowly catching on; and the firms responding by finding new loopholes.

If the party is so powerful, how can its edicts be so blatantly disregarded? Many in the government now believe the failure lies in the structure of regulation. In the early 2000s China divided its supervisory framework, appointing a banking regulator for banks, an insurance regulator for insurers and a securities regulator for brokers. That worked well enough for a decade, but as the financial system has grown bigger, so have the holes in it. Last year’s stockmarket crash exposed some of them. The securities regulator, looking at margin financing on brokers’ books, saw little danger from investors buying stocks with borrowed cash. The bank regulator, focused on lending, did not watch off-balance-sheet products that brought yet more leverage into the market.

Policymakers are convinced that regulation has to be better integrated. One popular idea is to merge the banking, insurance and securities bodies into a super-regulator under the aegis of the central bank. If only it were so simple. “Even if all regulation was under the same roof, you might still have separations between the different units,” says Wang Jun, a former central-bank official now at China Europe International Business School.

One of the defining traits of Mr Xi’s rule has been the consolidation of power. Party bodies that used to provide general direction for government policy are getting more involved in day-to-day management of the economy. Yet the concentration of power has, if anything, been associated with greater instability in markets and unpredictability in policy. Officials at all levels are more hesitant, afraid of making decisions that go against what Mr Xi might want. Regulatory bodies tried their best to recruit people with experience working for top-flight international firms, but after a few years of low pay and limited influence many have left.

Some believe the problem lies in the very nature of party control. Governments have three basic functions in finance: as promoters of healthy market development; as regulators of institutions; and as owners or guarantors of firms, especially at times of trouble. In a stinging report last June, the World Bank said China had mangled all three. Instead of promoting sound markets, the government twisted them to drive economic growth; the state’s ownership of financial firms was too pervasive; and regulations were consistently loosened to suit economic priorities. “These interventions have no parallel in market economies,” the report stated. Just two days later, the World Bank itself intervened to remove the section about finance from the report. It said this was its own decision, not the result of Chinese pressure.

To its credit, the party itself has expressed similar ideas about ceding more power to the market, albeit couched in softer language. Yet overhauling financial regulation is tough. Among other things, China must permit banks to compete properly, stop controlling the yuan and allow insolvent firms to go bust. The party, in other words, must give the market room to work.

Even with the best intentions, this transition is bound to be volatile. Government guarantees—sometimes explicit, often implicit—blanket much of the economy. Many in China, from investors to bankers, assume that local governments and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) cannot fail. By fostering cohesion, the party encourages the belief that, if the worst happens, it will keep credit rolling over.

Private companies understand the power of this belief. Whereas state-owned banks often hide their party background, their shadow peers play up their government connections, however tenuous. Ezubao, the large peer-to-peer lender that collapsed recently, held its annual meeting last year in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, the venue for big party gatherings (which is available for hire when not in official use), and advertised in state media. Investors who lost their money have protested, demanding that the government compensate them.

Let them go bust

Ending the party’s support for firms that are in fact state-owned will be that much trickier. “Failure may be the only cure,” writes Zhu Ning, an economist, in his recent book, “China’s Guaranteed Bubble”. Mr Zhu argues that China has to make an example of spendthrift companies and local governments, letting them default or even go bust to get investors to take market forces seriously.

Yet that can have extreme repercussions. In China’s struggling industrial heartland, the Hebei Financing Investment Guarantee Group, a government-owned company, underwrote vast amounts of loans to small manufacturers over the past decade. Thanks to its support, lenders treated the manufacturers as virtually risk-free. But when they began defaulting, Hebei Financing could not come up with the money. Last year it revealed that 32 billion yuan of loans it had guaranteed were in danger. Soon afterwards, a distraught investor stabbed the CEO of Global Wealth Investment, a fund manager that had lent to companies backed by Hebei Financing. Alarmed at the prospect of unrest, the Hebei provincial government has since scurried to make good on the loan guarantees, at least in part. It set up a re-guarantee company, in effect underwriting the underwriter. That has helped mitigate panic, but the trade-off has been moral hazard: investors will continue to expect the government to bail out state-run companies.

Elsewhere the party is taking a harder line. A handful of small state firms have missed bond payments this year. A credit-risk officer with a mid-tier bank says his team no longer assumes that provincial-level SOEs will receive bail-outs. He expects a few bankruptcies of government-backed steel mills and coal miners. But neither he nor almost anyone else thinks China will allow the biggest state firms to default. With so many economic and political levers in its hands, the party still retains plenty of control for now. The rest of the world can only watch and wait.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21697980-state-wields-extensive-control-so-why-financial-system-so-unruly-power/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Global impact

Nowhere to hide

China’s newest export is its financial system, for good and for ill

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



SOME OF THE finest infrastructure to be found between Singapore and Dubai lies in the south of Sri Lanka, close to the crashing waves of the Indian Ocean. Broad highways connect a deep-sea harbour to a silvery, angular convention centre and, further inland, to an elegant airport terminal with vaulted wooden ceilings. But it does not take long for visitors to see that something is awry. Wild peacocks scampering across the roads easily outnumber the people using the state-of-the-art facilities. The port sees less than a ship per day and the airport, which has been open for three years, no longer offers regular flights. The Sri Lankan government’s debt on the complex runs to at least $1.5 billion, or nearly 2% of the country’s GDP. And almost all of that is owed to Chinese banks.

Sri Lankan officials are careful not to blame China for the mess. It was the previous president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, who wanted all these facilities built near his home town of Hambantota, even though there was little commercial justification for them. But privately they feel that the lender must also bear responsibility. Were it not for Chinese banks extending vast amounts of credit with minimal safeguards, Sri Lanka would never have been saddled with these debts. Moreover, the Chinese banks charged unusually high interest rates on at least some of the loans. The term “odious lending” comes to mind, says a Sri Lankan government adviser. Partly because of its debt load and big looming repayments, Sri Lanka turned to the International Monetary Fund this year for a bail-out.

Tracking the ways in which the Chinese financial system affects the global financial system is far from straightforward. Since China is the world’s biggest trading nation, the fate of its economy clearly affects most of the globe. The slowdown in its construction industry has already battered commodity exporters from Mongolia to Brazil. But direct financial connections between China and the rest of the world are much more limited. In China itself regulations cap the involvement of foreign institutions, and Chinese banks, insurers and brokerages have been remarkably diffident about expanding abroad. Nevertheless, the promise and the problems of China’s financial sector are rippling beyond its borders.

As Sri Lanka can attest, one crucial, if often overlooked, linkage is China’s funding for other emerging markets. At the end of last year the combined overseas loan book of China’s two leading development lenders, China Development Bank and Export-Import Bank of China, reached $550 billion, a multiple of the World Bank’s roughly $150 billion. Some of that lending has gone to Chinese firms doing business abroad, but the bulk has been for governments and companies in developing countries.

A great deal?

It might seem churlish to criticise China for lending to poor countries, but loans are not gifts. The recipients have to repay them, so it is fair to ask whether they are getting a good deal. The evidence is mixed. China’s money has built many useful things, including power stations, roads, dams and railways across Africa, Latin America and South Asia. It has also offered a lifeline to emerging markets suffering capital outflows. Last year China’s two development banks lent $29 billion to hard-hit Latin American governments, three times as much as in 2014, according to the Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington think-tank.

But Chinese money is part of what got these countries into trouble in the first place. Its development banks have exported some of the worst excesses of the Chinese financial system: lending out huge dollops of cash with few strings attached, other than that Chinese contractors must do much of the construction. In the case of the airport and port in southern Sri Lanka, officials say there was insufficient analysis of their viability and no competitive bidding. “Would it have been bad to insist on these conditions? These are things we needed to do,” says Harsha de Silva, a critic of the original loans who is now deputy foreign minister. Allegations of corruption and waste have also followed Chinese loans around from Pakistan to Angola, Ecuador and Venezuela.

There are some signs that China wants to mend its ways. It has started being tougher on loan recipients, and is hoping to emulate the World Bank’s best practices in running the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, a multilateral lender it established last year. Yet the legacy of the past decade is that a number of poor countries are now deeply in debt to China, sometimes with little to show for it. China, to its credit, has so far been accommodating to those in trouble, extending maturities and providing new financing. But if China itself hits the skids and loses more foreign-currency reserves, it will have fewer dollars to spare for others. That would make the outlook for those already in hock to China even grimmer.

Tiny, but not for long

For advanced economies the picture looks very different. Chinese banks have only a minor presence there, so the dangers of a China-led credit crunch are much smaller. At the end of last year overseas loans by Chinese commercial banks totalled just $410 billion, less than half the loan portfolio of Wells Fargo, America’s largest bank by market value. Chinese banks have been wary about making international acquisitions after ill-timed investments by China Investment Corp, a sovereign-wealth fund, just before the global financial crisis. Industrial and Commercial Bank of China’s $690m purchase of the London-based trading unit of South Africa’s Standard Bank is one of the most ambitious overseas forays by a Chinese bank ever—yet it is worth less than 0.03% of ICBC’s assets.



Whatever happens to the domestic economy, it seems inevitable that Chinese financial institutions will increase their weight in developed markets in the coming years. If growth in China holds up well, they will have even more cash to deploy abroad; if their own economy stumbles, they will have an extra incentive to look abroad. For now, less than 3% of Chinese banks’ 102 trillion yuan in loans are in foreign currencies. Just serving Chinese companies as they venture abroad will ensure a big increase: they have accounted for nearly a third of all global cross-border M&A deals so far this year, according to Dealogic. Of Chinese insurers’ 13 trillion yuan in assets, a mere 2% are currently overseas. Insurers are starting to grab headlines with their overseas investments, such as Ping An’s acquisition of the Lloyd’s building, a London landmark, and Anbang’s bid for Starwood Hotels & Resorts, owner of the Sheraton and Westin brands. More are sure to follow.

In some ways this is to be welcomed. Over the past 15 years China has transformed earnings from its trade surplus into foreign-exchange reserves, most of which in turn were stashed away in American government bonds, which are safe but low-yielding. Foreign investment and overseas acquisitions, if well managed, are a more productive use of China’s savings.

Yet these outbound forays also harbour serious dangers. In the vanguard are state-owned enterprises, many of which are already leveraged to the hilt at home. Take ChemChina, a chemicals giant that bid $44 billion for Syngenta, a Swiss rival, earlier this year. If approved, this will be China’s biggest overseas takeover in history. Yet ChemChina’s debt-to-equity ratio is 234%; Syngenta’s is a much more conservative 44%.

In normal circumstances, banks might be reluctant to fund companies already carrying so much debt. But Chinese banks are only too willing to back SOEs, especially when international expansion is part of their national mission. Foreign banks, too, assume that government support for SOEs is rock-solid. These deals are spreading China Inc’s indebtedness to foreign markets; the balance-sheets of its acquisition targets will become much more vulnerable to a downturn in growth.

Mercifully, direct global exposure to the dangers within China’s financial system is still small for now. That is thanks in large part to a regulatory wall around the economy: foreigners can own no more than 20% of local banks, and can invest in stocks and banks only through strictly controlled channels. As a result, foreign investors own just around 1% of the Chinese stockmarket and even less of the bond market.

International banks, for their part, account for only 1.5% of total commercial bank assets in China. More than half of those assets are concentrated in the hands of three institutions: HSBC, Standard Chartered and Singapore’s OCBC Wing Hang, according to KPMG. Several others, including Goldman Sachs, Bank of America and Citi, previously had large investments in Chinese banks but sold them for chunky profits in recent years.

For foreign banks with big operations in China, its slowdown clearly poses risks. Standard Chartered got a taste of that in 2014, when it set aside about $175m to cover losses incurred in lending to a Chinese trading company, which had pledged the same stockpile of metals as collateral many times over to different banks. That scandal also dragged in Citi, HSBC and others. But they have generally been careful, partly because they have no alternative. Chinese banks, with their deeper local connections and rapid lending, have scooped up the vast majority of domestic clients, including the most indebted ones. Foreign banks, by and large, still serve international companies, which are among the safest borrowers in China. “The joy of being a drop in the ocean is that you can choose your drop in the ocean,” jokes one foreign veteran.

The next few years could bring dramatic changes on multiple fronts. Regulators have opened new channels for foreigners to invest in stocks, creating a link between the Shanghai and Hong Kong stock exchanges; another link to the Shenzhen exchange is also in the works. As part of making the yuan a more global currency, China is also opening its bond market to institutional investors.

And some foreign banks want a bigger foothold, believing that China’s growth prospects outweigh its risks. International bank lending to Chinese residents in mid-2015 amounted to $1.2 trillion, close to an all-time high and more than three times the 2010 figure, according to the Bank for International Settlements. HSBC, the biggest foreign bank in China, considered shifting its global headquarters to Hong Kong earlier this year, though in the end stayed put in London. Even those firms that want to insulate themselves from China will find it difficult to resist the gravitational pull of the world’s second-largest economy. “For serious investors, it’s no longer optional to be here,” says Eugene Qian, China head for UBS.

Many are still holding off, believing that Chinese growth and the yuan have further to fall. But it is only a matter of time before major benchmarks such as the MSCI world equity index start to incorporate Chinese stocks and bonds. As that happens, funds from university endowments in California to pension providers in Sweden will follow their lead, adding onshore Chinese assets to their portfolios. Based on their current trajectory, China’s capital markets could be the world’s biggest within a decade. “Investors in America won’t be able to go to bed without knowing where China is trading,” says Luke Spajic of the Asian arm of Pimco, a giant fund manager. The pace may vary but the trend seems inexorable: Chinese and global financial systems are becoming intertwined. With each passing year, China’s problems will increasingly be the world’s problems.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21697982-chinas-newest-export-its-financial-system-good-and-ill-nowhere-hide/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The way forward

Pain and prosperity

China is following a well-trodden but dangerous path

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



AT THE TIME, the “Five-Year Plan for a New Economy” seemed a courageous fresh start. The government vowed to wind down controls on interest rates, allow companies to borrow abroad, open domestic markets to foreign investors and sell its holdings in dozens of state-owned enterprises. Officials had promised at last to end “delay and vacillation”, remarked a leading reformist. Five years later the currency was plunging and banks’ bad loans were surging. It took a bail-out from the International Monetary Fund to douse the fire.

An imagined scenario of what lies ahead for China? No; this is a potted account of South Korea’s economic history in 1993-97, a period of bold deregulation that culminated in financial turmoil. Parallels with China are imperfect. For a start, South Korea’s vulnerability stemmed from the fatal combination of a whopping current-account deficit and a reliance on short-term foreign funding; China has neither to worry about. Yet two lessons are relevant to it. First, moving from a state-directed financial system to a market-based one is almost bound to cause serious turbulence. China is following a successful Asian development model pioneered by Japan and replicated by both Taiwan and South Korea. Their governments were unabashed in protecting infant industries and promoting exports and used banks to mobilise domestic savings for capital-heavy investment. In all three countries the benefits of such controls eventually faded away, but undoing them caused trouble, in the form of property and stockmarket bubbles in Japan in the 1980s; similar, if slightly smaller, bubbles in Taiwan by 1990; and South Korea’s financial crisis in 1997-98.

Such problems are not confined to Asia. Carlos Díaz-Alejandro, an economist, arrived at the same diagnosis in Latin America decades ago. The title of his classic 1985 paper went to the nub of it: “Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash”. Details vary from place to place, but there are common features. The most significant is the moral hazard that builds up in managed financial systems over time. Because the state wields so much control, lenders and investors alike come to count on it as a backstop when trouble arises. As Mr Díaz-Alejandro wrote, “warnings that intervention will not be forthcoming appear to be simply not believable.”

Deregulatory risk

Belief in the government’s role as guarantor is particularly dangerous when deregulation begins. Suddenly, opportunities arise for higher profits because returns are no longer capped, but financial institutions do not yet have proper risk safeguards in place. Some might even calculate that it is in their interest to expand as quickly as possible, gambling that by the time the government pulls the plug on guarantees they will have become “too big to fail”.

These dynamics are already at play in China. Over the past few years its banks have been piling on risk through their shadow operations. To attract funding, they have offered higher rates to depositors through wealth-management products. They have put more of their cash into higher-return assets, often dodging regulatory limits to do so. Mid-sized banks, those on the cusp of too-big-to-fail status, have been the wildest. Insurers, peer-to-peer lenders and asset managers, among others, have all been drawn into the race to offer higher yields, at the very moment when growth is slowing and returns are declining. And whereas the official preference is to move slowly, money is not waiting around. If need be, it will move abroad.

If deregulation involves such dangers, why would anyone want to risk it? The reason is that repressed financial systems eventually outlive their usefulness. Dysfunctions begin to corrode previously potent growth models. Returns on capital decline as banks roll over loans to struggling companies. Shadow banks flourish as companies and investors work around rules. Controlled capital accounts come apart at the seams. These ills are already far advanced in China. Just look at the growing amount of debt it employs to fuel short-term growth.

The second, more hopeful, lesson from the experiences of other Asian dynamos is that financial tumult need not spell the end of development. In recent years it has become fashionable to present crises as opportunities, but that is far too glib; the effects of a crisis are unpredictable and the damage to people’s lives all too real. Yet it is also clear that mistakes did not stop South Korea or Taiwan from subsequently doing well. Precautions are needed to limit the turmoil, but putting off change indefinitely will spell steady decline.

China’s financial reforms have been edging in the right direction, but not fast enough

China’s financial reforms have been edging in the right direction, but not fast enough. Many observers expect it to follow Japan towards chronic malaise. For China, that would be even worse. When Japan stumbled, its people’s incomes were close to American levels, but average Chinese incomes today are just a quarter of those in America.

China, however, is different from Japan in a number of ways. Some are helpful: it is less developed than Japan was in the 1980s, giving it more scope for catch-up growth—and for recovery from financial missteps; its exchange rate is under pressure to depreciate, not appreciate; its property bubble is less gigantic; and its stockmarket has already crashed.

Ideological differences are more worrying. The Communist Party is, almost by definition, wary of the market and suspicious of the West. In Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, economists who trained abroad eventually returned home and pushed for reform. China has an embarrassment of talented citizens with global experience, but many of those who have returned have grown frustrated with the party’s grip and left government. Without more political openness, the road to financial reform will be fraught.

There is another big difference to consider. China’s weight in the global economy is far larger than that of any other country whose banks have gone through a similar transition. The case for change is plain: the government needs to cede more control to the market to make the financial system work and to unleash the economy’s potential. Even if it gets it right, the process will be rough for China and bumpy for the world. The alternative—that it fiddles while its banks falter—is too awful to contemplate.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21697981-china-following-well-trodden-dangerous-path-pain-and-prosperity/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Hydrocarbons: Not-so-Big Oil

Spotify: These boots are made for walking

Internet firms: Growing, wildly

Hospitality: Stay with me

The grey market: Golden oldies

Entertainment: Parks of recreation

Schumpeter: What do the Foxes say?





Articles Sections Next

Hydrocarbons

Not-so-Big Oil

The supermajors are being forced to rethink their business model

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



IT HAS been a grim decade for investors in international oil firms—among them, many of the world’s biggest pension funds. Even before oil prices started to fall in 2014, the supermajors threw money away on grandiose schemes: drilling in the Arctic and building giant gas terminals. Their returns have trailed those of other industry-leading firms by a huge margin since 2009.



In the past 18 months things have gone from bad to worse. The Boston Consulting Group, a consultancy, calls it the industry’s “worst peacetime crisis”. That is evident in first-quarter results released in the past week by Exxon Mobil and Chevron of America, and European rivals, Royal Dutch Shell, BP and Total, which bear the scars of a collapse in oil prices to below $30 a barrel in mid-February (see chart).

Since then the oil price has rebounded to $45 a barrel; as a result of aggressive cost-cutting efforts, their earnings have mostly been better than expected. Miraculously, a bit of cheer has returned. The big firms’ share prices have outperformed America’s S&P 500 index by nine percentage points since the start of the year.

It is too soon to declare victory, though. Not only do the supermajors need to brace for the possibility of a renewed slide in oil prices in the short term; they must also prepare for a future in which oil demand is increasingly uncertain because of climate change, pollution and the emergence of alternative sources of energy. Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, argues that such “peak demand” is not imminent. There may be at least another 15-year growth cycle by oil firms before investors throw in the towel. But in the meantime companies need to develop a new business model built around a quest for returns rather than for reserves.

These returns are still woefully low, and debts unusually high. On May 4th Shell issued its first earnings report since acquiring BG, a smaller British rival, for $54 billion in February. Thanks mostly to decent sales and marketing performance, analysts considered it a fair outcome. But its returns on average capital employed, an industry benchmark, were a miserly 3.8%—well below its cost of capital. It also had net debt of $69 billion, a burden that should keep its executives awake at night if oil prices fall again. A few days earlier, Exxon Mobil reported its smallest quarterly profit since 1999, shortly after Standard & Poor’s, a rating agency, had cut the triple-A rating that it had enjoyed for decades. (That left America with only two blue-chip firms, Johnson & Johnson and Microsoft.)

Optimists, however, are starting to look beyond these shortcomings, for several reasons. First, cost discipline is becoming an industry-wide mantra. Shell, for instance, says it hopes to slash $30 billion from combined operating costs and capital spending by the end of this year, compared with 2014, despite the effort involved in swallowing BG.

Second, investment projects are being looked at more realistically than they were when it was blithely assumed that oil prices would remain above $100 a barrel for the foreseeable future. Third, the supermajors are less likely to embark on wasteful mega-mergers, as they did in the 1990s. The Shell/BG deal went ahead despite loud opposition from some shareholders. Elsewhere, competition authorities are baring their teeth. On May 2nd Halliburton, the world’s second-largest oil-service company, scrapped its $28 billion merger with Baker Hughes, the third-largest, after the Department of Justice opposed it on antitrust grounds.



INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability

Some doubt that this zeal for capital discipline will last long if oil prices rise much higher. “This is a cyclical business and it always will be,” says Bernstein’s Teng Ben. Paul Spedding, a former head of oil research at HSBC, a bank, says it has been forced upon the supermajors by weak market conditions.

Two reports issued this week suggest that investors should strive to keep the spending straitjacket on oil companies even if prices improve further. One, by Carbon Tracker, an NGO, (and co-authored by Mr Spedding), seeks to show that pursuing new reserves at all costs would not only be bad for the environment, it would be bad business. It argues that even if climate-change policies severely constrain demand for oil, companies will still need to produce more of the black stuff. But if oil prices are anywhere below $120 a barrel, they would produce higher returns if they carry out selective drilling of low-cost wells rather than “business as usual”. Another report, by Paul Stevens of Chatham House, a think-tank, says the supermajors should consider selling assets and returning cash to shareholders because relentlessly pursuing reserves is a dead model.

Unsurprisingly, the oil companies reject the notion that they need to shrink. They say they are adapting their portfolio to changing demand for hydrocarbons. Shell and BP favour what they see as cleaner natural gas over oil. France’s Total is developing renewables as well as oil and gas. Their instinct is to assume that even as the world battles climate change, it will want more hydrocarbons—especially in fast-growing developing countries such as China and India. Investors may pressure them to think differently.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698305-supermajors-are-being-forced-rethink-their-business-model-not-so-big-oil/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Spotify

These boots are made for walking

An aspiring tech giant threatens to turn its back on Stockholm

May 7th 2016 | STOCKHOLM | From the print edition

And that’s just what they’ll do

ON MAY 14th Stockholm hosts the final of the Eurovision song contest: a camp, televised crooning event that draws nearly 200m television viewers. Bands competing for votes and fame relish exposure; the host city gets to promote itself for tourists and businesses. And a big selling point for the Swedish capital is its status as home to a string of successful digital firms, exemplified by a large music-streaming business, Spotify.

Tech and Stockholm have long thrived together. “Programming is the single most common occupation in Stockholm today,” says Mikael Damberg, Sweden’s minister of enterprise. An estimate, by the city itself, suggests the tech sector employs 18% of workers—far above the 10% said to be typical in most European capitals.

A digital boom is one reason why the Swedish capital region has one of Europe’s fastest-growing populations (2.3m people, up by 10% since 2010). It also explains why the city’s economy as a whole is rattling along at about 5% annualised growth; the city claims to be the fastest-growing in Europe. Stockholm can boast not only about its hordes of clever startups—Paris, Berlin and others brag about these too—but also of fully fledged firms. Torbjorn Bengtsson, of the city’s business-development council, says that since 2003 it ranks as the fifth city, globally, in nurturing unicorns, private firms valued over $1 billion. It got one-fifth of all European investments in “fin tech” firms between 2010 and 2014, he says. One, Klarna, an online-payments firm, was valued at more than $2 billion last year and is expanding in America.

Games firms do well, too. Microsoft bought Mojang (creator of Minecraft) for $2.5 billion, two years ago. In February Activision Blizzard, a Californian firm, snaffled up King Digital (maker of Candy Crush and other mind-numbing games) for $5.9 billion. Communication is another strength. Microsoft bought Skype for $8.5 billion, five years ago. Now Truecaller, a digital contacts book and personal organiser, is going great guns. It says it doubled global users to 200m in the past year, notably in South Asia and the Middle East.

The biggest of the lot, however, is Spotify, which streams music, sells advertising and has persuaded 30m users—at the latest count—to pay for tracks. Last year it was valued at $8.4 billion. In March it raised $1 billion, in consolidated debt, from a single round of financing. Visit its offices and you find vinyl records stacked in crates and rooms crammed with trendy-looking staff in their 20s.

Spotify is in “a hyper growth stage”, says an employee. It has 1,000 staff at its operational headquarters in central Stockholm, though the firm is legally incorporated in Luxembourg. A team of 53 exists to recruit “super talent” globally; the firm expects to double the number of employees at its main offices by, or soon after, the turn of the decade. By then, it might count as Europe’s first real example of a new tech giant. (SAP, an older software goliath in Germany, is worth some $83 billion.) “Spotify wants to grow, they are competing with Apple; I would love Spotify to challenge some of the big platform companies in the world,” says Mr Damberg.

As the industry leader in music-streaming, Spotify will expand as long as most musicians continue to co-operate with it (see Free exchange). Taylor Swift and certain other artists refuse to do so, but they are exceptions. More in doubt is whether Spotify will grow in Stockholm or shift elsewhere.

Last month its co-founders, Daniel Ek and Martin Lorentzon, wrote a public letter about Sweden’s business climate. The men raised three concerns. Employees who get stock options face whopping tax bills. Renting a home in central Stockholm has become eye-poppingly expensive. Both problems worry foreigners especially. Third, too few Swedish schoolchildren are learning to code: needlework and carpentry are compulsory, not programming. Unless politicians act, say Messrs Ek and Lorentzon, the firm could choose to grow somewhere else—Silicon Valley, perhaps.

That sounds a mite ungrateful. Stockholm has long promoted tech, and all but pampered those who exploit it. Subsidies have helped to get personal computers and the internet into almost every household, however poor. 3G licences were given out free, as long as firms got as many people as possible online and mobile. The metro has Wi-Fi. The city built a network to connect 98% of homes, and all commercial property, with fibre-optic cables (firms operate the services). Finance, notably venture capital, is easier to access in Stockholm than in many European cities.

A policy of welcoming foreigners also helps tech firms: Mr Bengtsson reckons as many as one-third of city startups are launched by first- or second-generation migrants. Each year an estimated 2,500 Indian software programmers apply for visas to work in Stockholm. Every tech job, in turn, creates 4.3 other jobs, often low-paid, according to a report by an advocacy group for American tech firms. Carl Bildt, an opposition politician, says “an open attitude to people coming from wherever to work” is hugely beneficial, as Sweden relies on imported talent. He wants the 100,000-odd refugees who arrived last year to be taught coding, so they can respond “to a huge demand for that sort of talent”.

Spotify’s complaints are not just self-interested, they are also carefully timed. Sweden is now debating a proposed legislative change to let employees in companies with fewer than 50 workers for a time enjoy lower taxes on stock options. Spotify and others are miffed that the reform would exclude bigger firms. Talk of growing elsewhere is obviously intended to spur a rethink. Mr Damberg says the government will listen and consider a bolder reform, but says Sweden has fostered lots of big, non-tech firms before, such as Volvo or IKEA, without dropping its egalitarian, high-tax approach.

Tackling pricey housing in Stockholm is harder. A banker with a young family, looking to buy, laments that prices have doubled in five years and properties sell in a frenzy of bidding. Regulated rental markets mean tenants at times resort to paying landlords under the table. Politicians in power talk a lot but do little to help.

As for schools, more teaching in tech is bound to come—the question is how fast. This month a pilot scheme of compulsory coding lessons is due to start in some Stockholm schools. One goal is to get more young women to take it up: Spotify says its Saturday camps for pre-teen programmers often have more girls than boys who attend; but by college age, male coders vastly outnumber female ones.

Even if it got all its wishes, Spotify might end up growing faster abroad in any case. What really matters, says Jessica Stark, who leads SUP46, a lobby for Swedish tech firms, is the broader signal to many other start-ups as they grow—who voice the same complaints as the music-streaming company. “Stockholm should definitely not aspire to be Silicon Valley, but that doesn’t mean we can’t compete with it,” she says. In at least one area, however, the Swedish capital will always have the upper hand: Silicon Valley will never get to host Eurovision.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698311-aspiring-tech-giant-threatens-turn-its-back-stockholm-these-boots-are-made-walking/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Internet firms

Growing, wildly

China’s online-search market comes under scrutiny

May 7th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition



THE duty of large corporations is “not limited to ‘not being evil’”, argues People’s Daily, the bombastic mouthpiece of China’s Communist Party. The newspaper desires greater social responsibility at China’s internet-search firms. It apparently wants them actively to “stand up for the company’s ethics”.

The publication’s wrath centres on Baidu, China’s biggest online-search firm, for a scandal involving the ads it carries. Dodgy postings for questionable medical treatments may have led to a cancer patient’s death—after reportedly he paid $30,000 for the quackery. The case has prompted Chinese regulators to open an investigation into the company’s advertising practices, news that sent Baidu’s shares tumbling this week. The mess follows another health furore. In January, Baidu’s boss admitted that his firm had accepted payments from ostensibly independent health experts moderating its online chat rooms for sick patients.

The newspaper’s admonition also took a sideswipe at Google, whose longstanding motto is “Don’t be evil.” The American search giant noisily pulled out of China in 2010 rather than be subject to official censorship. Despite this seemingly principled departure, Google actually kept several of its lower-profile businesses going. It is rumoured that Google Play, its app store for Android smartphones, may arrive in China soon (which would require the firm to kowtow to censors).

The troubles at Baidu and the temptations of Google have the same root cause: China’s soaring online-search market (see chart). Revenues are forecast roughly to double to 411 billion yuan ($63 billion) by 2018. Group M, a division of WPP, a big advertising firm, estimates that roughly half of all advertising spending in China will take place online this year, up from just 15% five years ago and higher than the global average of 31%. Mobile online advertising shot up by 178% year on year in 2015, to 90 billion yuan.

Breakneck growth has come with problems. Recent reports from the University of Toronto found that browsers developed by Baidu and others used weak or little encryption, collected vast amounts of needless, intrusive personal data and proved highly vulnerable to malware. (Baidu insists its products are safe, but acknowledges ongoing efforts will “significantly strengthen information security”.) Other research suggests 15-20% of the roughly 10 billion daily clicks traded in advertising exchanges in China are generated by automated “bots”—not humans. Evil or not, the party newspaper is right to call for China’s internet firms to do better.

<body.content>



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698312-chinas-online-search-market-comes-under-scrutiny-growing-wildly/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Hospitality

Stay with me

As online rivals whizz ahead, hotels try to be both big and nimble

May 7th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

Room for a few more

HOTEL companies check out well just now. On May 3rd Hyatt became the latest chain to report sunny results—profits were up by 55% over the same quarter in 2015. In America RevPAR (revenue divided by rooms available in a given period) has risen for the past six years, according to STR, a data outfit.

Analysts debate when fortunes will change. America’s market has been buoyed by a temporary mismatch of slow-growing supply and robust demand. In the long term, however, the greatest uncertainty is not cyclical, but structural, as online firms change the industry’s shape.

Neither Airbnb, a room-sharing site, nor online travel agents are hotels’ obvious adversaries. Big hotel chains subsist on weary business travellers; Airbnb does not. Yet the growing popularity of the platform, now valued at around $25 billion, means it may siphon more guests from hotels in future. Booking sites help hotels but chomp into their margins with fees of up to 25%. Last year they accounted for nearly one in five bookings in America, up from one in ten in 2006, according to Phocuswright, a research firm. In Europe, where the hotel market is more fragmented, online agents account for one in four.

For hotel firms, one solution is to get bigger. After a bidding war with Anbang, a Chinese insurer, Marriott agreed to buy Starwood for more than $13 billion last month. The result will be a 1.1m room behemoth. Other firms are bulking up, too. Last year saw $67 billion of hotel mergers, according to Dealogic, a research firm—the highest level since 2007.

Scale will help hotels battle their main competitors: other hotels. But the recent spate of deals is also a response to challengers online. A bigger hotel firm can seek lower fees from online travel agents. Investments in technology can be deployed across more rooms. And the more hotels a firm manages, the more credibly it can urge travellers to bypass third parties and look for rooms on its own site, as Hilton, InterContinental Hotels and others are doing.

Hotels are also finding new partners or acquiring firms outright. On April 5th AccorHotels, a French firm, said it would buy onefinestay, an upscale rival to Airbnb. InterContinental, which was due to hold its annual meeting on May 6th, is partnering with a company called Amadeus to launch a new, cloud-based reservation system that gives more personalised service.

Despite such efforts, it will be difficult for hotel firms to keep up. They cannot beat online firms’ reach. Airbnb has more rooms than even the combined Marriott and Starwood; online travel agents’ inventory is broader still. Expedia’s scale is particularly worrisome for hotel companies. Its sites include not just Expedia.com but Travelocity, Hotwire, Hotels.com and Orbitz—an acquisition regulators declined to challenge in September to the dismay of hotel chains. Less than two months later, Expedia said it would pay $3.9 billion to buy HomeAway, which helps property owners rent their houses to those who want them for a holiday.

Matching online firms’ agility will be equally challenging. Airbnb is trying to attract business types by helping them find homes with wireless internet, 24-hour access and a desk. Expedia plans to offer more listings that show hotel rooms beside houses and flats. Such a move could make both Airbnb and hoteliers bristle.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698307-online-rivals-whizz-ahead-hotels-try-be-both-big-and-nimble-stay-me/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The grey market

Golden oldies

Ageing societies are forcing big shifts in the provision of health care

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THE forecasts are clear: by 2050 the number of people aged over 80 will have doubled in OECD countries, and their share of the population will rise from 3.9% to 9.1%. Around half will probably need help with daily tasks—particularly those with enduring chronic illnesses such as Alzheimer’s, heart disease and osteoporosis. Health systems designed only to offer hospital care for acute cases will struggle to provide such support.

To maintain the well-being of wrinkly populations, hospital stays can be replaced by residencies in purpose-built facilities at less cost. A forthcoming report covering 20 countries from KPMG, a consultancy, suggests the number of care-home residents could grow by 68% over the next 15 years. How care is managed in any one country reflects a tussle between cultural attitudes, national budgets and gritty demographic realities. The increasing availability of technology that would allow the elderly to stay in their homes for longer will also affect demand for such options.

Residential care in America and Japan is flourishing. But in an era of tight public finances, some governments are trimming the payments they offer to cover, or subsidise, care-home places. Some operators now struggle to make money; in western Europe, for example, governments are encouraging the elderly to stay in their own houses for longer. This is why the length of stays in care homes has declined from an average of three to four years a decade ago to 12 to 18 months today, says Max Hotopf, the boss of Healthcare Business International, a publishing company. Thousands of residential beds in the Netherlands and Sweden have disappeared as a result. About 5,000 debt-laden British care homes—a quarter of the total—may close within three years.

This makes emerging markets a more attractive prospect, at least for European care firms. Senior Assist, a Belgian company which manages residential facilities and home help, is now expanding in Chile and Uruguay. But China is the big prize. The Chinese will rely heavily on residential care, thanks to the country’s one-child policy and increasing urbanisation: two parents and four grandparents often depend on one child far away.

Families in other developing countries are more hesitant about handing Granny over to strangers, however. In Brazil, India and richer countries of the Middle East, such as Saudi Arabia, elderly care remains centred around hospitals. In Brazil taking the old from their neighbourhoods is frowned upon. In India and the Middle East, families are expected to look after their elderly when they are not in hospital. Helmut Schuehsler, from TVM Capital Healthcare, a private-equity firm in this sector, says to prevent hospital beds being blocked by oldies, “rehabilitation services” tied to hospitals should be on offer, or at least home care that avoids the need for a hospital in the first place.

Overall, home care is an increasingly attractive market, expected to reach $355 billion by 2020 globally, and growing by 7.8% on average a year, according to Grand View Research. For one thing, it is cheaper to provide help for the elderly in their own homes (as long as it doesn’t involve overnight care); for another, a growing desire exists to “age in place”.

In India, says Mr Hotopf, many agree that equipping ordinary homes with medical equipment will be the solution for those who can afford it. But simpler and cheaper additions can help keep oldies healthier at home, too. The company Sen.se, based in Paris, has a device called Mother that runs a family of “motion cookies”—small sensors. One will fit comfortably on the side of a pill bottle, for example. If placed appropriately around a house, they can monitor room temperature, the time that a person has spent in bed, the opening of the fridge door and whether tablets have been taken. An elderly relative’s data can then be monitored remotely on apps.

Keeping an aged parent in view is also becoming easier. The robotics company Revolve has a telepresence robot called Kubi that allows spectators far away to pan and turn an iPad—a tool that makes it easier for anyone concerned to see how elderly relatives are coping.

For those in need of human oversight, meanwhile, a range of startup companies hope to make finding and employing a carer far easier. Apps, including TenderTree and HomeHero, will replace the advertisements once crafted for fusty magazines.

Care firms and other professional outfits can save money themselves through advances in remote monitoring. In Britain, for example, the Airedale Hospital in the north of England put telemedicine services (a two-way secure video link) into nursing and residential homes for a period, and hospital admissions dropped by more than a third. This was because nurses were on hand to work out whether incidents in care homes were serious or not. In February the hospital started a new digital hub to provide these services on a wider basis.

Yet health-care systems have generally been slow to adopt technology this way. It may now be possible to consult with a doctor via a tablet, but governments have many rules about how medical advice is provided and how related data are handled. The extent to which new technologies grant the elderly independence will be limited by how willing governments are to integrate them into larger systems.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698313-ageing-societies-are-forcing-big-shifts-provision-health-care-golden-oldies/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Entertainment

Parks of recreation

Why media giants are betting big on the future of theme parks

May 7th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



WHEN Disney opens its newest theme park in Shanghai next month, one of the first sights to greet visitors will be the Enchanted Storybook Castle. Its gold finials and blue spires will tower 60 metres above the centre of the park, making the castle the largest in any of Disney’s six such domains. A translucent canopy will house a twisting rollercoaster based on the “Tron” science-fiction franchise; robotic boats will voyage through the lair of Davy Jones, a buccaneering villain from the “Pirates of the Caribbean” film franchise.

Marvels like these are why Bob Iger, the head of Disney, has promised this will be the company’s “most technologically innovative park”. With a $5.5 billion price tag it will also be the most expensive. But Shanghai Disneyland represents just a fraction of the investments the firm has been making in its theme parks. Over the past five years alone, it has ploughed $14 billion into its parks division. There have been major upgrades to all of its existing parks and many additional wonders are already being built in them.

Disney is not alone. Major media companies are clamouring to open new theme parks or expand their existing offerings. Universal Studios, which is owned by Comcast, has its own Chinese park in the works, a $3.3 billion project slated to open in Beijing in 2019. Viacom-owned Paramount Pictures has plans for a similarly pricey development outside London. And in Dubai, Sony Pictures and Lionsgate are among the studios collaborating with local developers on a huge complex of parks that is set to open later this year.

This global boom in investment might seem tough to reconcile with the challenges of the theme-park business. Delighting both ten-year-olds and their parents is a magical feat in itself. And as anyone who has heard the gruesome tale of Euro Disney knows, parks are costly to build and expensive to maintain.

Newfound enthusiasm for them partly reflects upheaval in the media industry. As it has become harder to reap riches in television and film, companies are eager to spin gold from both their vast content libraries and to attract attention to their new offerings. Disney and Comcast have enjoyed considerable success doing this through their parks businesses, which have chugged along as reliable profit engines. Universal Studios has contributed more to Comcast’s profits over the past five years than either the broadcast network NBC or the Universal Pictures film studio, its corporate siblings. At Disney, the company’s theme-park division has generated a better return on assets than its film studio in four of the past five years.

Media companies also see theme parks as a good way to cash in on demographic and economic shifts. Thanks to rapid growth in emerging markets, nearly three billion people over the next two decades will attain middle-class purchasing power; flush with disposable income, this tide of consumers is expected to generate huge new demand for recreational travel. Already, theme-park attendance numbers in Asia are growing at the fastest clip of any market in the world; if that trend continues, the Themed Entertainment Association, an industry group, predicts the market there could eclipse that of North and South America within four years. The scene outside Shanghai Disneyland suggests why: although the park does not open for more than a month, thousands flock to its tarp-covered gates each day in the hope of peeking in.

It helps that media companies need not assume as much risk as they did in past decades of park investments. Many simply license their characters, stories and other intellectual property to local developers in exchange for a cut of gross revenues or other fees. That ensures a relatively steady stream of income regardless of whether the park is making money, thereby minimising the risks to licensors. Such deals typically give licensors less control over the final product and limit the potential return from a park project. But for firms such as Paramount and Sony which are just beginning to explore such ventures, this model has nevertheless proved popular.

Companies with more theme-park experience prefer to take on more risk for the greater control and returns that a joint venture provides. In these deals, firms supply the intellectual property, design, management expertise and some cash in exchange for equity and fees. But they cede ownership of the park assets to a majority-shareholding local developer who then fronts much of the construction costs. Shanghai Disneyland, for example, depends upon one such arrangement.

Even if theme parks have many media companies spellbound, there are hazards. Measly economic growth can make finance for new construction harder to obtain. And as parks tend to draw the majority of their visitors from close by, attendance figures rise and fall with local incomes. A full-blown recession could do even more damage; profits from parks tumbled at many big firms, including Disney, during the depths of the global recession in 2009. Companies must make certain that their soaring hopes for theme parks, unlike the towers and turrets within them, do not rise too high.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698310-why-media-giants-are-betting-big-future-theme-parks-parks-recreation/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

What do the Foxes say?

The success of Leicester City will be pored over for management lessons

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



IN FOOTBALLING terms, Claudio Ranieri, an affable Italian, has found a way to turn water into wine. Mr Ranieri manages a club in England, Leicester City, which historically has not been very good. On May 2nd his team were crowned champions of the English Premier League, a competition more watched than any other on the planet, and reliably won—including in every one of the preceding 20 years—by one of four much bigger clubs. The Foxes had been 5,000-to-1 to win the title on the season’s opening day.

Sports obsessives will spend the summer debating how the cunning Foxes did it—swift counter-attacks, regular interceptions and deep defence all helped on the field—and if their good form can be sustained. But Leicester’s triumph will also spark inordinate interest in the world of business, which has long looked to sport for lessons on management and leadership. Sir Alex Ferguson, a wildly successful former boss of Manchester United, has taught courses at Harvard Business School. Billy Beane’s use of statistics at the Oakland Athletics, a baseball team with limited means, was an early parable of the power of “big data”; Mr Beane now sits on the board of Netsuite, a software firm. Steve Peters, a psychiatrist who has worked with a range of elite athletes, runs programmes promising to help stressed business folk manage their “inner chimp”. It’s a fair bet that Mr Ranieri will be asked onto the corporate-speaking circuit next year, or urged to pen a book on leadership (“I, Claudio”, anyone?).

He can certainly draw on several management themes to offer up lessons for the boardroom. Business leaders are routinely exhorted to learn from, and even celebrate, their mistakes. Walt Disney’s early bankruptcy is said only to have strengthened his resolve to succeed. Henry Ford called blunders necessary for achievement. And Bill Gates has declared success a much lousier teacher than failure. Mr Ranieri, who is 64, took over at Leicester last July and brought 30 years of experience as a manager. He had never won anything notable in England before, being known as a “nearly man” for finishing second in the Premier League when he coached Chelsea. One big criticism then was that he fiddled too much with his team choices, a trait that earned him the nickname “The Tinkerman”. At Leicester, however, he resisted meddling. It can be hard to know precisely what to change; Mr Ranieri, by design or good fortune, found the right thing to adjust.



INTERACTIVE: Flying foxes - footballing pay and performance

The club’s story will be seized on by management gurus as a reminder of an increasingly popular business theme: that the opportunities for smaller fry to emulate giants have got bigger, thanks to technology. Where it once took hefty budgets and in-house data centres for retailers like Walmart to analyse sales data and lure shoppers to out-of-town malls, for example, now cloud computing means that smaller firms can crunch data to draw likely buyers to their wares online. Leicester, too, adopted the approaches of the biggest football clubs in using new technology and analysing lots of data on how players perform.

Mr Ranieri might also reflect that not succeeding in one area can be helpful—if you can then focus on doing better elsewhere. The team fared badly in cup competitions, but was then free to concentrate on winning league games. In business, too, avoiding distractions and focusing on the “core” is a well-worn management theme. Total, a huge French energy company, had hoped to get into gas production in America, but is now thankful it missed out. More deliberately another French firm, Kering, has withdrawn from general retailing in the past few years—selling off brands such as Printemps, Fnac and Conforama—and now specialises in far more lucrative luxury goods.

Finally, there are the lessons to be reeled off from Mr Ranieri’s own relaxed management style. In training sessions he used an invisible bell—calling out “dilly ding, dilly dong”—to keep his team focused; he bought them all pizza when they performed well. The result was to cultivate a particularly strong sense of team spirit. Tech firms are well-versed in team-building tricks, using perks such as food, nap pods and idiosyncratic slang (“Googlers”, “Softies” and “Amazonians”) to bind employees together. As expectations and pressure grew, Mr Ranieri downplayed his team’s ambitions. Modesty in public can be shrewder than hyping up expectations. Plenty of unicorns will end up regretting claims that they are about to change the world.

No “I” in Leicester

There is another way of looking at Leicester’s triumph, however, and one that the self-deprecating Mr Ranieri might endorse. “The Halo Effect” (2007), a book on management delusions by Phil Rosenzweig, argued that great performance by a business often leads to managers being feted for their brilliance, just as poor performance sees them pilloried for their bad decisions. In truth, it is very hard to identify the sources of outperformance, and success is not necessarily the result of things a manager can control. Luck, in the form of a lack of injuries, played its part in Leicester’s success; so too did the shortcomings of rivals. It is easier to cultivate team spirit when you are winning. Mr Ranieri himself has not suddenly gone from good to great: he has been using his imaginary bell to decent effect throughout his career.

The big test for Leicester will be if they can sustain their success. Being champions will bring a financial fillip: a prize of about £90m ($131m), which is a share of the £1.7 billion the league gets in broadcast income yearly. Other blessings will follow. Leicester will now also play (for a while) in the Champions League, generating more income. But unglamorous clubs have previously won the Premier League, only to revert to relative mediocrity. Blackburn Rovers triumphed in 1995, but now languish in a lowlier division; most fans, and players, will remain keen on the biggest clubs. Winning the league has gone far beyond most expectations. But if Leicester were to do it again, the Tinkerman really should get ready to lecture at Harvard.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21698059-leicester-city-management-lessons/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Emerging markets: The unloved bounce

Buttonwood: A losing bet

Bailing out Greece: Where are those buckets?

Car loans: New engine

Italian banks: Broad shoulders

American infrastructure: Buy local

Developing Bangladesh: How to spend it

Free exchange: When life gives you lemons

Bitcoin’s creator: Wright’s wrongs





Articles Sections Next

Emerging markets

The unloved bounce

The recovery in emerging markets looks fragile for all but a handful of countries

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS not easy to have faith in the rally in emerging-market currencies that has taken place since February. The ones that have risen most in recent weeks are typically those—the rouble, the real and the rand—that had lost most ground since May 2013, when the emerging-market sell-off began in earnest (see chart 1). What is there to like about Russia, Brazil and South Africa, with their wilting economies and dysfunctional politics?



The proximate causes of the rally are clear. One was the fading of fears for China’s economy. At the start of 2016 capital appeared to be fleeing China at a rapid rate, in a vote of no confidence. The yuan seemed in danger of losing its moorings against the dollar, raising fears of a round of competitive devaluations across Asia and beyond. Views changed around the time of the meeting of the G20, a club of big economies, in Shanghai in February. Informal pledges by the Chinese authorities not to let the economy slide were backed up by stimulus policies, including a big budget deficit and faster credit growth. Tighter capital controls stemmed the outflows from China. Prices of scorned commodities, such as iron ore, surged at the prospect of Chinese construction. Currencies of raw-material exporters rose too.

A second trigger was a change of heart by the Federal Reserve. In December it raised its main interest rate for the first time in a decade and suggested four further increases were likely in 2016. It has since backed away from these hawkish forecasts. Real interest rates, measured by the yield on inflation-proof bonds, have fallen to 0.14%. The dollar has slumped against even rich-world currencies. No wonder the high yields on offer in Brazil, Russia and other emerging markets are so tempting to rich-world investors, says Kit Juckes of Société Générale, a French bank.

The improved conditions for emerging markets may prevail for a while, but not indefinitely. China’s policy of loose credit only adds to its alarming debt pile (see article). The Fed will eventually resume tightening. Even so, there is a bit more to the emerging-market rally than just a favourable backdrop.

To understand why, go back to May 2013, the start of the “taper tantrum”, when hints from the Fed that its bond-buying would soon tail off prompted a stampede out of emerging markets. Before the Fed’s shift their trade deficits had been growing, leaving them more reliant on foreign borrowing to fill the gap. So when the exodus got going, the hardest hit were economies that depended most on foreign capital.

Jump forward to 2016, and the picture is very different. Emerging markets in aggregate are running a trade surplus. That is the case even if China’s bumper surplus is excluded (see chart 2). What is more, the countries whose trade balances have adjusted the most, Brazil and Indonesia, are among the best recent performers, says Paul McNamara of GAM, a fund manager. True, the improvement is the result of crushed demand for dearer imports, not a revival in exports. But this is a typical pattern of adjustment: imports fall first; exports recover later.



Sceptics counter that there is little that links the countries whose currencies have bounced recently. Some are oil producers. Others export different commodities. A few do neither. Some have made painful changes. Many have skirted them. “Even the dogs have rallied quite hard,” sniffs another fund manager.

The quest for a Teflon-coated emerging market is probably futile. If investors become chary of risky assets again, even those with half-decent fundamentals will get dumped. Still, some traps seem avoidable. China is one obvious snare. Renewed trouble in its economy would hurt commodity producers through lower prices, but probably will not lead to a further drop in investment in drilling and mining, which has already been crushed. At greater risk, perhaps, are the fairly rich economies that supply China with half-finished or finished goods—Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan—though all have ample protection in the form of trade surpluses and foreign-exchange reserves.

A second concern is interest-rate increases in America. So few of them are expected that even a turn in a mildly hawkish direction by the Fed might give the dollar a lift. Countries with biggish current-account deficits, such as Colombia and South Africa, or big stocks of dollar debt, such as Chile, seem most vulnerable. Turkey is at risk on both counts, as well as from political upheaval, which caused the lira to slump this week. Manoj Pradhan of Morgan Stanley stresses a third potential pitfall: overly rapid credit growth. China, which has huge and still-growing debts, is Exhibit A. Malaysia, Thailand and South Korea may also face credit hangovers. They all have strong trade links with China, too.

Once these traps are taken into account, there are just a handful of emerging markets to feel fairly sanguine about. Russia has already endured a deep recession. It has a cheap currency, a current-account surplus and a capable central bank. Better yet, with inflation likely to fade, interest rates there are expected to fall this year.

India is a net commodity importer; it is tied only loosely to China’s economy; it has a smallish trade deficit and credit has been slowing for years, even if its banks are weighted down by souring corporate debts. Indonesia has similar merits. Mexico’s economy has been a let-down (in part because America’s economy also has), but it has fewer weak links than its peers. It is testimony to the still parlous state of emerging markets that such lukewarm investment cases are the best on offer.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698268-recovery-emerging-markets-looks-fragile-all-handful/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

A losing bet

Hedge funds haven’t delivered on their promise

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



HEDGE funds employ the cleverest people in the world to exploit the opportunities that other managers miss. That is why they deserve their high fees—or so the story goes.

That story is getting harder and harder to believe. In the first quarter of the year the average fund lost 0.8% after fees, according to Hedge Fund Research, an index provider. That follows a loss of 1.1% for the average fund in 2015, and a gain of just 3% in 2014. In other words, the average investor has earned a cumulative 1% since the start of 2014.

While clients have made do with the crumbs, the managers are still dining well. They get annual management fees of 2% or so, however the funds perform. Those that have done well have earned performance fees on top. All told, managers will have earned a lot more than their clients over the past couple of years.

Market conditions have been difficult for the hedge-fund titans. Sudden shifts between “risk-off” and “risk-on” markets, such as the market turnaround in February, are very hard to time. Official intervention in the markets, either through central banks or regulatory action, can also blindside the savviest investors. In January Martin Taylor closed down his Nevsky Capital fund, citing economic nationalism, the poor quality of data in China and India, and less transparent markets as reasons for his decision.

Dan Loeb, who runs the Third Point hedge fund, told clients in a letter in late April that recent months have seen “one of the most catastrophic periods of hedge-fund performance that we can remember”. Mr Loeb says many hedge funds were convinced that China would be forced to devalue the yuan early this year; it didn’t. Others backed big technology stocks like Apple and Netflix; they have underperformed. And some fund managers have lost out because of events in the pharmaceutical sector: the collapse of the Allergan-Pfizer merger and the plunge in Valeant’s share price.

Individual funds have their ups and downs. It is unfair to judge fund managers over the short term. So what about the longer run? In 2007 Warren Buffett, the investment guru who heads Berkshire Hathaway, a conglomerate, struck a $1m bet with Protégé Partners, a fund of hedge funds, over whether a hedge-fund portfolio would beat the S&P 500, after fees, over the subsequent ten years. As the chart shows, with around 19 months to go, Mr Buffett seems almost certain to collect. He drummed the point home at Berkshire’s recent annual meeting, saying, “There’s been far, far, far more money made by people in Wall Street through salesmanship abilities than through investment abilities.”

Defenders of hedge funds would say that the S&P 500 is not the best benchmark. Instead of aiming for the highest total return, managers use their skill to limit risk and deliver a more consistent performance. Even in this respect, however, hedge funds have lagged a long way behind a typical institutional portfolio comprising 60% American equities and 40% Treasury bonds.

It is not too difficult to figure out why. In a world of low interest rates, low bond yields and low dividends, the fees charged by hedge funds simply take too big a bite out of gross returns to leave much for clients. The golden age of hedge funds was in the 1990s, when the likes of George Soros delivered double-digit returns every year. Pension funds and endowments still have a dim memory of those days; that is why they hope hedge funds will act as a deus ex machina and deliver the outsize returns needed to fund the promises they have made. They have been repeatedly disappointed; some, such as CalPERS, a giant Californian pension fund, have liquidated all their investments in the sector.

All the statistics in this article refer to the average hedge-fund return; of course, there will always be managers who perform much better than average. But how to spot them in advance? If it were easy, then why would anyone give money to below-average managers? It will always be possible to find managers who have earned exceptional returns in the past, just as some people actually did back Leicester for the English football title at 5000-to-1. That doesn’t mean you’d pay good money for the same punters’ tips on the Kentucky Derby.

There is no doubt that many hedge-fund managers are extremely clever and work diligently at ferreting out profitable opportunities. But are there enough opportunities to sustain an industry with 10,000 individual funds and $2.9 trillion of assets? Nowhere near.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698273-hedge-funds-havent-delivered-their-promise-losing-bet/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bailing out Greece

Where are those buckets?

Brinkmanship over emergency loans resumes

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

The script seems familiar

THE tagline of the film “My Big Fat Greek Wedding 2”, which was released in March, is “People change. Greeks don’t.” Whether any euro-zone finance ministers have seen the film, let alone detected any resemblance to their ongoing talks with the Greek government, is unknown. But the renewed bickering over the terms of Greece’s latest bail-out, complete with threats of a snap election if its creditors don’t give more ground, has the air of a duff sequel.

Greece badly needs the next dollop of the €86 billion ($99 billion) bail-out creditors promised it last summer, in exchange for promises of austerity and reform. But it will not get the money until the creditors complete a review of its progress, which has been dragging on since October. The government has scraped together enough cash (by raiding independent public agencies) to pay salaries and pensions in May, perhaps even in June. But by July 20th, when a bond worth over €2 billion matures, the country once again faces default and perhaps a forced exit from the euro zone. The threat of Grexit is not exactly back; it never really went away.

With a referendum on Britain’s EU membership in June and a possible flare-up of the refugee crisis as summer approaches, the last thing Europe needs is another Greek drama. The European Commission is thus in a mood for compromise. It emphasises that negotiations are “99%’’ complete. But the other creditor, the IMF, is less forgiving. With tax arrears in Greece rising and reforms constantly delayed, the fund has little faith that the programme’s target of a 3.5% primary budget surplus by 2018 can be achieved. It wants Greece to make a contingency plan to raise more money or cut spending further before it approves the next instalment of the bail-out.

In April a meeting of euro-zone finance ministers, intended to approve Greece’s fiscal plans along with the pending disbursement, was cancelled at the last minute. Although negotiators had more or less agreed on a package of €5.4 billion (3% of Greek GDP) in austerity measures, they hit a deadlock over an extra €3.6 billion in contingency measures to be adopted if the primary surplus does not reach 3.5%. The Europeans seem content to have a woolly plan B, but Christine Lagarde, head of the fund, says it will “have to be legislated upfront, have to be credible, and have to be triggered with a degree of automaticity”. Greece’s finance minister, Euclid Tsakalotos, says this is constitutionally impossible.

In fact the biggest constraints are political, not legal. The contingency package would probably involve further cuts to pensions, a direct assault on the base of the ruling Syriza party. Alexis Tsipras, the prime minister, faces a revolt by 53 of his own MPs, led by Mr Tsakalotos. Greece’s main opposition party, New Democracy, now leads in the polls and has called for snap elections. It says it will vote neither for the €5.4 billion austerity package (because it is too tax-heavy and reform-light) nor for additional contingency measures.

The meeting of euro-zone finance ministers has been rescheduled for May 9th. Before that, negotiators on both sides will need to agree on the contingency plan. If they do so, the deal will have to be approved by the Greek parliament by May 24th, when the next finance ministers’ meeting takes place. If Mr Tsipras strikes a deal but cannot get it through parliament, a new election is likely. And several euro-zone governments must get parliamentary approval to sign off on any disbursement of bail-out funds. The potential pitfalls, in other words, are legion.

The irony is that the IMF, for all its current intransigence, is the more forgiving of Greece’s creditors. It wants to reduce the primary-surplus target to 1.5% and to write off some of Greece’s debt. Such concessions are politically indigestible for euro-zone governments, especially Germany’s. The most likely solution, as always, is a fudge: an agreement that gives creditors just enough confidence to release the next slug of cash, without putting Greece’s finances on a sustainable footing or resolving the most heated disputes.

Deal or no deal, election or not, the economy is struggling. Banks are still zombies; many structural reforms (such as to the judiciary, labour and product markets) have been put off; and private investors continue to give Greece a wide berth. Yet other euro members do not want to talk about debt relief. Greeks are not the only ones, it seems, who do not change.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/21698206-brinkmanship-over-emergency-loans-resumes-again-threat-grexit-never-really-went-away/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Car loans

New engine

Fintech firms find a way to finance purchases of secondhand cars

May 7th 2016 | New York | From the print edition



OF THE 3.1m Americans who bought a new car in the last three months of 2015, 86% of them took out a loan to do so, according to Experian Automotive, a research firm. More car loans are issued in America than mortgages. The total amount outstanding on them is almost $1.1 trillion—well in excess of credit-card debt, and almost as much as the stock of student loans. But there is one part of the car market where credit is scarcer: only 55% of the 5.6m who bought secondhand cars in the fourth quarter of 2015 received a loan.

Whereas sales of new cars get most of the attention, secondhand cars generate twice as many transactions, worth 50% more in total. Stereotypical small car-dealers, with their oily manner and shouty television advertisements, are being displaced by big chains, such as CarMax, with transparent prices and standards. These outfits are able to offer credit, since they can provide accurate valuations, and thus be sure that the car in question is adequate collateral for a loan. Indeed, CarMax makes 40% of its profits from lending.

Every year, however, more than 10m cars are sold in America by one individual to another. Such transactions are much harder to finance. Lenders have little way of knowing whether the money is actually being used to buy a car, let alone whether the car is worth the amount to be borrowed. Credit unions will occasionally finance such transactions, but only for buyers with very high credit ratings and only after cumbersome procedures to guard against fraud. Both buyer and seller are required to show up at the credit union to sign the relevant documents in person.

There are few market failures in America that do not now have fintech firms clamouring to correct them, and used-car loans are no exception. An online marketplace called Shift opened for business in San Francisco a little over a year ago and now operates in six cities. Rather than buy and resell cars, Shift greases the wheels of “peer-to-peer” transactions for a fee without ever owning any cars. (A rival startup called Beepi offers a seemingly similar service, but does take ownership of the cars, making it more like a web-only version of CarMax.) Shift picks up cars from sellers, checks what shape they’re in, photographs them and advertises them on its website at a price it sets. When a buyer is found, it handles all the paperwork. It even delivers the car to potential buyers for a test drive.

The extensive inspection allows Shift to assess the car as collateral for a loan, and by handling the paperwork itself it reduces the risk of fraud. That allows Shift to offer loans at rates of 4-9%—more or less what a conventional dealer would offer, but without the same incentive to inflate the sales price. The innovation may help America’s mountain of car loans grow even taller.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698276-fintech-firms-find-way-finance-purchases-secondhand-cars-new-engine/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Italian banks

Broad shoulders

A catastrophe is averted, but there’s still trouble ahead

May 7th 2016 | MILAN | From the print edition



WHEN Italian financial institutions created Atlante, a €4.3 billion ($4.9 billion) bank-rescue fund, at the government’s behest last month, they did so partly to guarantee a share sale by Banco Popolare di Vicenza (BPVi), the country’s tenth-biggest bank. They also hoped that Atlante’s mere existence would encourage other investors to subscribe. Fat chance. On May 2nd the stock exchange said too few had signed up for its stockmarket listing to proceed. Atlante (Italian for Atlas, a mythical giant who supported the sky) will underwrite the whole €1.5 billion issue, leaving it the owner of almost all of the troubled lender.

Atlante’s intervention has staved off an immediate crisis: after November’s botched public bail-out of four small banks, in which retail investors lost money, failure to raise new capital for BPVi was unthinkable. UniCredit, Italy’s biggest bank, will be especially relieved, having sidestepped an ill-advised commitment to underwrite the issue in full.

BPVi’s flop bodes ill for Banca Veneto, another smallish bank which plans a €1 billion capital increase in June. But Veneto’s predicament is less dire; and Intesa Sanpaolo, one of Italy’s stronger banks, has syndicated its underwriting of the rights issue, which UniCredit failed to do for BPVi’s. Veneto’s chairman says he does not expect to need Atlante’s help.

The fund’s biggest test of strength will be denting Italy’s gigantic pile of bad debts. Gross non-performing loans amount to €360 billion, of which €196 billion are especially troublesome. Mediobanca, an investment bank, reckons that Atlante (bulked up by leverage, and working alongside a new government guarantee scheme) could absorb €21 billion. Equita, another, suggests the fund could buy up to €33 billion.

Atlante’s stamina will depend partly on how Veneto’s capital increase goes: if the fund chips in a lot, it will have less left over for bad loans. A bankruptcy reform to speed up credit recovery, passed on April 29th, may help by making duff loans a little more valuable.

Questions also remain over how the fund will be governed, how it will turn round the banks it supports and how it will sort out the loans it acquires. The European Banking Authority is due to carry out further “stress tests” on the banks it supervises this summer, to assess their resilience to economic shocks. Italians will hope it puts no more weight on Atlante’s shoulders.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698277-catastrophe-averted-theres-still-trouble-ahead-broad-shoulders/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

American infrastructure

Buy local

America increasingly relies on state governments to fund public investment

May 7th 2016 | DES MOINES | From the print edition



IN THE suburbs of Des Moines, Iowa, yellow diggers slowly knock chunks out of a tired-looking bridge. Beneath lies Interstate 80, one of America’s economic arteries, which traces the route of the Lincoln highway—the first road to cross America—from New York to San Francisco. The bridge impedes traffic both on the highway—it is too low—and over it—it is too narrow. Its replacement will be a third wider, making room for cycle lanes and more traffic, and six inches higher, allowing bigger lorries to pass beneath. The diggers are out across Iowa, which embarked on a five-year programme to upgrade its bridges and highways in January.

Elsewhere, however, the diggers sit idle. America’s government invests much too little in infrastructure. A study in 2013 by the American Society of Civil Engineers claimed that additional spending of $1.6 trillion, in 2010 dollars, is needed by 2020 to bring the quality of the country’s infrastructure up from “poor” to “good”. Roads are a particular problem: over the past decade, America’s roads have fallen from seventh to fourteenth in the World Economic Forum’s rankings of the quality of infrastructure. Part of the problem is that the federal tax on petrol (gasoline), which provides most of the funding for federal spending on roads, has been stuck at 18.4 cents per gallon since 1993. Over that period the price of construction materials and the wages of construction workers have both risen by more than 75%.

Happily, the federal government is responsible only for about a quarter of spending on highways. States are keener to raise local taxes on petrol: 12 did so in the year to January. Iowa’s rise was the sharpest. Since last year Iowans have paid 31 cents per gallon to the state, up from 21 cents per gallon—a rate set in 1989. Most states tax by the gallon and so have also benefited from the falling oil price, which has boosted petrol sales. Nationally, they are up by 3% on a year ago.

Since 2013 state and local governments’ net investment (ie, after depreciation) is up by about a quarter. In contrast, federal net investment, which was barely positive in 2013, is now negative, meaning that Congress is not even spending enough to maintain what it has. In the aftermath of the financial crisis, states cut investment to balance their budgets, while the federal government upped its spending as part of a stimulus program. Now the reverse is true: state and local investment adds to growth, while falling federal investment is a drag on it (see chart).



Investment by Iowa’s state government rose by 7% last year, according the National Association of Budget Officers. The state will raise about $215 million from its petrol-tax increase in 2016, says Stuart Anderson of the Iowa Department of Transportation. There is less political gridlock than in Congress. Even so, getting the petrol tax up took more than a decade of studies and consultations. And needs remain: addressing all the state’s infrastructure problems would require an increase five times as big.

The federal government has made some progress. In late 2015 Congress reached a deal to fund highway spending until 2020, having previously relied on a series of short-term compromises. This encouraged states to invest by removing the risk that federal funds would suddenly dry up, causing projects to be cancelled, says Mr Anderson. The deal also provided some new cash—the White House says road funding will increase by 4%—but, bizarrely, paid for this by raiding the capital of the Federal Reserve.

Further petrol-tax rises are scheduled for the next 12 months in Michigan, Nebraska and Washington. Politicians in other states, including Alabama, Hawaii and Louisiana, are considering raising their levies this year. In spite of this progress, however, local petrol taxes still have the same problem as the federal one: they tend to be fixed in nominal terms, such that inflation erodes their value over time. As a result, politicians must burn political capital just to stand still. And unrelated problems may yet jeopardise local investment: slowing growth in other local tax receipts is raising a “yellow flag” for state budgets, according to the Rockefeller Institute, a think-tank.

That means Congress must find a way to finance more federal investment, especially once the latest deal expires in 2020. Hillary Clinton, the front-runner for the presidency, promises a modest $275 billion increase in spending. More will be needed, or America’s roads and bridges will continue to crumble, diggers or not.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698301-america-increasingly-relies-state-governments-fund-public-investment-buy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Developing Bangladesh

How to spend it

An ambitious attempt to work out the best use for scarce resources

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

Sifting through the options

EVERY government minister, senior civil servant and charity official is familiar with the pitch. Spend money on my project, says the supplicant: it will bring such large benefits that you will actually save money in the long run. At this, the official sighs, knowing that another supplicant with an equally bold pitch is waiting outside. How can he pick among competing pleas for bridges, IT systems, deworming medicines and a thousand other things?

Next week, at a conference in Dhaka, the Copenhagen Consensus will try to answer that question. For more than a decade the think-tank has assessed the global costs and benefits of different development schemes. Now it has commissioned studies, mostly by academics at BRAC, a local charity, into 70-odd activities in Bangladesh. Better drains are weighed against cash transfers to the poor and research into more nutritious rice. The idea is to give a tailwind to the best ideas and a headwind to the worst, says Bjorn Lomborg, who runs the Copenhagen Consensus. The results are clear—indeed, rather too clear.

Most of the interventions score between one and 20, meaning that a dollar spent on them will yield $1-20 of economic, social and environmental benefits. A stiffer, better-enforced tobacco tax would supposedly repay at a ratio of eight to one, for example, whereas expanding village courts would yield 18 to one. A few interventions, including unconditional handouts of cash to poor Bangladeshis and treating and immunising against cervical cancer, score less than one.

The winner, yielding a fantastic $663 in benefits for every $1 spent, is digital procurement. Bangladesh’s government requires most would-be suppliers to submit bids in person. That is a costly nuisance for them; it also encourages corruption. Powerful bidders intimidate weaker ones and even employ thugs to seize rivals’ bids—a phenomenon known as “tender snatching”. One study suggests that e-procurement cuts the price of contracts by about 12%. Because switching to online bids is fairly cheap, the assumed returns are huge.

Weighing the costs and benefits of diverse projects is astute, and not only for poor countries like Bangladesh or Haiti (next in line for the Copenhagen Consensus treatment). Cost-benefit analysis is common in the West, although it is often applied to just one project—a high-speed railway, say—rather than a menu of options. But there is a hitch. “Cost-benefit analysis gives you a number,” says Munshi Sulaiman of BRAC, who contributed a study of anti-poverty programmes. “It doesn’t tell you how much confidence you can have in that number.”

Some projects have been rigorously analysed. A “graduation” programme for the very poor, which combines training with gifts of livestock, has been subjected to several large randomised controlled trials. It comes out comparatively badly, with returns of two to one—but at least the benefits are certain. For other projects the evidence is weaker. Stimulating the minds of stunted children is assumed to repay at 18 to one because a small Jamaican programme that began in 1986 got good results. The e-procurement study extrapolates from the experience of Bangladesh’s local engineering department.

Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak of Yale University, who has experimented with encouraging Bangladeshi farmers to migrate to cities during the lean season, thinks it unfair to compare carefully tested projects to others where the cost-benefit numbers are “essentially made up”. Binning reliable, low-scoring projects for untested high-scoring ones would be foolish. But if the upshot is more scrutiny for promising projects, the exercise is useful. And almost anything would be better than spending money on projects because their backers can tell a good story, or because they are supported by powerful politicians.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698302-ambitious-attempt-work-out-best-use-scarce-resources-how-spend-it/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

When life gives you lemons

The economics of digital music favour streaming. Artists are learning to adapt

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THE release of Beyoncé’s newest album (a genre-jumping tour de force entitled “Lemonade”) was carried out with the precision of a military operation. Manoeuvres began in February, with the release of a single and a performance at the Super Bowl. Phase two commenced in April, when the complete album was rolled out across various platforms in stages, alongside a short film and the launch of a worldwide promotional tour. Beyoncé’s campaign is about more than showmanship. Like other artists, she is attempting to work out the answer to a difficult question: how to maximise the money made selling digital files that many listeners can easily (if not always legally) obtain free of charge.

Money earned by selling music has declined steadily from a peak in the late 1990s, the salad days of the compact disc, to the early 2000s. Though Apple used the popularity of the iPod to reaccustom people to paying for music, in the form of low prices for digital downloads, sales of physical recordings have fallen faster than digital ones have grown. The era of digital downloads in any case proved short: in 2015, for the first time, more money was spent on paid subscriptions to music-streaming services.

The economics of digital music seem to favour streaming. A typical user values the music of a few favoured artists highly—highly enough to pay for their albums (and perhaps also for concert tickets and merchandise). That user may also enjoy songs by other performers, but not enough to shell out the $1.29 it costs to download the music legally. Rather than reduce the money earned on each sale by cutting the typical song price, the music industry has instead chosen to lose sales, often to piracy.

Streaming offers a way to pick up those pennies from the pavement. By bundling thousands of songs together and offering access to them on demand, streaming services like Spotify have created an appealing product. Many services provide free, ad-supported streaming while also offering premium subscription packages; both Tidal’s standard service and Spotify’s ad-free premium service cost $10 per month—less than the $17.99 it costs to buy “Lemonade” as a digital download. IFPI, an international recording-industry trade group, estimates that there are now 41m fee-paying subscribers worldwide, up from 8m in 2010. Streaming services add value in other ways, as well. Tidal offers a more expensive service providing high-fidelity audio, and all services compete for users by seeking to build the best algorithms, which tailor playlists to users’ tastes.

Each time a user listens to a song, the artist earns a small fee: about $0.007 on average at Spotify, for instance. This income pales in comparison with the windfalls that sales of physical albums used to generate. In 2013 Thom Yorke, Radiohead’s lead singer, declared streaming services to be “the last desperate fart of a dying corpse”. Yet recent research suggests that streaming is not in itself diminishing artists’ earnings. Although it does displace some digital sales, the shift of other listeners from illegal downloading to streaming more than makes up for the loss.

As streaming grows, artists are pursuing several broad strategies to boost what they earn. Most rely on cross-selling: streaming helps build demand for live performances, for instance, which provide nearly all the money earned by artists just starting out and as much as half of the income for big acts like Beyoncé.

Other artists focus on boosting album sales. Some, like Adele, eschew streaming, relying instead on older fans who are still happy to buy CDs. Artists occasionally market their album as an artistic whole (rather than as a collection of tracks that can be slotted into streaming-service playlists); most of the songs on “Views”, a new album by Drake, a Canadian rapper, cannot be purchased as individual tracks. Adding bells and whistles to the album can help, too. Many come with digital books or videos; those who purchase “Lemonade” can also download the accompanying film. Artists are also selling old-fashioned records, which appeal both to nostalgic baby-boomers and to young hipsters who see some cachet in vinyl. Last year the industry earned more selling vinyl records than it did from ad-supported streaming services.

Against the current

The most marketable artists increasingly follow a third strategy, of deeper involvement with streaming services themselves. Tidal was set up by musicians, including Beyoncé and her husband Jay-Z, a rapper; part of the service’s pitch to users is that it pays out a bigger share of its earnings to musicians than rivals.

Popular acts are also learning to play online music outlets off against each other by auctioning off the exclusive right to stream or sell their music, a practice called “windowing”. Beyoncé’s last album, released in 2013, was available only on Apple’s iTunes for a week after its debut; “Lemonade” was exclusive to Tidal for a day. In 2014 Taylor Swift pulled her music from Spotify and gave exclusive streaming rights to Apple; Prince did something similar with Tidal, which saw sales jump when he died on April 21st.

Although windowing provides artists with a way to capture more of the money made selling their music, it complicates life for consumers. When services compete on the basis of catalogues, that dispels the dream of having all of the world’s music available in one place; users must instead decide whether to sign up for multiple services or miss out on some artists. Consumers may ultimately gravitate to one dominant service, with which all musicians feel compelled to do business; or competing services could co-operate to share artist catalogues. Yet while that might satisfy users, artists might balk at the concentration of market power in streamers’ hands (and regulators might take an interest). More likely still, technology will strike the next blow, delivering new ways for users to access digital music—and leaving artists and record companies scrambling to adapt once again.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698274-economics-digital-music-favour-streaming-artists-are-learning-adapt-when/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bitcoin’s creator

Wright’s wrongs

The quest to find Satoshi Nakamoto continues

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



ANOTHER Satoshi has bitten the dust. On May 2nd Craig Wright, an Australian entrepreneur, published on his blog what he claimed was proof that he is Satoshi Nakamoto, the mysterious creator of bitcoin, a cryptocurrency. Within 90 minutes the post had been debunked on Reddit, an online forum. He then said that he would present “extraordinary proof” that he is indeed Mr Nakamoto by moving some bitcoin from accounts thought to be under control of the currency’s creator. But on May 5th he wrote on his blog that he did not have the strength to continue trying to prove his identity, prompting most to add his name to the long list of false leads in the hunt for Mr Nakamoto.

In October 2008 somebody who went by that name posted an academic “white paper” online, outlining the design of a cryptocurrency the author dubbed bitcoin. The following January the same person switched on a system like the one outlined in the paper. But nobody, not even his closest collaborators, ever met Mr Nakamoto in person. They communicated with him only electronically. And a couple of years into the project, he stopped joining in. “I have moved on to other things,” he wrote in April 2011. Except for a few messages, most of which are believed to be hoaxes, he has not been heard from since.

The invention that underlies the currency, called the “blockchain”, is widely considered brilliant. That Mr Nakamoto has not basked in its glory suggests an overwhelming desire for privacy. Nor does Mr Nakamoto seem to be motivated by fortune: all bitcoin in circulation are now worth about $7 billion. Mr Nakamoto is thought to hold more than 1m bitcoin, worth about $450m at current rates (the currency’s value has recovered a bit after a steep fall—see chart).

Mr Nakamoto’s reclusiveness has given rise to a cottage industry of Satoshi-hunters. In 2014 Newsweek, an American magazine, identified a man called Dorian Satoshi Nakamoto as the real Satoshi, but he turned out not to be. In December 2015 it was Mr Wright’s turn to be outed: hackers leaked some of his e-mails and documents. But holes soon started to appear in that story, too. SGI, a maker of supercomputers, for instance, denied that it had ever done business with one of his firms, Cloudcroft. After a raid by Australian tax officials on his house in Sydney, many came to believe that the entire story was an elaborate hoax, perhaps one staged by Mr Wright himself.

Soon afterwards Mr Wright moved to London, where one of his companies has an office, but kept silent—until late March, when his public-relations agency contacted three media outlets, including The Economist, saying that Mr Wright wanted to refute claims that he had made the story up and to offer cryptographic proof that he is indeed Mr Nakamoto. Although he gave us a demonstration that seemed to show that he is in possession of cryptographic keys which only Mr Nakamoto should have, important questions remained. In particular, Mr Wright was unwilling to use his keys to sign digitally a message provided by us, which would have been stronger, although not absolutely watertight, evidence that he is Mr Nakamoto.

Others were convinced by his claim, however. Gavin Andresen, Mr Nakamoto’s successor as the leading developer of bitcoin’s software, confirmed in an interview that he had met Mr Wright and thought his proof was valid—an endorsement that lent credence to his claim.

Blog jam

This week Mr Wright published a blog post which he had promised would not only describe the proof in detail, but also provide data to allow it to be independently verified. But the post turned out to be an exercise in obfuscation: he laid out a very complicated way of proving his identity and provided as cryptographic proof a string of numbers that is publicly available.

This bungled self-outing provoked head-shaking among bitcoin gurus: if Mr Wright was indeed Mr Nakamoto, surely he could provide more convincing evidence? Mr Andresen, too, was flabbergasted by the blog post and later said that it was a mistake to endorse Mr Wright’s claim before reading it.

Faced with much ridicule, Mr Wright backed out. “I believed that I could do this,” he wrote in a new post. “I believed that I could put the years of anonymity and hiding behind me. But, as the events this week unfolded and I prepared to publish the proof of access to the earliest keys, I broke.”

The most obvious explanation for Mr Wright’s erratic behaviour is that he is indeed an imposter—and does not have the access to Mr Nakamoto’s keys. But things may be more complicated. One theory holds that Mr Wright was only one of a group of inventors of bitcoin. Ian Grigg, another bitcoin expert, recently wrote: “It is true that Craig is the larger part of the genius behind the team, but he could not have done it alone.” Two possible members of that team, Hal Finney and Dave Kleiman, have died.

In other words, the Satoshi saga will go on. In the meantime the bitcoin community remains divided community into two competing camps with different views about how the currency should evolve. One side wants to keep it smallish and pure; the other is pushing for it to grow rapidly, even if this means turning it into something more like a conventional payment system. The controversy has dragged on for months because bitcoin lacks institutions to reach and impose a decision.

The “civil war”, as some call it, has already slowed bitcoin down, says Jeff Garzik, another influential developer and co-founder of Bloq, a bitcoin startup. If the strife continues, another cryptocurrency may well supersede bitcoin—in which case the effort to establish Satoshi’s true identity will become academic.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698294-quest-find-satoshi-nakamoto-continues-wrightu2019s-wrongs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Robotic surgery: Who wields the knife?

Genes and disease: Encore une fois

Quantum computing: Now try this

Animal behaviour: Time and motion study

Matrimonial harmony: Count me in

Matrimonial harmony: Technology correspondent’s job





Articles Sections Next

Robotic surgery

Who wields the knife?

A machine carries out an operation almost unaided

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THEY don’t drink, they don’t get tired and they don’t go on strike. To hospital managers, the idea of robots operating on patients without human intervention is an attractive one. To patients, though, the crucial question is, “are they better than human surgeons?” Surgery is messy and complicated. A routine operation can become life-threatening in minutes.

Such considerations have meant that the role of robots in operating theatres has been limited until now to being little more than motorised, precision tools for surgeons to deploy—a far cry from the smart surgical pods and “med-bays” of science fiction. But a paper published this week in Science Translational Medicine, by Peter Kim of the Children’s National Health System in Washington, DC, and his colleagues, brings the idea of real robot surgeons, operating under only the lightest of human supervision, a step closer. Though not yet let loose on people, it has successfully stitched up the intestines of piglets.

To build their robodoc, dubbed the Smart Tissue Autonomous Robot (STAR), Dr Kim and his team fitted a robotic arm with an articulated suturing tool and a force sensor to detect the tension in the surgical thread during the operation. They equipped the arm with cameras that could create a three-dimensional image, to guide it as it deployed the tool, and also a thermal-imaging device to help distinguish between similar-looking tissues. A computer program written by the team controlled the arm. This had a repertoire of stitches, knots and manoeuvres that permitted it to plan and carry out a procedure, known as anastomosis, which involves sewing together two parts of a bodily tube.

No pig in a poke

Before each of the trial operations, the team anaesthetised a piglet and opened its abdomen to expose part of its small intestine. They then severed this and highlighted pertinent areas with fluorescent dye, to help guide the arm. Under a surgeon’s supervision, STAR sewed the piglet’s gut together again. In the four operations reported in the paper it carried out about 60% of the procedure without human intervention, and the rest with only minor adjustments to its stitches. Since the team submitted their results for publication, however, they say STAR has successfully completed the entire process unaided.

Comparing STAR’s work with that of experienced surgeons operating both with and without the assistance of existing robotic tools, Dr Kim and his colleagues reckoned STAR’s stitches were more evenly spaced and the sutured gut less leaky. None of the pigs suffered complications.

STAR did, it is true, take much longer than a human surgeon would to create the suture. It averaged 50 minutes for the operation, whereas a person would take about eight. But that will surely get faster. And even if STAR never quite matches a human being at work for speed, the better final product it seems to deliver would, if translated into regular clinical practice, reduce readmission rates.

For now, STAR remains a tool rather than a truly autonomous agent. But such autonomy is probably not far away. Dr Kim hopes, for example, that a souped-up version will soon be able to remove an appendix without any assistance from doctors.

STAR’s existence does, though, highlight two questions being raised more and more in what is an increasingly robotised society. These are: “will people trust robots with their lives?” and, “who is liable if something goes wrong?”

The answer to the first will probably depend on the level of supervision the machines are subject to. It would not take much, for example, to turn airliners into drones, but passengers are reassured by the presence of a flight crew, so this is unlikely to happen soon. The same will probably be true of surgical robots, however good they become. In answer to the second, the lawyers are already circling. Intuitive Surgical, a maker of surgical robots based in Sunnyvale, California, has been on the receiving end of lawsuits alleging (which the firm denies) that surgeons were inadequately trained to use its machines or that the robots were defective. Machines may get the better of humans in the operating theatre, but the courtroom will also determine how fast they spread.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698220-operations-performed-machines-could-one-day-be-commonplaceif-humans-are-willing/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Genes and disease

Encore une fois

The genomic era arrives. And this time it’s probably real

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN the DNA sequence of the human genome was revealed in 2000, many people expected it to start a revolution. Researchers would be able to discover the genes that caused or influenced diseases. And drug companies would be able to use that knowledge to create better medicines. Until recently, though, it has been a case of “revolution postponed”. The flood of promised discoveries has been more like a trickle.

Much of the reason for the unfulfilled promises was naivity about how straightforward the link between different versions of genes and particular diseases would be. But that naivity has gone, and the fact that complex illnesses often have contributions from large numbers of genes is now recognised. This recognition, plus better computing and sequencing power, mean researchers are indeed beginning to pick the relationships between genes and disease apart.

In January, for example, a group at the Broad Institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts said they had homed in on most of the genes involved in schizophrenia, and thus had a hypothesis for a mechanism that might be causing it. This week it is the turn of breast cancer, as the most comprehensive analysis yet of mutations related to this condition is published in Nature.

The team that did the analysis, led by Serena Nik-Zainal of the Sanger Institute in Cambridge, England, sequenced the genomes of cells from 560 tumours. These, says Dr Nik-Zainal, proved vastly different from the genomes of healthy cells from the patients involved, for they had generally acquired thousands of mutations. That is not surprising. Early mutations in the development of a tumour often involve genes involved in DNA repair. Once this has happened other mutations accumulate. But all these secondary mutations make it hard to sift out the ones which are clinically relevant. To do so you need to compare lots of samples from different people, and thus see which mutations some of them have in common.

That, Dr Nik-Zainal and her colleagues did. They also found mutations that were known to indicate damage from exposure to ultraviolet light (perhaps from too much sunbathing), smoking and other risk factors. This study makes it possible, on the basis of genetic similarities, to cluster breast cancers into different types. In essence, even though their symptoms are similar, these groups are different diseases. It is therefore likely that they will respond differently to particular treatments. The next stage is to see which treatments work best on which clusters.

Genomics is already having an impact on the treatment of cancers such as this. Foundation Medicine, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, offers a test for 300 genes that are often mutated in solid tumours. This lets oncologists try to match treatments with patients. In the future, DNA from patients’ tumours is likely to be sequenced completely for diagnostic purposes.

The arrival of genomics as a science of clinical significance was further underscored by AstraZeneca’s announcement on April 21st that it would form a collaboration to sequence 500,000 samples taken during clinical trials it has conducted over the years. This British-Swedish drug firm says it plans to see 2m genomes so studied over the next decade.

One of its main partners in this endeavour is Craig Venter, a man who led one of the human-genome sequencing projects that resulted in the announcement in 2000. Dr Venter, now the boss of a genomics firm called Human Longevity (HLI), which is based in San Diego, said at the launch of the collaboration, “you can’t tell much from a handful of genomes. We needed large numbers of genomes to find small differences.”

He should know. HLI has compiled a list of the common variants in the human genome. The firm needed 10,000 genomes to pick these out. Larger numbers than this will therefore be required to notice rare and ultra-rare variants that may or may not be associated with diseases. Dr Venter reckons that to discover all of the genetic variation which human beings display, 10m genomes will need to be sequenced.

Variations on a theme

Of course clinical data, too, are needed to work out what those variants all mean.AstraZeneca has these for its trial participants. Genomics England, part of Britain’s Department of Health, has clinical data too. It intends to sequence 100,000 whole genomes from consenting patients. And other pharmaceutical companies are also looking to form collaborations with sequencing groups such as HLI and Genomics England.

It all bodes well for the future of genome-based diagnosis. A report published in 2013 found that nearly a third of drugs in clinical development are associated either with a known DNA variant or with a variation in the structure of a specific protein, ultimately traceable to DNA. The presence in, or absence from, a patient of such a variant allows drugmakers to know whether their products are likely to work in that individual. A new era of genome-based medicine is set to arrive. Again.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698229-genomic-era-arrives-and-time-its-probably-real-encore-une-fois/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Quantum computing

Now try this

IBM is making a quantum computer available for anyone to play with

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

A handful of qubits

USING the rules of quantum mechanics to carry out computations far faster than any conventional machine can manage is an idea that goes back decades. It was proposed in the early 1980s, but was confined to the blackboards of theoreticians until the late 1990s, when experimentalists gave it life by building simple machines which proved that the equations on those blackboards worked in practice. Now it has bloomed into a corporate project. Google, Microsoft, Hewlett-Packard and IBM each have dedicated quantum-computing research groups.

What quantum computing has not done, though, is make much impact on the outside world. And in some part that is because those quantum computers which do exist are still confined to laboratories. Only researchers have been able to tinker with them. Until now. For, on May 4th, IBM announced that it would connect one of its quantum computers to the internet and make it available for anyone to play with.

Quantum computing is exciting because it offers the promise of computers that can crunch through some kinds of mathematics (though not all) far faster than any classical computer that could ever be built could manage. This power comes from two counterintuitive phenomena: superposition and entanglement.

Superposition turns the fundamental unit of classical computing, the bit, into the qubit. A bit represents the smallest possible dollop of information: on or off; yes or no; 1 or 0. A qubit, though, is a mixture of both, superimposed upon each other. A classical computer with, for example, four bits can represent 16 different states. This machine can, however, exist in only one of those states at any given time. Its quantum equivalent, by contrast, can exist in a superposition of all 16 states at once.

But it is entanglement, which binds the fates of particles together, that really makes quantum computers sing. Entanglement makes it possible to manipulate groups of qubits all at once—so, as the number of qubits grows, the number of states a machine can occupy rises, quite literally, exponentially. A 300-qubit computer would have more possible states than there are atoms in the universe.

The result could manipulate prodigious amounts of information with ease. It could thus crunch through many tricky problems, from cracking cryptographic codes to simulating chemical reactions accurately at the molecular level. That is something ordinary computers find intractable, but which would prove useful for all manner of industrial processes.

A 300-qubit machine is far in the future. IBM’s current offering is a five-qubit processor built on a chip from loops of superconducting metal (see picture). It is suspended at the bottom of a large helium fridge at the firm’s research centre in Yorktown Heights, New York. This chills it to within a whisker of absolute zero—the lowest temperature possible—so that the chip’s delicate innards remain undisturbed by any stray puffs of heat. The chip is programmed by squirting carefully calibrated doses of microwaves into the fridge, with each qubit responding to a different frequency.

Qubit by qubit

None of that fiddly technical stuff, however, will be visible to users. Instead, they will be presented with something that looks rather like a musical staff: five horizontal lines, each representing one of the qubits. A collection of symbols, one for each quantum operation, can be dragged onto the staff. When a program, which IBM calls a “score” in a nod to the musical analogy, is ready, the user can press a button and the chip will execute it.

The Economist watched as Jerry Chow, who is in charge of the project, made the machine run Grover’s algorithm, a quantum algorithm designed to search through unsorted piles of data, and to do so faster than any classical machine. A classical computer could take as many tries to find an item as there are things to be searched through (so up to 52 attempts to locate the ace of spades in a 52-card pack, for instance). A quantum computer can do it in a number of steps equal to slightly less than the square root of the number of items to be searched. In the case of the cards, it needs just six attempts.

By itself, though, a five-qubit chip is not going to set the world on fire. A run-of-the-mill laptop can simulate quantum computers with as many as 40 or 50 qubits, says Scott Aaronson, a quantum-computing researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. According to Dr Chow, IBM plans to upgrade its quantum chip as the technology improves. But the main idea is not, yet, to produce a commercially valuable machine. Instead, he hopes to introduce the principles of quantum computing to as wide an audience as possible, to encourage understanding of those principles by potential programmers. The best way to do that, he thinks, is to give people “hands-on” time with a real machine.

Unlike classical machines, quantum computers answer questions probabilistically rather than definitely. A given result has only a certain chance of being correct. Exploiting their power is tricky. To get an answer it is necessary to measure the machine. That causes its quantum superposition to vanish, which leaves it in a single state, just like a classical computer. To ensure that state is the one containing the answer needs careful management, so that the probability of getting the correct answer is reinforced, while the chances of getting a wrong answer are suppressed.

Quantum computers thus need a great deal of coddling. Their superposed states are delicate and the slightest intrusion from outside—a stray electromagnetic wave or a tiny change in temperature—can make those states vanish prematurely. To work properly, then, a quantum computer must be isolated as much as possible from the rest of the universe. Bulky shielding and cryogenic cooling mean they are unlikely ever to fit on a desktop or into a smartphone. This means that big, commercially useful quantum computers will probably, like the prototype just unveiled, live in remote data-centres, wired up to the internet, waiting to be called upon by ordinary, classical machines whenever their specialised talents are required.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698234-ibm-making-quantum-computer-available-anyone-play-now-try/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Animal behaviour

Time and motion study

How to make zoologists more productive

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

Not as hidden as it thinks it is

HANG a collar fitted with a GPS tracker and a radio transmitter around a wild animal’s neck, or simply glue such a device to its back, and you will know all the time where it is. You will not, though, know what it is up to—which is usually more interesting than its mere location. For this, you need to have someone in the field, watching and taking notes. That is expensive, needs special equipment to do at night and is impossible if the animal is underground in a burrow. But a group of ecologists and engineers at the University of California, Berkeley, led by Talisin Hammond, hope to change this state of affairs. As they describe in Experimental Biology, by adding an accelerometer to the tracker they have found a way to spy in detail on the lives of the world’s fauna.

Building the new tracker was no mean feat. Ms Hammond studies chipmunks—animals that weigh about 35 grams. Anything such an animal is forced to carry around needs to be considerably lighter than this. Her colleague Dwight Springthorpe succeeded, however, in cramming the necessary processing chip and memory chip, accelerometer and lithium-polymer battery into a small weatherproof case, to produce a pack that weighed a mere 1½ grams—or 4.25% of an average chipmunk’s body weight. The result was something that could be glued onto the back of a chipmunk with the sort of adhesive used to attach false eyelashes.

A battery light enough to be part of such a package cannot, of course, store much juice, so the researchers programmed the tracker to run for ten seconds every quarter of an hour, in order to sample the animal’s behaviour at regular and reasonably frequent intervals without taxing the power supply too much. On this regime it lasted 4½ days before conking out.

The team’s first task was to understand which patterns of accelerometer behaviour corresponded to which patterns of animal behaviour. To find out, they tested the new device on 18 captive chipmunks, using video cameras to record the animals’ behaviour. When each recording session was over, they removed the tracker, downloaded the data and fed them, along with a record of what the chipmunk had been up to, into a machine-learning algorithm designed by a third member of the team, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. The algorithm proved a fast learner. After parsing 28 hours’ worth of data from the captive chipmunks, it was able to work out what the rodents were up to—running, grooming, digging, eating or lying still—82% of the time. Ms Hammond therefore put it to the test in the wild.

She and her colleagues attached the new trackers to 15 alpine chipmunks and 15 lodgepole chipmunks living in Yosemite national park, and then attempted to live-trap the animals between two and six days later. Nine of the alpines and 11 of the lodgepoles obliged them by going into the traps, so they got 20 of their devices back.

Ms Hammond was not just collecting data at random. She was testing a hypothesis that alpine chipmunks would be more active than lodgepoles during mornings and evenings, and less so during the middle of the day. She suspected this because the alpine chipmunk’s range has shifted more in response to global warming than has the lodgepole’s, leading her to wonder if it is more sensitive to heat, and thus more likely to be crepuscular.

As it turned out, her hypothesis was wrong. But she had been able to demonstrate its wrongness in two weeks of observation (one in the summer and one in the winter). A conventional study using field glasses and eyeballs would have taken ten times as long to gather enough data to draw an equivalent conclusion. That is a huge efficiency gain. Technology can improve productivity almost anywhere. Even, it seems, in zoology.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698230-how-make-zoologists-more-productive-time-and-motion-study/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Matrimonial harmony

Count me in

Just how important is sex to a marriage’s success?

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



DOES marital bliss depend on an active sex life? It sounds like a bears-in-woods and papal-religious-affiliation sort of question, yet around half of studies carried out into the matter suggest the answer is “no”. And this is not just a question of Darbies and Joans, who were at it in their youths, having slowed down as the years have passed. Even reasonably newly married couples, these studies suggest, do not rely on sex to keep their bond strong.

On the other hand, the remaining 50% of investigations have shown the correlation that common sense would predict—namely that in matters matrimonial, sex is crucial. Lindsey Hicks of Florida State University therefore wondered if, as is the case with many things in life, it is all a question of how you ask the question. Many psychological questionnaires permit the respondent time for reflection. Ms Hicks was having none of that. She wanted instant, gut responses.

Ms Hicks’s study, just published in Psychological Science, started off by doing what previous ones have done. She collaborated with a team of colleagues to round up 120 recently married local couples. The partners in these couples were then separated and each asked to fill in a questionnaire that inquired about how satisfied they were with their spouses and how often they had sex (a fact on which, despite what cynics might suspect, husband and wife generally agreed).

Ms Hicks, however, did not leave things there. She suspected the reason why past explorations of this subject have had mixed results is because many people want to believe their marriage is in a good state despite infrequent sex, or that frequent sex should not be important for maintaining a healthy relationship. Wanting to believe something is not, though, the same as actually believing it. So she needed a way to distinguish between the two.

Her answer was what is known as an automatic attitude test. Such tests measure instant feelings. Participants are shown an image and then presented with a word that is either positive (“wonderful”, “outstanding” or “charming”, for example) or negative (“awful”, “disturbing”, “horrible”). When they see this word they must indicate as quickly as they can, using a keyboard that measures their reaction time, whether it is positive or negative. Previous work has shown that faster reaction times to positive words and slower reaction times to negative ones suggest a participant has a positive attitude towards whatever he saw in the image. Slower reaction times to positive words and faster ones to negative words suggest the opposite.

To wield the test for her own purposes, Ms Hicks arranged for participants to work through several sets of words. The first set was a control, in which they ranked the words without seeing an image beforehand. The following sets were preceded either by another control (a picture of the participant him- or herself) or by a picture of the participant’s spouse.

Ms Hicks and her colleagues found that although the frequency with which couples have sex does not have much correlation with how satisfied they claim to be with their partner, it correlates well with their automatic attitudes towards one another. Those who said they had sex with their spouse two or more times a week reacted more quickly to positive words and more slowly to negative ones after seeing an image of said spouse. The opposite was true for those who had sex once a week or less. None of these effects emerged after people saw an image of themselves, or during the initial control.

Ms Hicks’s result does not mean the no-sex brigade are lying when they claim it does not signify. They may genuinely believe what they say. But it does suggest they are fooling themselves. And that is not a matter of mere prurience. If things do start to go wrong in a relationship, and the participants want to patch matters up, then understanding where the real problem lies is important. This is only a single study, of course. But if it is successfully replicated, marriage-guidance counsellors the world over might want to take note.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698232-just-how-important-sex-marriages-success-count-me/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Technology correspondent’s job

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

The Economist is looking for a technology correspondent to work at its headquarters in London. Knowledge of the field, an ability to write informatively, succinctly and wittily, and an insatiable curiosity are more important attributes than prior journalistic experience. The successful candidate will understand that the terms “technology” and “information technology” are not identical. An engineering degree, or background in engineering, would be an advantage. Applicants should send a CV, a brief letter introducing themselves, and an article of about 600 words which they think would be suitable for publication, to techjob@economist.com. The closing date for applications is May 27th 2016.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698233-technology-correspondents-job/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




India and the second world war: For king, then country

The English country house: Partying, hunting, shooting

Alessandro de’ Medici: A dark duke

Fazioli pianos: Piano nobile

Johnson: Beyond black and white





Articles Sections Next

India and the second world war

For king, then country

In India, as elsewhere, the second world war changed everything

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



India at War: The Subcontinent and the Second World War. By Yasmin Khan. Oxford University Press; 416 pages; $29.95. Published in Britain as The Raj at War: A People's History of India's Second World War. Bodley Head; £25.

India’s War: World War II and the Making of Modern South Asia. By Srinath Raghavan. Basic; 554 pages; $35. Allen Lane; £30.

AT THE close of 1945 the British Raj could congratulate itself. Despite growing impatience for independence, the empire had still managed to muster a 2.5m-man Indian army, the largest all-volunteer force in history. Indian troops had served loyally at home to crush an incipient insurrection in 1942. They proved crucial to British victories in Ethiopia, north Africa and the Middle East; in Burma they eventually inflicted the biggest land defeat ever suffered by the Japanese imperial army. India also contributed materiel and money: by the war’s end Britain owed its prized but impoverished colony £1.3 billion, an eighth of British GDP.

Yet the war was also catastrophic, both for the Raj and for India. The relatively small scale of India’s direct war casualties—some 90,000 soldiers killed in six years of fighting on three continents, 6,000 sailors lost and 1,400 civilians killed by Japanese bombs—belied far wider suffering. The Bengal famine of 1943, the prime cause of which may have been inflation fuelled by the printing of rupees to cover wartime deficits, left as many as 3m dead. Ignominious defeats in Malaya, Singapore and Burma undermined British prestige. Of the half a million Indian civilians who joined a chaotic exodus from Burma in 1942, perhaps one in ten also perished.

Far from securing the jewel in the British empire’s crown, the war rendered India’s independence inevitable. Distress caused by the wartime doubling of prices, the bare-knuckle crushing of dissent, the requisitioning of land and goods, the militarisation and mobilisation of large chunks of Indian society and Britain’s divide-and-rule manipulation of India’s sectarian rifts all contributed to a combustible atmosphere. In 1947, two years after the war ended, it exploded in the bloodletting of partition.

Few had foreseen or wanted this outcome at the war’s onset. The brutal logic of partition, as two new histories of India and the second world war make clear, evolved in large part as a result of decisions made by a fateful triangle of actors: British officials desperate to keep a lid on India, a secular Congress movement that wavered between Gandhian pacifism, support for the Allies and collaboration with the Axis, and a hitherto unpopular Muslim League that exploited the turmoil to push for dividing the subcontinent along religious lines. Pakistan’s founding father, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, later admitted that this “war which nobody welcomed proved to be a blessing in disguise.” To him, at least.

Despite the importance of India’s role in the war and its critical impact on India’s own destiny, few popular histories have treated the subject. These two new books for the general reader neatly fill the gap. Better yet, they are complementary rather than competing accounts. (A third superb recent work, Raghu Karnad’s “Farthest Field: An Indian Story of the Second World War”, which traces one family’s dramatic war years, also deserves mention.)

Yasmin Khan, a historian at Oxford, offers a richly researched social history of wartime India that is peppered with fascinating detail. Her sources range from official accounts and court records to the diaries and letters of Indian and British soldiers and officers, upper-class colonial women and rebellious Indian housewives. All this she weaves into a flowing narrative that touches on such forgotten aspects as India’s acceptance of stranded European refugees as well as of Japanese civilians transported from Singapore, whose squalid internment influenced Japan’s own ugly treatment of captured civilians. Describing the slow erosion of discrimination between British and Indian officers in the army of the Raj, she notes that it was only mid-way through the war that Indians were allowed to sit on courts-martial for British soldiers, and that after the capture from Italy of the Eritrean city of Asmara, separate brothels were maintained for British and Indian soldiers.

Ms Khan picks out ironies, such as the discomfort caused to the Raj by Britain’s chief ally. When American diplomats placed advertisements in Indian newspapers proclaiming the right of all men to freedom, British censors quietly confiscated those editions. Yet the Raj went along with a softer American propaganda ploy, the distribution of pin-ups of Hollywood starlets. “Images of women and the promise of sex, whether real or imagined, were hitched firmly to the war effort,” writes Ms Khan. “The Raj had to jettison, or at the very least reformulate, the old ways of protecting the prestige of women.”

There is irony, too, in a comment she unearths from an intelligence report on the mood among British troops in India. “The British Tommy...does not understand Indian politics,” it stated confidently. “To him it appears foolish to fight for a country that does not want to be helped and from which we are clearing out after the war.” This generic soldier seems better attuned to Indian politics than his superiors.

Srinath Raghavan, a fellow at the Centre for Policy Research, a Delhi think-tank, usefully supplies the facts, in charts, figures, maps and details of military operations, which Ms Khan elides. He also gives thorough, fascinating and revealing accounts of the economic transformations generated by the war, and of the debates and decision-making in wartime politics.

No one comes out of this looking very good. Mr Raghavan lets the cynicism and occasional outright racism of British officials speak for themselves. Winston Churchill, for instance, told his cabinet in 1940 that troubles between Hindus and Muslims were “a bulwark of British rule”, and later dismissed famine in Bengal as less important than famine in Greece.

But the author also offers a corrective to later Indian accounts that have exaggerated the strength of pro-independence feeling and glorified the Japanese-sponsored Indian National Army, made up of Indian POWs and defectors. No more than 9,000 of these soldiers actually fought against the Raj in Japan’s ill-fated invasion of India in 1944, Mr Raghavan notes. More remarkable in retrospect was the loyalty shown by many Indian soldiers: a British censor’s log from Tunisia records a soldier’s letter to his family declaring proudly, “Our beloved king (God save him) has conquered this country.”

Both books argue persuasively that the war not only consolidated India’s sense of self, but generated many of the institutions and attitudes that framed independent India. Mr Raghavan quotes a British staff officer of the 19th Indian division describing its drive to capture the Burmese capital, Rangoon: “Twenty races, a dozen religions, a score of languages passed in those trucks and tanks. When my great-great-grandfather first went to India there had been as many nations: now there was one—India.” Sadly, this would not be so true by 1947, and the Raj cracked into two parts.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698223-india-elsewhere-second-world-war-changed-everything-king-then-country/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The English country house

Partying, hunting, shooting

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

A cup of nostalgia

The Long Weekend: Life in the English Country House, 1918-1939. By Adrian Tinniswood. Basic; 344 pages; $30. To be published in Britain by Jonathan Cape in June; £25.

LOOKING back on the years before war broke out across Europe in 1914, Vita Sackville-West, an aristocratic English novelist, remembered an upper-class world of “warmth and security, leisure and continuity”. For many of her aristocratic contemporaries in the 1920s and 1930s, the Edwardian country house was the heart of that world. For them, the pre-war age of innocence stood in stark contrast to what followed. In many memories, it was a period of decline and decay.

One-tenth of titled families had lost their heirs in the trenches. Mansions and estates were put up for sale at an unprecedented rate, which rose further after the stockmarket crash of 1929. Some were torn down, others abandoned: in the 12 years to 1930 more than 180 country houses were destroyed. Wollaton Hall, one of the most flamboyant Elizabethan examples, was transferred to the local city council and became a museum; Claremont in Surrey became a girls’ school. As the importance of land declined, mansions and family seats no longer had much use as a home.

The inter-war era has long been seen as an “Indian summer”, awaiting the death knell of the second world war. But as Adrian Tinniswood argues in an engaging new account of inter-war country-house life, this has obscured a world of energy, invention and change. “Fast”, the byword of the era, applied not just to Soho “flappers” and Jazz Age ballrooms, but to the country-house set, too. The loosening bonds between family, mansion and local community meant the country house was changing, but it was not dying. New owners—often Americans—brought “new aesthetics, new social structures, new meanings”.

A “spirit of restlessness” characterised the age. Country-house parties could last from 48 hours to three weeks. The word “week-end” entered common usage as expanding rail networks and car ownership meant that people could dash to the country on Friday and return on Monday exhausted after a race, a ball, a shoot or a political gathering. (Although, as Mr Tinniswood points out, the phrase in polite circles was still “Saturday-to-Monday”, to distinguish the leisured class from those who had to be at work on Monday morning.) Women, in particular, were confronted with gruelling social expectations: a seven-day shooting party, for example, would require multiple outfits for every day of the week, and spending whole seasons like this was arduous.

Only a fraction of all country houses, mansions and estates was destroyed. And new ones were built. Philip Sassoon, a hyperactive Conservative politician, built Port Lympne in Kent as a “fairy palace”—a gaudily theatrical Cape Dutch-style red-brick mansion overlooking Romney Marsh towards the English Channel. To its architect, it stood as a declaration that “a new culture had risen up from the sickbed of the old, with new aspirations.” There were modernist novelties, too—Crowsteps near Newbury, Joldwynds in Surrey—shocking the public with their shiny white walls, flat roofs and angular façades. But these were anomalies: most of the design in this period was backward-looking, as aristocrats and nouveaux-riches seeking stability and refuge embarked on a frenzy of castle restorations in a bid to “domesticate the past”.

The picture was never uniform. Mr Tinniswood provides rich detail from all corners, uncovering plenty of angst, but also much optimism—until 1939. When the next war came, the idea returned that the world was lost, symbolised, to many people, by the disappearance of domestic service (which, contrary to some alarmist inter-war accounts, had held up buoyantly for most of the preceding two decades). In the 1950s, the National Trust came into its own as a flood of houses passed into its stewardship. The “English Country House” became an object of nostalgia. Mr Tinniswood’s book is a work of historical scholarship, not heritage fetishism. For all its merits, though, it still seems to be a product of the mindset. The English country house casts a long, rose-tinted shadow.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698222-partying-hunting-shooting/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Alessandro de’ Medici

A dark duke

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



The Black Prince of Florence. By Catherine Fletcher. Bodley Head; 308 pages; £20. To be published in America by Oxford University Press in September; $29.95.

THE short life and violent death of Alessandro de’ Medici, duke of Florence, is like the plot of a Verdi opera. Alessandro, who had a keen sexual appetite, lusted after a married woman in Florence. While her husband was away on business, his trusted cousin Lorenzino promised him an assignation with her. Lorenzino, meanwhile, hired a villain, Scoronconcolo, who, on being asked to kill an anonymous victim, said: “That I’ll do, even if he’s the duke himself.” So it was. Alessandro, napping in his rooms while waiting, was woken not by a caress, but by a sword in his stomach. Scoronconcolo then cut his throat.

On his death in 1537, Alessandro was in his mid-20s. It was his misfortune, says Catherine Fletcher in her gripping narrative, to be assassinated “first with a sword, then with a pen” by historians.

Her operatic plot, which builds gradually, is broken off for details of the ducal lifestyle: silk, satin and taffeta for the horses, plentiful staff (26 men to look after the hawks and dogs), and the cuisine (165lb of veal, 14 capons and 24 chickens eaten daily). But this is a political drama based on the restoration of the fortunes of the Medici family, which had ruled Florence for much of the 15th century. Different branches of the family had produced only two sons, Alessandro and Ippolito; both were illegitimate. Alessandro’s mother was a servant who may have been a Moorish slave. Their lives were organised by Clement VII, a Medici pope. The cousins, friendly as children, grew to hate each other. Ippolito, the older and more opportunistic, desperately wanted to be duke.

The crucial year in this complicated plot is 1529, which Ms Fletcher describes in detail without losing momentum. Clement VII, who was waging war with Charles V, the Holy Roman Emperor (and king of Spain), fell ill. To protect the family’s power base, he made Ippolito, then 18, a cardinal, which was a serious obstruction in his path to the dukedom.

Clement survived his illness and made peace with Charles. Part of the settlement was that the families should be united by Alessandro’s marriage to the emperor’s daughter Margaret. The armies of the alliance were ordered to retake Florence from its populist Republican government so that Alessandro could become duke.

Outraged, Ippolito tried to seize the title, trying first a coup, then diplomacy. He failed. In 1532 Alessandro became duke, inheriting the palace, bride-to-be, advisers, artists and a mistress. Feeling insecure—with good reason—he almost certainly had Ippolito poisoned in 1535, and he may have had his own mother murdered too. There is no shortage of damning material here, but Ms Fletcher remains stubbornly fair to the oft-maligned Alessandro.

The principal relic of Alessandro’s brief reign is the Fortezza da Basso, built into Florence’s 14th-century walls. He married the 13-year-old Margaret, who was 14 when she miscarried. She was widowed shortly afterward. Ms Fletcher can find no motive for the murder of Alessandro by Lorenzino, who was himself assassinated in 1548. But it is impossible to finish this medieval melodrama without thinking that it would make a riveting series for an enterprising TV producer.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698226-dark-duke/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Fazioli pianos

Piano nobile

Why more and more pianists are opting for instruments costing $200,000

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition

If price is no object

IN 1980 a Roman engineer and pianist, Paolo Fazioli, made what most of his friends considered a foolish decision. He opened a piano factory, and not one making cheap pianos for children. Mr Fazioli planned to make the world’s best pianos.

The market for high-end pianos has been dominated for so long by the German-American Steinway brand that nobody thought Mr Fazioli would be able to sell even more expensive ones. The only successful new entrants into the grand-piano market have been companies like Yamaha, a Japanese brand, which sold a cheaper product.

To build his factory, Mr Fazioli moved from Rome to Sacile, near Venice and, more important, near the Val di Fiemme, known as the “musical forest” for spruce trees yielding especially resonant wood. Antonio Stradivari made his violins from it three centuries ago. Using his engineering skills, Mr Fazioli set about designing a grand piano that would produce a sound superior to any other piano.

Today Mr Fazioli’s factory—more accurately, a hall filled with craftsmen and their tools—runs at full capacity, turning out 140 grand pianos a year. Because they are made to order, customers have to wait between four and eight months for delivery of the instruments, for which they are prepared to pay as much as $200,000. So large is the demand that Mr Fazioli is increasing the size of the factory to make 160-170 pianos a year.

Stephen Carver is head piano technician at the Juilliard School in New York which, with 275 pianos, is the world’s largest owner of Steinway grands. That makes him an important arbiter in the debate about pianos’ attributes and financial value. “Fazioli pianos are very well-crafted and have a clear, bell-like presence and an even line of sound,” Mr Carver explains. “Steinways have a darker colour, which some people would call richer than the Fazioli sound.” Steinways, Mr Carver adds, also vary in quality and are slightly harder to play than Faziolis. Some 97% of Juilliard’s pianos are Steinways. It also owns several Yamahas. In a major victory for the Italians, though, Juilliard bought a Fazioli piano five years ago and has two more on order for this year.

Even with output of 170 pianos, Fazioli will never defeat Steinway, which makes about 2,000-2,500 a year, with grand pianos starting at $63,000. Mr Fazioli, by contrast, considers his firm a boutique instrument-maker. The company exports almost all its pianos, with Europe being the main market, followed by America, Canada, China, Japan and other Asian countries, including Thailand and Indonesia.

Pianos are a growing business again. In 2014, the latest year for which details are available, the American market saw an increase in sales from $293m to $304m, according to the National Association of Music Merchants (NAMM). Although still not back to their levels before the financial crisis, piano sales in America have increased every year since 2009. And newly rich Chinese consumers present a golden opportunity for high-end instrument makers. According to NAMM, exports to China have shown constant growth over the decade to 2014. In 2014 China imported nearly 6,000 grand pianos, up from fewer than 2,000 in 2005.

But a maker of rare instruments differs from other companies in one important respect: it is not the number of customers, or the price they are willing to pay, that matters most. It’s who they are. Fazioli needs to sell to famous pianists, not just wealthy amateurs. “More and more professional pianists use us,” insists Mr Fazioli. “They’re the most important segment because their interest shows that we’re grown-up.”

Alessio Bax, a New York-based concert pianist who prefers Hamburg-made Steinways, says that no leading pianist would turn down a Fazioli. Angela Hewitt, a renowned interpreter of Bach, performs on Fazioli instruments whenever possible. “The action is incredibly responsive to every variation in touch, and everything I imagine in my head I can produce with my fingers,” she explains. “Other pianos can be very beautiful but are less interesting, because the sound cannot be varied to such an extent as on a Fazioli.”

Even so, the company struggles with something of an arriviste aura among the best performers. “Fazioli are not catching on as fast among concert pianists as among the general public,” says Mr Carver. “There’s some issue of psychology there; people are resistant to change.” He also points to Steinway’s impressive marketing. “Steinway has managed to establish itself as an instantly recognisable top brand, even though there are other piano-makers that have been making excellent instruments for as long.” Bösendorfer, an esteemed but struggling Austrian maker, was acquired by Yamaha eight years ago.

Back in Sacile, Mr Fazioli recently dreamt up a new way of addressing the doubters. Using specially developed software, he is reproducing recordings of now-dead pianists such as Glenn Gould as they would sound if they had performed on Fazioli pianos. Still, he insists, he will never beg famous pianists to use his instruments. Instead he promises to “convince only through quality”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698225-why-more-and-more-pianists-are-opting-instruments-costing-200000-piano-nobile/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

Beyond black and white

Two biracial comedians on language in a divided America

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



AS A premise, it isn’t terribly promising: Rell, fresh from a breakup, adopts a kitten, calling it Keanu. When the kitten winds up in the hands of gangsters, he and his friend Clarence infiltrate the gang to get it back. “Keanu”, which opened in American cinemas on April 29th, would be forgettable in most hands. But Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele—the stars of “Keanu” and, before that, of their sketch-comedy show, “Key & Peele”—have a way of using goofy premises to make a serious statement about male friendship and competition, race, class and especially language.

Mr Key is tall, thin, bald and energetic; Mr Peele is short, soft and bespectacled; his characters often have a quiet intensity that balances Mr Key’s bouncing around. Both have black fathers and white mothers, and away from the camera both, as they put it, “sound whiter than Mitt Romney in a snowstorm”. But they have an uncanny ability to disappear into a gallery of characters from any race or background. At its best, this goes far beyond “doing accents” to be a walking, talking and devastatingly funny sociolinguistics thesis on race as a performance.

In “Keanu”, Rell and Clarence have every mainstream—that is, non-black—feature possible, from their names to their music (Clarence lives to a George Michael soundtrack). To penetrate the gang, they need new names (“Shark Tank” and “Tectonic”) and, most of all, a new way of talking. Finding themselves in a black strip club, Clarence orders a white-wine spritzer. Rell panics: “You can’t talk like that in here.” A denizen sceptically asks: “You niggas in the right place?” Clarence, transformed, wheels round, wide-eyed, and shouts “Yeah, we in the right place, nigga!” She backs off.

This is their shtick at its broadest and most obvious. The simple strangers-in-a-strange-land storyline of “Keanu” disappointed critics. But a sketch from “Key & Peele” better illustrates black language as a tightrope walk. The two sit as colleagues at a table in a small soul-food restaurant; the sun beats down on the sleepy southern town outside. In dress shirts and ties, they’ve made good in a big city somewhere else. “I’m so glad we could bring this project to this neighbourhood—I grew up in a neighbourhood like this.” “I grew up in a neighbourhood exactly like this.”

Suddenly, each is worried that the other is more authentic. When the waitress comes, each man’s voice smoothens, vowels lengthening. Both keep changing their orders, trying to get the most typical soul-food dish from the proud black South. Through collard greens, cornbread, okra, ham-hocks, chitterlings and pigs’ feet, neither can stop upping the ante. Key finally orders “some dandelion greens, a cow hip and a dog face; wrap that whole mess in a old Ebony magazine”. Peele ends up with “a platter of stork ankles, an old cellar door, a possum spine and a human foot”. Both would gain if they could stop performing, but neither wants to do it first.

Mr Key is from Detroit, but light-skinned; Mr Peele grew up on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. Controlling just how black or white to sound was a daily exercise. “You never want to be the whitest-sounding black guy in a room,” says Mr Peele. John McWhorter, a linguist at Columbia University, grew up with a black family and friends in Philadelphia and New Jersey, but as he writes in a deeply personal recent essay, he has no—his term—“blaccent”, sounding “like an announcer in a 1940s newsreel”. It’s a small heartbreak every time he sees the surprise on the faces of black people he meets: is he trying to put on airs, to be better than them? He isn’t, but to fake a “blaccent” would be, for him, preposterous.

For black Americans, the right voice means warmth and solidarity, but for many whites, black dialect (including its grammatical differences) sounds like broken standard English, which it isn’t. Messrs Key and Peele are lucky to control it with such ease. They have lent this talent to another man who must walk a thin racial line. Mr Key’s sketch character “Luther” is Barack Obama’s “anger translator”, saying things the president wishes he could say but can’t. The real Mr Obama invited “Luther” to join his comedy routine at last year’s White House Correspondents’ Dinner. When he is no longer president, America will hear more in his memoirs about striking the balance between warmth and cool, black and white during a tumultuous two terms in office. Until then, Messrs Key and Peele will keep a nervous America laughing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698224-two-biracial-comedians-language-divided-america-beyond-black-and-white/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Harry Wu: Beyond the wire





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Harry Wu

Beyond the wire

Harry Wu (Wu Hongda), victim and exposer of China’s gulag, died on April 26th, aged 79

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition



THE top of the carrot, blackened by frost, poked just above the frozen ground. As soon as he saw it, Harry Wu dropped to his knees and scraped for it until his fingers bled. After 18 months in one of China’s laogai (“re-education through labour”) camps, hunger consumed him. Already he had sampled the half-rotten roots of cabbages left in the ground, and learned to dig into rat-holes to find stores of grain. In another hole he found a tangle of hibernating snakes, pulled them out, bit off their heads, skinned them and boiled them up for that wonderful, near-forgotten taste of meat.

He had learned to fight, too. When he took off his glasses he no longer looked like the intellectual he was. He was ready to beat up anyone who challenged his theft of a hard wotou bun or a piece of salted turnip, aiming his punch straight for the nose or the eyes so that his assailant wouldn’t try twice. The camp had made an animal of him, throwing desperate creatures together as, when a boy, he had put ferocious yellow ants and black ants in a bottle and watched them kill each other. In his case, his fall into barbarity had not taken long.

The ostensible reason he was there—he assumed, for he was forced to sign the charge-sheet in 1960 without reading it—was because he had been accused of stealing 50 yuan. In fact he had been hauled in to be turned into “a new socialist person”. As an eager student at the Geology Institute in Shanghai in the mid-1950s, after the Communists had seized power, he resented spending half the day studying party doctrine. He was slow to confess in public that, as the son of a banker, waited on by servants and educated by Jesuits, he was from “the exploiting class”. He had also skipped indoctrination sessions to be with his girlfriend. The result was that his brain had to be dulled by hard labour, and new thoughts put inside.

This went on for two decades, all through his best young years. He worked on farms and down a coal mine, where his back was broken. The Red Brigades found his favourite books—“Moby-Dick” and “The Old Man and the Sea”, sagas of men obsessed with a dream against enormous odds—and burned them. For a week he was put in solitary, in a cement cell three feet high. He had tried to send out letters of protest, desperate that no one knew of his plight or where he was. As comrades died around him, he reflected that their lives were just a flick of cigarette ash on the wind. When he had clambered out of that mood, he resolved not only to survive but also to ensure that no one forgot China’s laogai and the thousands suffering there.

This was harder than he imagined. After years of rising slowly through the prisoner hierarchy, helped too by the death of Mao Zedong and the milder rule of Deng Xiaoping, he emerged to try to work as a lecturer in geology. He was still viewed as a rightist, he found. And China remained indifferent to the laogai, with a further twist: the forced labour of prisoners was enabling his country to roar into world markets as a producer of cheap car parts, tools, toys, clothes and hardware. The prison camps were being renamed factories, and the world hoodwinked into buying goods stained with blood and marked with tears. As soon as he could get his papers, in 1985, Mr Wu left for California—to make a new life, and spread the word.

Making trouble

He had $40 in his pocket, supplemented by night shifts on a doughnut stand. His English was fractured and, again, his voice was a lonely one. Americans in the mid-1980s knew almost nothing of mainland China except, increasingly, its trade potential. Stories of the Chinese gulag were the province of right-wing think-tanks, such as the Hoover Institution, and right-wing congressmen. Many thought he was exaggerating the horrors, or being soft on criminals who deserved it. But Mr Wu stressed that China’s labour camps were both inhuman, and contained an alarming number of political troublemakers like himself. Besides, America, like most European countries, already had laws on the books banning the import of goods made with forced labour.

To get his point across, he travelled the world with instruments of torture in his suitcase. Relentless as a terrier, he lectured, lobbied and wrote, until by 1989—when Tiananmen Square made his argument for him—Americans did not question that the gulag existed. What he most yearned to do, however, was to go back to China for more evidence. In the early 1990s he managed to sneak in several times, with journalists and hidden cameras, to the camps where he had been held. With fame, his trips became much riskier: he was chased by security men, spotted from watch-towers, and in 1995 was arrested as he tried to enter from Kazakhstan. Only pressure from the Clintons (Hillary being about to visit) secured his deportation, after 66 days.

That second spell of captivity, though relatively gentle, reminded him how much he had been shaped by the first. He could fall asleep anywhere in 15 seconds, even with guards watching, and still be aware of what was happening round him. He could see escape routes where others couldn’t. His broken back still ached, and the sight of prisoners made him tremble so much that he could not film them. None of this, however, curbed the overwhelming hunger the laogai had left in him: hunger to play with fire, taunt the system, dig deep.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21698188-mr-wu-died-april-26th-aged-79-obituary-harry-wu-victim-and-exposer-chinas-gulag/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

The Economist poll of forecasters, May averages

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21698236/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698242-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698244-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698245-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist poll of forecasters, May averages

Other markets

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698247-other-markets-economist-poll-forecasters-may-averages/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

May 7th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698246-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

TE20160507

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



American politics: Trump’s triumph





China’s financial system: The coming debt bust





Child refugees: Under-age and at risk





Crony capitalism: Dealing with murky moguls





Fairy tales: Underdogs are overrated





Letters



On business in Iran, Dilma Rousseff, interest rates, English language, Republicans, solar power: Letters to the editor





Briefing



The Republican nominee: Fear trumps hope





United States



Indiana’s primaries: The fifth stage of grief





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





New York politics: Boss de Blasio?





Ageing and income: Silver-haired in clover





Disarray in the South: Sweet home





Lexington: What next for Bernie Sanders





The Americas



Venezuela: Lights out





Pollution in Mexico: Blocking traffic





Technology in Brazil: Faulty powers





Bello: Stop stealing





Asia



State elections in India: The fire goddess of West Bengal





Identity politics in India’s north-east: How green is my valley?





Australia’s looming election: Turnbull rolls the dice





Elections in Malaysia: Rumbles in the jungle





China



Overhauling tax policy: Central tendency





NGOs and religion: Charity ends at home





Enforcing cultural purity: Exterminate the foreign names





Banyan: The 15-year hitch





Middle East and Africa



Iraq unravels: The ungovernable country





Syria’s war: Spiralling out of control





Syrian refugees in Jordan: Peace, bread and work





Jobs in Africa: In praise of small miners





South African idols: Who owns Mandela?





Europe



NATO and the European Union: Buddy cops





France at war: Aux armes





Turkey’s prime minister: No room for moderates





Repressing Islam in Russia: Salafis mustered





Germany’s migrant complex: Doppelgänger envy





Charlemagne: Visa wars





Britain



EU referendum campaign: The eternal quest for youth





Leicester’s success: Foxes and tigers





Brexit brief: City blues





Working hours: Nice work if you can get it





Migration crisis: Rebels with a cause





Port Talbot steelworks: Either ore





The rental market: Full house





Bagehot: The loneliness of Ken Livingstone





International



Our crony-capitalism index: The party winds down





Corporate ownership and corruption: How to crack a shell





Special report: Finance in China



Finance in China: Big but brittle





Banks: Breaking bad





Shadow banks: Dark and stormy





Capital markets: Risky returns





Politics: Power to the party





Global impact: Nowhere to hide





The way forward: Pain and prosperity





Business



Hydrocarbons: Not-so-Big Oil





Spotify: These boots are made for walking





Internet firms: Growing, wildly





Hospitality: Stay with me





The grey market: Golden oldies





Entertainment: Parks of recreation





Schumpeter: What do the Foxes say?





Finance and economics



Emerging markets: The unloved bounce





Buttonwood: A losing bet





Bailing out Greece: Where are those buckets?





Car loans: New engine





Italian banks: Broad shoulders





American infrastructure: Buy local





Developing Bangladesh: How to spend it





Free exchange: When life gives you lemons





Bitcoin’s creator: Wright’s wrongs





Science and technology



Robotic surgery: Who wields the knife?





Genes and disease: Encore une fois





Quantum computing: Now try this





Animal behaviour: Time and motion study





Matrimonial harmony: Count me in





Matrimonial harmony: Technology correspondent’s job





Books and arts



India and the second world war: For king, then country





The English country house: Partying, hunting, shooting





Alessandro de’ Medici: A dark duke





Fazioli pianos: Piano nobile





Johnson: Beyond black and white





Obituary



Obituary: Harry Wu: Beyond the wire





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





The Economist poll of forecasters, May averages





Markets





