The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



The lower house of Brazil’s Congress voted to forward a motion to impeach the president, Dilma Rousseff, to the Senate. If the Senate votes to accept the motion by a simple majority, Ms Rousseff will have to step aside for up to 180 days while it conducts a trial. Ms Rousseff is accused of using accounting trickery to hide the true size of the budget deficit, but few of the congressmen who voted to impeach her gave that as their reason. She accuses Congress of conducting a “coup d’état”.

Hundreds of people died and at least 4,000 were injured in the most powerful earthquake to strike Ecuador in more than 70 years. The death toll from two recent earthquakes to hit Japan rose to 44.

Argentina returned to international capital markets after an absence of nearly 15 years when it issued $16.5 billion-worth of ten-year bonds. Demand far exceeded supply. Argentina’s recently elected president, Mauricio Macri, paved the way by reaching a deal with investors who had refused to accept earlier restructurings of debt on which the country had defaulted.

Cuba’s Communist Party announced that the country’s president, Raúl Castro, would remain chief of the party until 2021. Mr Castro is due to step down as president in 2018. His brother, Fidel Castro, gave a rare speech in which he praised communism for producing “the material and cultural goods that human beings need”.

Breaking the truce

Peace talks on Syria were hanging by a thread after the opposition said it was demanding a pause (not quite, as yet, a walk-out) after an intensification of attacks by the regime of Bashar al-Assad in apparent violation of a month-old ceasefire. At least 50 people are thought to have been killed this week. See article.

Xenophobic violence erupted in Lusaka, the capital of Zambia, amid rumours that foreigners were behind a series of murders in recent weeks in which the bodies of victims were said to have been mutilated. Hundreds of people were arrested after riots and attacks on foreigners in which two people were burned to death.

Barack Obama arrived in Saudi Arabia on a visit aimed at repairing strained relations with the Gulf monarchies following his nuclear deal with Iran. He was then due to visit Britain and Germany.

Tragic circumstances



The UN said it feared up to 500 migrants may have died when the boat they were using to cross the Mediterranean from Libya to Italy capsized. After visiting Lesbos, the Greek island where thousands of migrants and refugees are held in camps, Pope Francis unexpectedly took 12 Muslim Syrian refugees back to the Vatican as a humanitarian gesture.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, faced criticism for agreeing to prosecute Jan Böhmermann, a satirist, who read a “poem” on German television calling Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, a paedophile and more. Left-wing politicians have called for the arcane part of the penal code which allowed Mr Erdogan to request prosecution to be scrapped.

Britain’s Treasury drew up three scenarios under which the country could leave the EU, with each estimating the damage to economic growth of a Brexit over a sustained period. The chancellor, George Osborne, claimed Britain would be permanently worse-off, saying that after 15 years each household would lose £4,300 ($6,200) a year. The official Leave campaign called the paper “economically illiterate”. Meanwhile the governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, defended the bank’s apparently pro-EU position before a committee in the House of Lords, saying that it has a duty to be “open and transparent” when delivering its evidence-based judgments.

New York state of mind

Hillary Clinton won the New York Democratic primary with 58% of the vote, a fillip to the front-runner’s campaign after a recent string of losses to Bernie Sanders. She remains the firm favourite to capture the party’s presidential nomination. In the Republican primary Donald Trump scored a victory with 60% of the vote. He will have to win similar margins of victory in the remaining primaries to avoid a contested convention in July. See article.

The first charges were brought in relation to investigations into the contamination of drinking water in Flint, Michigan, which has prompted a state of emergency in the city. Three state and local officials were indicted. The scandal started when the city began to draw its water from the Flint river instead of Lake Huron in order to save money.

Testing votes of confidence

In Australia an early election in July seemed more likely after a controversial bill to restore regulatory oversight of construction unions was defeated in the Senate. The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, called for a “double dissolution” (in which every seat in both legislative chambers is up for grabs) if the bill failed to pass. An election will not be called until after the budget on May 3rd.

Malaysia’s borrowing costs shot up, after a sovereign-wealth fund from Abu Dhabi axed a debt deal with 1MDB, a scandal-hit Malaysian state fund. The emirate had guaranteed $3.5 billion of 1MDB’s bonds, but 1MDB missed a payment of $1.1 billion.



The Taliban started its annual spring offensive in Afghanistan by attacking a compound in Kabul used by the country’s security services. The explosion and a co-ordinated gun battle killed 64 people and wounded 350, most of them civilians. The death toll was the worst in the Afghan capital since 2001. See article.

State television in China said that nearly 500 children at a school in the eastern city of Changzhou had fallen ill, some of them seriously, apparently because of contamination of the school from chemical factories that used to be there. The central authorities have been urging tighter supervision of industrial chemicals since explosions last year in the port city of Tianjin that killed 165 people.

A Chinese military aircraft landed on Fiery Cross Reef, a man-made island in the South China Sea, ostensibly to take workers back to China for medical treatment. It was the first reported use of the contested island’s newly built runway by a Chinese military plane.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21697292-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

The European Union opened up a new front in its antitrust battle with Google by accusing the company of using the dominant position of its Android operating system in the smartphone market to limit competition. The EU is focused on the strict licensing rules that Google imposes on smartphone-makers—for example, requiring them to pre-install its Chrome browser as a condition of licensing some Google apps. Google, which has a few months to respond, pointed out that apps for Facebook, Amazon and others are also usually pre-installed on phones. See article.

The deadline passed for potential buyers of Yahoo to submit their offers. Verizon, America’s biggest wireless telecom firm, is said to be leading the field of contenders. Marissa Mayer, Yahoo’s chief executive, responded to investor criticisms that the process was slow and disorderly by saying that the huge interest shown by the suitors was “humbling”.

Intel decided to cut 12,000 jobs worldwide, 11% of its workforce, as it rejigs its business to focus more on powering cloud-computing services and less on making chips for PCs, which still account for 60% of its sales.

Carry on regardless

A mooted freeze in oil output among most of the world’s big producers was scuppered when talks collapsed in Doha, the Qatari capital. Saudi Arabia walked away when Iran, which only recently regained full access to international oil markets, refused to attend. Russia had joined the Saudis to call for a freeze in output in order to ease the current glut and thus boost oil prices, the collapse of which has hammered oil-producing economies. Oil workers in Kuwait achieved what the negotiators in Doha could not when they went on strike for three days, which helped lift prices. See here and here.

Underscoring the effects of cheaper oil, Saudi Arabia turned to international creditors for the first time since 1991, raising $10 billion in loans over five years to help cover its budget shortfall. American and Asian banks led the consortium of lenders. See article.

A Dutch court approved Russia’s application to set aside a $50 billion arbitration award to former shareholders of Yukos, a forcibly nationalised oil company. The court ruled that the arbitration panel had lacked jurisdiction in the case. The dispossessed former owners plan to appeal.

Banca Popolare di Vicenza set the price range for its capital-raising exercise at between €0.10 and €3 a share ($0.11 to $3.40) following a lack of interest among big institutions. The troubled Italian lender was forced into the offering after the European Central Bank required it to pad its capital buffers.

To be expected

Capping a poor quarter for America’s biggest banks, Goldman Sachs reported net profit of $1.2 billion for the first three months of the year, which was down by 56% compared with the same period last year. Morgan Stanley’s net income dropped by 53%, to $1.1 billion. And Citigroup registered a profit of $3.5 billion, a fall of 27%. Given the volatile start to the year in markets, the results were not that surprising.

China’s GDP expanded at an annual rate of 6.7% in the first three months of the year. Although that was the slowest pace since the start of 2009, it was in line with most forecasts and the government’s new growth target of 6.5-7%. There were also signs that the economy had performed better in March than in January, with fixed-asset investment growing at its fastest rate since August. But there may be trouble ahead: new bank loans and other forms of debt have also risen sharply.

Mitsubishi Motors, Japan’s sixth-largest carmaker,admitted that its employees had altered data in fuel-consumption tests for some of its models so that they would record better mileage. Mitsubishi’s boss apologised, though that didn’t stop a suspension of trading in the company’s shares, whose price plunged by 15% after the news broke. Meanwhile, Volkswagen’s share price soared in anticipation of an agreement with American regulators over an emissions-cheating scandal.

Attack of the drones



An aeroplane approaching Heathrow airport was struck by a drone. This came after a fuss about a drone flight that filmed stunning views over London, but broke many rules in the process. Drone-flyers are breaching both no-fly zones and restricted airspace around airports with increasing frequency. There have been calls for mandatory “geo-fencing” software, which would stop these incursions automatically, and for the rules to be applied more stringently. A total ban on drones over London and Windsor was announced ahead of Barack Obama’s visit this week.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21697281-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21697279-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




Hillary Clinton’s plans for the economy: Can she fix it?

Brazil: The great betrayal

Bloodshed in central Africa: Burundian time-bomb

The case against Google: Tie breaker

Saudi Arabia: The new oil order





Articles Sections Next

Hillary Clinton’s plans for the economy

Can she fix it?

Hillary Clinton has the Democratic nomination within her grasp. She needs bolder ideas on what to do with it

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



SOMETIMES relief makes triumph all the sweeter. That is how Hillary Clinton must feel after this week’s Democratic primary in New York, when she broke a losing streak by beating Bernie Sanders handily. She is now almost certain to be her party’s presidential candidate in November. After a 50-year slog through American politics, even the cautious Mrs Clinton was emboldened to declare that “Victory is in sight!”

Mrs Clinton is experienced. In an age of extremes she has remained resolutely centrist. Yet, rather than thrilling to the promise of taking the White House or of electing America’s first woman president, many Democrats seem joyless.

And America as a whole is seething with discontent. It may dodge putting a populist, an ideological extremist or a socialist in the White House in 2017. But, if voters’ anger remains unabated, it will not do so for much longer. Mrs Clinton needs a bold plan to counter this popular frustration. Alas, judging by her economic policies so far, she is more inclined to tinker.

The not-a-fan belt

To gauge Mrs Clinton’s programme, start with the Clintonomics that her husband pursued in the mid-1990s. Broadly, it got the big things right by transforming a tax-and-spend party into one that took deficits seriously. Under Bill Clinton, the Democrats made peace with Wall Street and free trade, and agreed to ambitious welfare reform. Thanks to these sensible policies, and the fortuitous tailwind of higher productivity growth, the economy boomed and prosperity was shared.

America today is more divided; its economy is weaker and beset by problems. Since 2000 most workers’ incomes have stagnated, even as those of the richest have soared. Scarred by the financial crisis, battered by technological change and globalisation, less-skilled workers have fared worst. Many have left the labour force (54% of over-25s with only a high-school education are in work, down from 63% in 2000). An opioid epidemic is lowering their life expectancy.

The Democratic Party looks different, too. Mr Sanders, victor of seven of the past nine primaries, thinks the Wall Street banks are criminal and suggests that the only solution to America’s ills would be to start a revolution. Many younger voters seem to agree with him.

Faced with all this, what are Mrs Clinton’s ideas? A lesser candidate would have veered to the left. Yet, even as Mr Sanders has proposed a top rate of tax of almost 70% and wants to scrap the trade pact with Canada and Mexico, Mrs Clinton has largely stood her ground. When she sets out to create “strong growth, fair growth, and long-term growth”, her rhetoric is hard to fault. In her plans to make college more affordable, grant paid leave to parents, introduce a $12 federal minimum wage and increase infrastructure spending, she has the rudiments of an agenda that does not stray too far to the left (see article).

But next to the ills they are supposed to correct, Mrs Clinton’s solutions too often seem feeble. A typical Clinton speech on the economy contains some reflections on the tornadoes of globalisation and automation that have torn up opportunities for less-skilled workers, then culminates in a proposal to introduce a minuscule, two-year tax credit for companies to encourage profit-sharing schemes. This risks repeating the worst parts of 1990s Clintonomics, which added a slew of micro-measures to America’s over-complicated and inefficient tax code.

Sometimes, her policies are fiddly. Rightly fearing that some Wall Street banks are too big to fail, Mrs Clinton wants an extra tax on their debt. Making sure banks hold enough capital and scaling back the tax-deductibility of interest on all firms’ debt would do the job better and be simpler. Her plans for personal income tax, which would take the top federal rate to around 45%, are equally complex, as is a proposed change to tax on the capital gains of long- and short-term investors, which looks like a solution to a non-existent problem.



America's primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

Worst of all, Mrs Clinton sometimes ignores her own diagnosis. She accepts that the main reason many American workers have seen living standards fall since the 1990s is technology and, to a lesser extent, trade with China. But she goes on to advocate policies that focus on punishing cruel bosses for screwing their workers. And, rather than rethink how to help those who lose from trade, she wants to abandon beneficial new trade deals, such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Mrs Clinton can be bold when she chooses. She has proposed reforms to criminal justice that would lead to fewer non-violent offenders ending up in jail. This has attracted criticism, because it underlines how, in the 1990s, she backed her husband’s hardline views on crime. In fact, she should be willing to overturn applecarts more often.

Don’t monkey-wrench around

A bigger plan to help American workers would start by boosting competition, both by slashing unnecessary regulations for small businesses and by ensuring that big firms no longer operate in protected markets. Losers from globalisation and technological change need more ambitious support, from wage insurance to retraining and help to relocate for work. A big expansion of the earned-income tax credit—a kind of negative income tax—would be a start. More generally, Mrs Clinton should aim for a tax system that is efficient as well as progressive by stripping out deductions, including popular ones like mortgage-interest relief.

To be clear, we are holding Mrs Clinton to a higher standard than other candidates. She has released more detailed plans than anyone else and made more effort to make the sums behind them add up. But she needs a compelling pitch because, if Americans concluded that the only way to bring radical change was to elect a Trump, Cruz or Sanders, it would represent a disastrous failure of the political centre. We are also asking her to be ambitious just when Washington has been plagued by gridlock and obstruction for its own sake. Yet the mess the Republican Party has got itself into may present Mrs Clinton with a chance to reshape the nation. What a shame if her ideas were too small to seize it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21697225-hillary-clinton-has-democratic-nomination-within-her-grasp-she-needs-bolder-ideas-what/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brazil

The great betrayal

Dilma Rousseff has let her country down. But so has the entire political class

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



BRAZIL’S Congress has witnessed some bizarre scenes in its time. In 1963 a senator aimed a gun at his arch-enemy and killed another senator by mistake. In 1998 a crucial government bill failed when a congressman pushed the wrong button on his electronic voting device. But the spectacle in the lower house on April 17th surely counts among the oddest. One by one, 511 deputies filed towards a crowded microphone and, in ten-second bursts broadcast to a rapt nation, voted on the impeachment of the president, Dilma Rousseff. Some were draped in Brazilian flags. One launched a confetti rocket. Many gushed dedications to their home towns, religions, pet causes—and even Brazil’s insurance brokers. The motion to forward charges against Ms Rousseff to the Senate for trial passed by 367 votes to 137, with seven abstentions.

The vote comes at a desperate time. Brazil is struggling with its worst recession since the 1930s. GDP is expected to shrink by 9% from the second quarter of 2014, when the recession started, to the end of this year. Inflation and the unemployment rate are both around 10%.

The failure is not only of Ms Rousseff’s making. The entire political class has let the country down through a mix of negligence and corruption. Brazil’s leaders will not win back the respect of its citizens or overcome the economy’s problems unless there is a thorough clean-up.

Ditching Dilma

Sunday’s vote was not the end of Ms Rousseff, but her departure cannot now be far off. Brazil ought not to mourn her. Incompetence in her first term in office, from 2011 to 2014, has made the country’s economic plight incomparably worse. Her Workers’ Party (PT) is a prime mover behind a gargantuan bribery scheme centred on Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company, which channelled money from contractors to politicians and parties. Although Ms Rousseff has not been personally implicated in the wrongdoing, she tried to shield her predecessor as president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, from prosecution.

What is alarming is that those who are working for her removal are in many ways worse. If the Senate votes to put her on trial, probably by mid-May, Ms Rousseff will have to step aside for up to 180 days. The vice-president, Michel Temer, who comes from a different party, will take over and serve out her term if the Senate removes her from office (see article). Mr Temer may provide short-term economic relief. Unlike the hapless Ms Rousseff, he knows how to get things done in Brasília and his Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB) is friendlier to business than the PT.

But the PMDB is hopelessly compromised, too. One of its leaders is the speaker of the lower house, Eduardo Cunha, who presided over Sunday’s six-hour impeachment spectacle and has himself been charged by the supreme court with taking bribes through the Petrobras scheme. In announcing their “no” votes, some of Ms Rousseff’s allies denounced Mr Cunha as a “gangster” and a “thief”.

The taint of corruption is spread across many Brazilian parties. Of the 21 deputies under investigation in the Petrobras affair, 16 voted for Ms Rousseff’s impeachment. About 60% of congressmen face accusations of criminal wrongdoing.

There are no quick ways of putting this right. The roots of Brazil’s political dysfunction go back to the slave-based economy of the 19th century, to dictatorship in the 20th and to a flawed electoral system that both makes campaigns ruinously expensive and also shields politicians from account.

In the short run, impeachment will not fix this. The charge that is the basis for trying Ms Rousseff—that she manipulated accounts last year to make the fiscal deficit look smaller than it was—is so minor that just a handful of congressmen bothered to mention it in their ten-second tirades. If Ms Rousseff is ousted on a technicality, Mr Temer will struggle to be seen as a legitimate president by the large minority of Brazilians who still back Ms Rousseff.



Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts

In any other country, such a cocktail of economic decline and political conflict might be combustible. Yet Brazil has remarkable reserves of tolerance. Divided as they are over the rights and wrongs of impeachment, Brazilians have kept their anger in check. The past three decades suggest that theirs is a country which can endure a crisis without resorting to coups or collapses. And here, perhaps, is a shred of hope.

The fact that the Petrobras scandal has ensnared some of the country’s most powerful politicians and businessmen is a sign that some institutions, especially those that enforce the law, are maturing. One reason politicians are in such trouble is that a new, better-educated and more assertive middle class refused to put up with their impunity. Some of the statutes now being used to put away miscreants were enacted by Ms Rousseff’s government.

One way of capturing this spirit would be for the country to hold fresh elections. A new president might have a mandate to embark on reforms that have eluded governments for decades. Voters also deserve a chance to rid themselves of the entire corruption-infested Congress. Only new leaders and new legislators can undertake the fundamental reforms that Brazil needs, in particular an overhaul of the corruption-prone political system and of uncontrolled public spending, which pushes up debt and hobbles growth.

Second best

True enough, the path to renewal through the ballot box is strewn with obstacles. Given its record, Congress is unlikely to pass the constitutional amendment required to dissolve itself and hold an early general election. The electoral tribunal could order a new presidential ballot, on the ground that Petrobras bribe money helped finance the re-election of Ms Rousseff and Mr Temer in 2014. But that is far from certain.

There is thus a good chance that Brazil will be condemned to muddle on under the current generation of discredited leaders. Its voters should not forget this moment. Because, in the end, they will have a chance to go to the polls—and they should use it to vote for something better.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21697226-dilma-rousseff-has-let-her-country-down-so-has-entire-political-class-great-betrayal/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bloodshed in central Africa

Burundian time-bomb

The killing of rebels in Burundi has ominous echoes of Rwanda in 1994

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN a Hutu politician says it is time to “pulverise and exterminate” rebels who are “good only for dying”, outsiders should sit up. When he talks of spraying “cockroaches” or urges people to “start work”, it is hard to miss the old codewords for massacring Tutsis. When the politician is not some obscure backbencher but the president of the Burundian Senate, the world should be alarmed.

History does not always repeat itself in central Africa, but it rhymes cacophonously. Rwanda and Burundi, two small countries with Hutu majorities and Tutsi minorities, have seen large-scale ethnic massacres in 1959, 1963, 1972, 1988, 1993 and 1994. These were not, as some outsiders imagine, spontaneous outbursts of tribal hatred. They happened because those in power deliberately inflamed ethnic divisions. The Rwandan genocide of 1994, in which perhaps half a million Tutsis were hacked to death, was meticulously planned by Hutu army officers and politicians. They did it to avoid sharing power with Tutsi rebels after a peace accord to end a civil war. They raised a militia, cranked up the genocidal propaganda and imported hundreds of thousands of machetes in advance. The outside world barely noticed until it was too late. The genocide ended only when a Tutsi army swept in to stop it, led by Rwanda’s current president, Paul Kagame.

Today in Burundi, many people hear echoes of 1994. Since last April, when President Pierre Nkurunziza, a Hutu, declared that he would seek a (probably unconstitutional) third term in office, the country has been plunged into turmoil. Bujumbura, the pretty capital on the shores of Lake Tanganyika, has endured a botched coup and street fighting. Its cobbled streets are deserted after dark and ring to the sound of gunfire. In recent months repression has gathered steam. Mr Nkurunziza’s youth militia terrorises his opponents, many of whom are Tutsis. Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of people, mostly young men, have been “disappeared”. Torture is rife. Maybe 250,000 people have fled to neighbouring countries; more are displaced internally. The economy is collapsing.

Tutsis have cause to be afraid. They are quietly being purged from the army. On the radio, they hear murderous rhetoric of the sort that preceded the Rwandan genocide. As was the case in Rwanda in 1994, today’s Burundian government feels besieged. Several of its members have been assassinated, and rebels have launched attacks into Burundi from foreign refugee camps. It is far from clear that genocide is looming. But even if the worst is unlikely, it makes sense to take precautions. History shows that calamity can happen very quickly: Rwanda’s genocide lasted a mere 100 days. And conflict can often spread across borders: the ripples from Rwanda started a great war in Congo that eventually claimed even more lives.

A short fuse

What can be done to defuse Burundi? The European Union is cutting aid to its government, but Mr Nkurunziza has simply redirected spending from health and education to the security forces, leaving the UN and charities to look after children and the sick (see article). The African Union considered sending 5,000 soldiers—but then backtracked when Burundi objected. The UN has suggested sending peacekeepers but has done nothing. This is not good enough.

More targeted sanctions, which hurt the president’s cronies personally, are needed. If things get worse, outsiders should be ready to send in troops, under the aegis of the African Union or the UN. There are 19,000 UN blue helmets just across the border in Congo. They should be prepared to step in, and the great powers should make sure that Mr Nkurunziza knows it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21697222-killing-rebels-burundi-has-ominous-echoes-rwanda-1994-burundian-time-bomb/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The case against Google

Tie breaker

The EU’s case that Google has abused its dominance in mobile operating systems has merit

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



TECH moguls look upon the European Commission with as much enthusiasm as does the average Tory MP from the English shires. Europe has no successful technology companies of its own, they whisper, which is why Eurocrats spend their time hassling American tech giants instead.

Not for the first time Google finds itself in the commission’s crosshairs. This week, the head of the EU’s trustbusting division, Margrethe Vestager, issued charges against the internet-search firm (see article). Its “preliminary view” is that Google is guilty of unfairly using its control of Android, the operating system that powers over 80% of the world’s smartphones, as a means to get its apps and services preferred over those offered by rivals. Europe trying to protect its own? Perhaps. Nevertheless, Google has a case to answer.

The commission’s claim has echoes of antitrust battles against Microsoft, which was found guilty on both sides of the Atlantic of trying to extend a monopoly in one area, the operating system for desktop computers, into others. The commission reckons that Google has a European market share of over 90% in three related areas: internet search, licensed smartphone operating systems and the distribution of apps for use on the Android platform via its online store, Google Play. Google is charged with using these near-monopolies to reinforce each other and also to extend its market power to other apps in its line-up. So if a manufacturer wants to pre-install Play on its handsets, it must also install Google Search as the default search engine. If it wants to license Google Search, it must pre-install Google’s Chrome browser. By “tying” its products in this way, Google can consolidate its market power.

This makes it harder for apps from Google’s current rivals (or by potential future innovators) to get a look in. Google claims there is no arm-twisting of manufacturers. Android is open-source software, it says. Anyone can use it without Google’s say-so. Handset-makers, such as Samsung, can and do pre-install apps of rivals, such as Facebook and Amazon, alongside those from the Google stable. Apple’s iOS, by contrast, is a closed operating system. But Apple’s slice of the smartphone market, though wildly profitable, is much smaller. In contrast, Google’s sway over Android gives it the power to crush rivals and, crucially, to entrench its position in search, where it currently has no strong competitors.

That power adds weight to a second charge by the commission, that Google is offering financial incentives to manufacturers to pre-install its search service on smartphones and tablets exclusively. A third charge is that Google does not allow manufacturers to use modified versions of Android on any of their devices if they want to pre-install the firm’s apps on one of them. If such restrictions were truly necessary to preserve the integrity of the Google-licensed version of Android, that might be good for consumers. But such conditions also seem to show that Android is a rather less open system than Google likes to claim.

Besmirched engine

Awkwardly for Ms Vestager, Canada dropped charges against Google the day before she unveiled hers. The European interpretation of competition does not hold much sway in America, where the prevailing view of its courts is that the power and profits that come with a dominant market position are simply the prize for success. Yet the need to reward Google has to be balanced against the need to inspire innovations that might complement Android or Google Search—or even displace them. It is now up to Google to demonstrate that its mobile strategy does not harm competition, and thus consumers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21697223-eus-case-google-has-abused-its-dominance-mobile-operating-systems-has-merit-tie/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Saudi Arabia

The new oil order

An impetuous prince is rattling the Middle East, but may also bring bold reform

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



FOR generations, oil and stability have gone hand in hand in Saudi Arabia. The puritanically conservative kingdom has used its oil wealth to buy loyalty at home and friends abroad. But since King Salman came to the throne last year, his 30-year-old son, Muhammad, has injected unpredictability into the Middle East.

Critics consider the deputy crown prince a hothead, whose dangerous obsession with Iran, Saudi Arabia’s rival, is feeding sectarianism and fraying relations with America. At home, though, the impetuousness of Muhammad bin Salman may be just what Saudi Arabia needs to start weaning itself off oil, the price of which has fallen sharply over the past 18 months. A big test comes on April 25th, when the prince is due to unveil the kingdom’s long-delayed “Vision” reform plan.

Under the prince, Saudi Arabia has certainly seemed rash. A year ago it went to war in Yemen, and is now bogged down. In January it executed a prominent Shia cleric, inflaming relations with Iran. Days later the prince revealed to this newspaper plans to float shares in Saudi Aramco, thought to be the world’s biggest company, surprising executives and ministers alike. On April 17th he torpedoed an attempt in Doha by some of the world’s leading oil producers to raise the price of crude by holding output steady. By sinking the agreement at the eleventh hour, he destroyed the credibility of technocrats such as the veteran Saudi oil minister, Ali al-Naimi (see article).

Yet Prince Muhammad also has striking ideas about how to diversify the Saudi economy. The world’s biggest oil power relies on crude oil for nine-tenths of government revenues. With the collapse in prices, the country is expected to post a budget deficit of 13.5% of GDP this year; it is having to cut spending, draw down its reserves and borrow abroad. The rentier model, whereby the Al Sauds distributed largesse and do-nothing public jobs in return for obedience, was under strain even when oil was booming.

Prince Muhammad’s plans include abolishing subsidies, raising new taxes, the part-privatisation of public services and an industrial reform involving Saudi Aramco and SABIC, a petrochemicals giant. But it faces obstacles. One is the weak capacity of the kingdom’s civil service to act on such ambition. Another is the power of the sprawling ruling family and ultra-conservative clerics to block the other reforms needed to attract investment: promoting a vigorous private sector, fostering transparency and the rule of law, and empowering women.

Some of the pain is self-inflicted. Saudi Arabia stopped propping up the price of crude in 2014. Instead it kept pumping oil to drive out higher-cost rivals, including some American shale producers, and preserve its market share. To do otherwise, say the Saudis, would be to subsidise uncompetitive producers. They are also trying to squeeze Iran. Saudi Arabia says it will not freeze production unless Iran does so, too. Iran thinks it has every right to rebuild its output after the lifting of Western nuclear-related sanctions in January (see article).

The American factor

Saudi Arabia is being combative partly because of its fear of abandonment by America. The Al Sauds think that Barack Obama, visiting Riyadh as we went to press, is tilting towards Iran. Mr Obama has stoked fears by calling Gulf states and other allies “free-riders”, and telling the Saudis “to share the neighbourhood” with Iran. This adds to the urgency of reform. Saudi Arabia may have more oil, but Iran has a more diversified economy—and knows how to deal with hardship.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21697221-impetuous-prince-rattling-middle-east-may-also-bring-bold-reform-new-oil/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




On politics, Bruce Springsteen, steel, the American constitution, South Korea, clearing houses, English: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

On politics, Bruce Springsteen, steel, the American constitution, South Korea, clearing houses, English

Letters to the editor

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



E-politics

We read your special report on technology and politics with interest (March 26th). However, your claim that most progress in this field has occurred in the United States and your limited focus on the use of big data to “mobilise the masses” were both too narrow. The Aam Aadmi Party in India, for example, won an overnight victory in Delhi’s state elections in 2015 on a clean-hands ticket and developed software to project the real-time flow of its donations online. Political movements like Podemos in Spain and the Five Star Movement in Italy have used software to include people in formulating policy, membership debates and internal voting. In Argentina, Pia Mancini and her Partido de la Red, or Net Party, used the free software DemocracyOS to thrust open the traditional backroom process of policymaking and transformed it into an online proposing, debating and voting frenzy.

The Dutch Labour Party (PvdA) and social liberal D66 are both developing online voting systems for policy and to select candidates. The Danish Liberal Alliance has experimented with blockchain to conduct internal voting.

The use of technology in politics goes far beyond understanding and mobilising the masses. As long as politicians continue to see technology as a mere unidirectional tool for the few to know and influence what the masses do, it will remain a means for manipulation, as your special report suggests. This is not where IT’s strength lies. Instead, political parties should see technology as a means to let the masses know and influence what the few in power do. Numerous political parties and those supporting democracy are already doing just that.

YVES LETERME

Secretary-general

SAM VAN DER STAAK

Senior programme manager

International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA)

Stockholm





Men of steel

The ability of Britain to produce its own steel is more than a matter of national pride or free markets (“Cast-iron arguments”, April 9th). Machiavelli noted that the failure of many city states in early modern Italy was due to their lack of strategic supplies in times of conflict, a lesson which Britain learned following two world wars. In both instances, Britain’s industrial capacity was central to its fighting ability, while its reliance on imports (especially food) nearly brought defeat. It was this memory which influenced policymakers to support the Common Agricultural Policy, a strategic but wholly uncompetitive set of subsidies which the EU fully endorses.

ANDREW GRAY

Norwich

Although China’s manufacturing activity has decreased recently, the country’s excess steel capacity has come about because of the unconstrained building of factories. The world has never encountered a beast of such epic dimensions and it should be constrained by any means possible. Tariffs are just fine in my book.

TYLER OWEN

Executive vice-president

Owen Industries

Carter Lake, Iowa



* Let me offer some additional reasons for the decline of the British steel industry to the ones you mentioned. The big factor is the dwindling manufacturing base that transforms steel into usable machines, equipment and infrastructures. Today the British economy transforms 184kg of crude steel per person, whereas Germany transforms 527kg. At its peak in the 1970s Britain was transforming 460kg against Germany’s 550kg.

Germany has preserved its manufacturing base, but the British steel industry also endured bad management. Nationalisation in 1967 merged 14 steel companies but failed to restructure them sufficiently and left most mills operating to preserve local employment. Privatisation at a rock bottom price in 1988 did not bring significant restructuring either, since it consisted mostly in closing the worst mills and not building new ones that could have competed with new mills on the continent. Tata Steel’s takeover in 2006 had even fewer strategic, industrial or commercial synergies.



An adversarial relationship between management and the unions did not help. In Germany, Mitbestimmung, or co-management, led to much smoother transitions that preserved customer relationships and business confidence.



As a result of many years of mismanagement by all sides, the British industry lost the confidence of many of its domestic customers. In 2014, Tata Steel UK had a meagre 30% market share in its own home base, and 70% of its customers already relied on foreign, mostly continental, imports. So if today Chinese imports are cheaper, why not continue?



MARCEL GENET

Managing director

Laplace Conseil

Paris





Constitutional issues

Bello pointed to the near fatal flaw with presidential constitutions based on a strong separation of powers (April 9th). In the 1980s Fred Riggs, a political scientist, studied such constitutions around the world and found that they all led to severe gridlock resulting in either a presidential coup d’état over the parliament or a parliamentary coup unseating the president. Except in the United States. Many factors are credited with explaining this American exception, including the victory of the north in the civil war, the availability of land, industrialisation, the power of economic elites and the capacity of certain presidents to temporarily overcome crisis and obstructionism and set a new course, as with the New Deal in the 1930s.

However, this constitutional American exceptionalism is under growing pressure from globalisation, social fragmentation and a backlash from those who think they have lost out.

The American constitution is deeply revered as the glue that holds the United States together. But in this rapidly changing environment it is becoming increasingly dysfunctional. Can it adapt further and avoid the fate of other such constitutions?

PHILIP CERNY

Professor emeritus of politics at the University of Manchester

York





Welfare in South Korea

Your article on social welfare in South Korea (“Doubt of the benefit”, April 2nd) said that sluggish growth had stalled even timid welfare plans under President Park Geun-hye. Yet in 2013 South Korea began to pay child-care allowances and nursery-school fees to all parents regardless of income. The Basic Pension Scheme was introduced in 2014 successively after the National Pension Scheme in 1988. Low-income families now receive more benefits, under a reformed National Basic Livelihood Security System.

Job creation is also a priority. The government is increasing the support for startups and the employment services. The government views welfare as a vital pillar of national progress and has raised its total welfare budget in 2016 to 123.4 trillion won ($108 billion), a 33% increase from 2012.

The government is also managing the consultation between the central and regional governments regarding the welfare programmes under the principle of properly distributing precious tax for promoting welfare.

NAMKWON JO

Director-general for welfare policy

Ministry of Health and Welfare

Sejong, South Korea





Market scale

* You oppose combining Deutsche Börse with the London Stock Exchange, on the basis that it would lead to a merger of their clearing houses, Eurex and LCH.Clearnet (“Don’t clear the clearers”, April 2nd). Your concern is that there will be some extra offsetting of the collateral (margin) held by the merged clearing house (when a user has a long position in one market and a short position in another), the degree of offset depending on the correlation between markets.



This already happens for positions margined by a single clearing house, such as Eurex or LCH.Clearnet. So your argument is that increasing scale is, of itself, a risk for the margining system. The logic of that argument is difficult to follow, unless the true danger you wish to avoid is of an administrative “cock-up” over margining. Such administrative faults have occurred in the past and led to the failure of clearing houses for the French sugar market in 1974, the Kuala Lumpur palm-oil market in 1983, and the Hong Kong stock-index market in 1987.



But failures of clearing houses are very rare and have tended to occur at young clearing houses with one main commodity and inadequate systems of margining. In each of these cases there were influential members who decided that, rather than paying-up their own debts, it was preferable that the clearing house should fail. The lesson is that a clearing house should not feel obligated to a cabal of the members.



The main danger for a clearing house is that its management is inept or subject to special interests. Because of their systemic role in the financial system, there is an indisputable need for the regulation of clearing houses, but increasing scale is not a particular danger.



GORDON GEMMILL

Emeritus professor of finance

Warwick Business School

Coventry





Land of hope and dreams

As a New Jerseyan by birth, I took umbrage at your statement that Bruce Springsteen is “New Jersey’s most famous poet” (“Out of luck”, April 9th). Although there can be no questioning that singer’s talent, William Carlos Williams was born, lived most of his life in and then died in New Jersey. And none other than Walt Whitman spent many years in the state, where he died in the only home that he ever owned.

He enjoyed those years, remarking that “Camden [New Jersey] was originally an accident, but I shall never be sorry I was left over in Camden. It has brought me blessed returns.” He sung of the open road, too, but unlike the Boss, Whitman was an actual poet.

DANIEL LURKER

Washington, DC





Lesser languages

Johnson’s column on the use of English in the international business world (April 9th) reminded me of an old joke:

What do you call someone who speaks three languages?

Trilingual.

What do you call someone who speaks two languages?

Bilingual.

What do you call someone who speaks one language?

English.

THORSTEN LONISHEN

Cologne, Germany

*Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21697205-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Hillary Clinton: Unloved and unstoppable





Articles Sections Next

Hillary Clinton

Unloved and unstoppable

In a year of insurgents, Americans appear likely to elect an establishment grande dame as president

Apr 23rd 2016 | ORANGEBURG, SOUTH CAROLINA, AND WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition



AMONG the millions of words Hillary Clinton has expended on the campaign trail, these stood out. “This is not easy for me,” said the Democratic front-runner, during a televised debate in Florida last month. “I am not a natural politician, in case you haven’t noticed, like my husband or President Obama.” A more straightforward answer to the question posed—why do two-thirds of Americans mistrust you?—might have cited the many scandals that have attended her three decades in public life. An FBI investigation into her casual handling of classified information is merely the latest. But if somewhat disingenuous, her response was, in its way, accurate and revealing.

She does not mesmerise on the stump, as Barack Obama and Bill Clinton did. She is fluent and accomplished but icily controlled, as if stage-managing her every utterance. Her grip on policy is ironclad; in hours of wonkish debate with Bernie Sanders, the rival she beat handsomely in the New York primary on April 19th (see article), she has rarely been caught out. But the easy charm Mrs Clinton displays in private is seldom evident. “She tries so hard to be real she just seems false,” said a 21-year-old student, voting in the Ohio primary last month. His friends nodded; all were “feelin’ the Bern, definitely!”

Her oratorical weaknesses contribute to Mrs Clinton’s reputation for shiftiness. Where Mr Obama inspired with promises of a better world, she rams home her argument like a trial lawyer. That can sound hectoring; it also makes her look especially hypocritical when she changes tack. Her decision to come out against the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) last year would have seemed less cynical had she not predicted that the deal would be the “gold standard” of trade agreements.

These problems hurt Mrs Clinton even before a large part of the Democratic electorate, enraged by the financial crisis and its aftermath, turned against establishment politicians. A 68-year-old former first lady, senator and secretary of state, with good friends on Wall Street (she pocketed $675,000 for giving three speeches to Goldman Sachs in 2013), her candidacy was always liable to face an anti-establishment attack. Still, Mr Sanders, the 74-year-old conscience of Vermont, has made her struggle far more than anyone predicted.

When Mr Sanders announced his presidential run in a four-minute-long speech to a handful of journalists, he did not look like a contender. The rumpled senator, who for 25 years has been the sole self-declared socialist in Congress, has gone on to win 17 states. In recent months his campaign has raised more money than Mrs Clinton’s: $44m last month, mostly in small contributions from millions of admirers. Most are young and white—like those Ohioan students, one of whom predicted Mr Sanders would win because he “didn’t know anyone who wasn’t voting for him”—or well-educated lefties. These groups have felt the Bern by huge margins. Even women below the age of 35 have done so, suggesting that the radical promise of a first woman president is not such a big deal to those born after the 1970s.

Down and confused

Mrs Clinton owes her lead over Mr Sanders to older whites and to Hispanics and blacks of all ages, who have backed her by a similar preponderance—but with less obvious enthusiasm. A few days before the primary in South Carolina, it was hard to find voters in Orangeburg, one of America’s blackest cities, fired up by the candidate they were about to choose by a 72-point margin. In 2008, recalled Sharon Marlon, who runs the city’s Masters hair salon, you could hardly move for Obama yard-signs. “But where are the Hillary signs? I haven’t seen one!” This apathy looks bad for Mrs Clinton’s chances in a general election. The Democrats need a big turnout if they are to win a rare third straight victory.

Scandal-dogged, distrusted and divisive, a workaday campaigner with a style and résumé at odds with her party’s humour, Mrs Clinton is not ideal. Yet all this may hardly matter. She is almost certain to win the Democratic nomination. Her victory in New York has extended her lead in elected delegates to 237. She also has a large lead in “super-delegates”, the Democratic top brass who have a vote at the party’s nominating convention in July (see chart 1). To catch up, Mr Sanders would need to win about 60% of the remaining delegates, which is almost unimaginable. The Democrats divvy up their delegates in proportion to vote share and Mrs Clinton has a lead in all the big remaining states, including Pennsylvania and California.



Having won her party’s ticket, Mrs Clinton would probably face either Donald Trump or Ted Cruz in November. Both men have consistently lost to her in head-to-head polling (see chart 2). Predictwise, which looks at polls, betting markets and bookies, puts her chance of becoming president at more than 70%. Perhaps only an indictment arising from the investigation into her use of a private e-mail server when secretary of state could stop her.



Her Republican rivals claim to expect one. Mr Trump says she faces “up to 20 years in prison”. Mr Cruz, in his snider fashion, says that, instead of the White House, “I’ve got slightly different government housing in mind for her.” Within the next few weeks Mrs Clinton and a couple of her aides are expected to be summoned for interviews with the FBI to ascertain whether they “knowingly” mishandled classified information, or allowed that to happen through “gross negligence”. If Mrs Clinton is indicted, it is assumed she would quit the contest (leaving Democratic leaders to try to block Mr Sanders much as their Republican counterparts are trying to nobble Mr Trump).

Republicans have a history of pinning imagined crimes on Mrs Clinton. The e-mail case sprang from one such: on the basis of no evidence, many believed Mrs Clinton had failed to protect America’s ambassador to Libya and three co-workers, killed by jihadists in 2012. Mrs Clinton’s e-mail arrangements emerged from one of several congressional inquiries into this bogus scandal. Disdaining the usual protocols, she used a private system, protected by off-the-shelf security systems, to send and receive e-mails—2,100 of which, it transpired, contained classified information.

This looks naive and high-handed—a familiar case of Mrs Clinton bending rules to her convenience, her critics say. Her friends admit the trait, in both Clintons, but excuse it as a response to Republican hounding. “It is to stop those who would undermine them that they do things they shouldn’t do,” says Leon Panetta, a former head of the CIA and Mr Clinton’s former chief of staff. Contemptuous of her Republican accusers, Mrs Clinton for too long refused to admit having done anything wrong. That made her look arrogant and prolonged the controversy; the public’s trust in her, impressively high when she was secretary of state, tumbled (see chart 3).



Republicans compare her case with that of General David Petraeus, who pleaded guilty to mishandling classified information last year. On the face of it, that is absurd. Mr Petraeus knowingly gave top-secret intelligence to his biographer (with whom he was having an affair). There is so far no suggestion that Mrs Clinton knew her e-mails contained classified information. The 2,100 in question were classified after the fact, often against the advice of the State Department and mostly in the mild “confidential” bracket. After a review of dozens of federal investigations into similar cases, Politico, a newspaper, concluded it was “highly unlikely” she would be indicted.

The fisted glove

If Mrs Clinton does make it back to the White House, as seems likely despite her struggles, it will be for three main reasons. Mr Sanders has done her more good than harm; the Democrats are more united than they seem; and the Republicans are every bit as divided.

The Sanders insurgency has forced Mrs Clinton to build her campaign aggressively. Modelled on Mr Obama’s victorious efforts, it relies on a loose structure of volunteers. Some worried that the graft required for such an approach to deliver would not be forthcoming for a candidate so much less inspiring than Mr Obama. It seems that it has been, though, especially among African-Americans, a group which may have been made more politically active by its decisive role in determining the outcome in 2008 and 2012. Though there were few Hillary yard-signs up in Orangeburg, Mrs Clinton’s activists had toured the city’s Baptist churches and were confident of the rout they duly delivered.

An adept debater, Mr Sanders has forced Mrs Clinton to sharpen her message, especially on issues such as wages and trade that are likely to be crucial in the general election. Mrs Clinton’s biggest scare, by far, was a surprise defeat in Michigan on March 8th that reflected Mr Sanders’s success in painting her as a jobs-destroying free trader. This evoked a nightmare of Mr Sanders tearing up the rest of the rust-belt—or, supposing Mrs Clinton survived that, of the protectionist Mr Trump doing likewise in November. Both Clintons promptly descended on Ohio, Illinois and Missouri, which were due to vote a week later, to advertise her more mixed record on trade.



Hillary versus Hillary: The 2008-2016 horse race

There is little doubt she favours free trade. She was a cheerleader for the North American Free Trade Agreement, signed into law by her husband, and voted for several bilateral deals in the Senate. When in need of union votes, however, she has been less enthusiastic—in 2008 she aped Mr Obama by slamming NAFTA; in the Senate she voted against its Central American equivalent. In a speech in Ohio, Mrs Clinton vowed to “stop dead in its tracks any trade deal that hurts America and American workers.” The onslaught worked. Mrs Clinton won all three states—including a majority of those Ohioans who thought international trade had cost America jobs.

Being seen to scrap has been beneficial in itself; a recent Gallup poll suggests her supporters are becoming more enthusiastic. “I was for Bernie, but what she’s said about equal pay for women has really swayed me,” said Dana, a Harley-Davidson motorbike inspector in Wisconsin, ahead of its primary on April 5th. Mrs Clinton lost that one. Indeed, going in to New York, she had lost seven of the previous eight states. But her strategists were pretty relaxed. Those defeats were in places with few big cities and a lot of whites—in other words, those least representative of the Democratic electorate.

It is an indicator of her underrated strength that Mrs Clinton has largely avoided lurching to the left after Mr Sanders, a manoeuvre that would inevitably damage her in the general election. Many pundits claim otherwise, but this is based on wishful thinking of two different sorts. Those on the right want to see their long-held belief that she is a dangerous leftie borne out. Those on the left, the more realistic of whom always saw nudging Mrs Clinton leftward as the most they could hope for, want to see that hope realised. “The Sanders movement has caused her to reconsider her priorities, change her positions,” says Congressman Raúl Grijalva from Arizona, a rare Bernie-backer on the Hill. But there is little evidence for this.

The prime, incontestable shred is Mrs Clinton’s flick-flack on TPP, which would be hard for her to reverse. Yet if the Senate ratifies the agreement this year, as it may, she will be spared the dilemma. She has said nothing to rule out future deals, including TPP’s companion agreement, covering trans-Atlantic trade. Otherwise, Mrs Clinton’s more leftist positions, for example those on cutting student debt and expanding Social Security, are more moderate than she often tries to make them sound. She has proposed nothing that is likely to panic swing voters in November.

Take tax. To pay for his policies, Mr Sanders would increase income tax and introduce two new payroll taxes. The marginal rate paid by the richest Americans, including federal and state taxes, would rise to 73% in the average state. Mrs Clinton’s tax plan entails a 10% increase in the marginal rate for those with income over $5m a year, bringing it to 43.6%, and a minimum federal-income-tax rate of 30% for those earning over a million dollars. Despite the post-crisis anxiety many voters feel over bankers, wages and other left-wing targets, there is little in any of her proposals to suggest she would stray from the pragmatic, pro-market, centre-left territory of Mr Obama and her husband.

The public seems to understand this better than the pundits. On a left-right scale compiled by Crowdpac, a data firm, from the perceptions of millions of political donors, Mrs Clinton has scarcely budged in a year. She has much the same liberal rating as Mr Obama. This must be disappointing for Mr Sanders’s fans. Even so, two-thirds of them already say they will vote for her in November, and the number will surely rise as the party closes ranks in the summer. There is already evidence of this. “If she wins, we hope our supporters will support her,” said Mr Sanders’s wife Jane on April 13th. “It’s nowhere near as rancorous as it was between Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton.”

If not natural no matter

This is the second factor in Mrs Clinton’s favour. Despite their differences, Democrats are basically united. Most revere Mr Obama, who is quietly backing Mrs Clinton, dislike Republicans and want power. In an online poll of 400,000 Democratic voters conducted by Alan Grayson, a congressman from Florida, hardly any said they were supporting either candidate because they disliked the other.

The third factor is that the Republicans are mustering for civil war. Exit polls in Wisconsin suggested more than a third of Republican voters would not back Mr Trump in a general election. No wonder Republican bosses are trying to block him; yet if they do, a third of Mr Trump’s supporters say they will not support any other Republican candidate. Mr Cruz would be a less divisive figure, but perhaps only a bit; he is caustically right-wing and hated by most of the party bosses.

Love the one you’re with

Some moderate Republicans already say they would hold their noses and pick Mrs Clinton over either man. At a polling station in Milwaukee, a retired marine who had just voted for John Kasich, the Republican in distant third place, said he would vote for her over Mr Trump or Mr Cruz. More important, either of those two would put fire into the bellies of apathetic Democrats, enabling them to stretch their emerging advantage in the popular vote. Although Hispanics have one of the lowest participation rates in the Democratic coalition, it will still matter that eight in ten of them dislike Mr Trump—and seven in ten loathe him.

It has been long assumed that, even if Mrs Clinton does win the presidency, a Republican-controlled Congress would prevent her doing much with it. Yet some Republicans now fret that, with Mr Trump on their ticket, they could lose not only the Senate but also their 30-seat majority in the House of Representatives. This possibility, while still seeming far-fetched, has some Democrats wondering what Mrs Clinton might do with a freer hand than Mr Obama has recently enjoyed.

She might well attempt nothing more dramatic than she has already promised. In the best case for the Democrats, she would still face a Republican filibuster in the Senate. Moreover, her own record there and as secretary of state suggests pragmatism and a commitment to incremental improvement, not radicalism and the grand gesture. “She is totally opposed to not getting anything done,” says Mr Panetta. “She knows her limitations, but she also knows how to empower others.” Her caution is partly informed by the high price Mr Clinton and Mr Obama both paid for launching ambitious measures, including on deficit reduction and health care, early on. Both lost control of Congress after two years. Mrs Clinton might be expected to eke out her political capital more gradually.

It is a remarkable paradox that, in a year of populist insurgency, she, the archetypal establishment creature, looks best-placed to win. If she does, she suggested in a recent interview with Business Insider, Americans will soon like her a lot more than they do now: “Because when I have a position, whether it’s first lady, or senator, or secretary of state, and I’m doing the work, I’m really quite popular.” Quite likely, we will see about that.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21697220-year-insurgents-americans-appear-likely-elect-establishment-grande-dame/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




New York and after: March of the titans

Psephology: Uptown Trump

The $20 bill: Not going to Jackson

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

Immigration and the Supreme Court: Branching out

The cost of college: Delayed gratification

Cocaine: Nosedive

Lexington: Ben Heard





Articles Sections Next

New York and after

March of the titans

Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump won big in the Big Apple

Apr 23rd 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



“NEW YORK values”, a phrase Senator Ted Cruz used to posit America’s greatest city as an East-Coast Gomorrah—liberal, licentious, infested with bearded atheists wearing unhealthily constrictive jeans—turn out, electorally at least, to be consistent with American norms. In a restorative day for front-runners, Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump both cast aside recent setbacks to trounce their rivals in New York’s Democratic and Republican primaries on April 19th. Mrs Clinton, an adoptive New Yorker, won 58% of the vote, and over 30 delegates more than Senator Bernie Sanders, an exiled son of Brooklyn. This surpassed her expectations, nullified most of the gains Mr Sanders had made in winning seven of the previous eight states, and sent him scuttling home to Vermont for an unscheduled timeout. Mr Trump, another native New Yorker, did even better, winning 60% of the vote and almost all the state’s 95 delegates. Mr Cruz got none.

Exit polls suggest the Democratic vote was divvied up in a familiar pattern. Mr Sanders, who had predicted for himself “a major victory here in New York” won 65% of voters aged 18-29 years, tens of thousands of whom attended a pair of giant pre-poll rallies in leafy New York parks. In Brooklyn, hipster heaven, streams of young voters flowed from polling stations berning with enthusiasm for the 74-year-old democratic socialist. “People use socialism as a bad word, but they appreciate socialist things,” said Christina Reich, a single mother who teaches mindfulness to small children. Yet the zeal of Mr Sanders’s young idealists was, once again, met with cool-headed resistance from most other Democratic groups—which is why Brooklyn fell heavily for Mrs Clinton.

Older and affluent voters, blacks, Hispanics and women all plumped for the former New York senator by big margins; voters in Westchester County, where she lives, backed her by 2:1. “There’s no place like home!” she hallooed, in a victory speech in which she slammed the Republicans, called on her party to unite and barely bothered to mention Mr Sanders. She knows she has the nomination in the bag.

Trump bump

Mr Trump is further from glory; his victory was for that reason more necessary—and timely. Opposition to the foul-mouthed celebrity builder has consolidated and hardened inside the Republican Party as its primary field has thinned; only Mr Trump, Mr Cruz and John Kasich, the governor of Ohio, remain from a starting pack of 17 candidates. Hence Mr Trump’s thumping loss on April 5th in Wisconsin, after the state’s conservative bigwigs rallied behind Mr Cruz. That was embarrassing: Mr Trump’s gassy claim to be a preternatural “winner” makes him look silly in defeat. It also made it seem unlikely he could secure the 1,237-delegate majority he needs to win the Republican ticket before the party’s convention in July. In short, Mr Trump badly needed this home-state win.

It always looked likely. A self-designed symbol of New York pugnacity and success, he has been a fixture in the city’s tabloid newspapers for four decades; Mr Cruz is best known to many New Yorkers for his fatuous slur. Yet the breadth of Mr Trump’s victory was impressive; he won over half the vote in most of the state’s 27 congressional districts—and won every district except the one covering the area of Manhattan where he lives. Another measure of his wide appeal: 57% of Republican voters considered him likeliest to beat Mrs Clinton in a general election. Only 12% said that of Mr Cruz, despite his claim to be uniting the party—which is not something Mr Trump could ever hazard: over a third of Republican voters in New York said they were “scared” or “concerned” by the prospect of a Trump presidency.

Mr Trump now has 846 delegates, over 300 more than Mr Cruz, and a revived hope of a ticket-clinching majority. His prospects will probably look even better after April 26th, when another five eastern states—Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania and Rhode Island—will hold primaries. Given his strength in nearby Massachusetts, his biggest win before New York, Mr Trump will expect to win all five and most of their 172 delegates.



America's primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

It would still be tough for him. To get 1,237 delegates—or near enough to that mark to bargain a way to it—Mr Trump will probably need to do better than he is currently predicted to do in California, where 172 delegates will be up for grabs on June 7th, the last day of the primary season. Mr Cruz has pockets of support there; it looks awfully tight.

Intriguingly, Mr Trump has tacitly acknowledged this by making the first significant changes to his campaign since he entered the race last June. The obvious danger he faces is that, if he fails to secure a majority of delegates, he may lose out to Mr Cruz or some other establishment-approved challenger in the horse-trading that would ensue at the Republican convention in July. There are already warning signs. Mr Cruz has run rings around Mr Trump in a concurrent shadow battle over the rosters of delegates who will attend the convention and nominate the candidate; in a first ballot, most will vote in accordance with the results of the primaries and caucuses; in subsequent ballots, if no candidate has a majority, most will be able to vote for the candidate of their choice. In a belated effort to punch back, Mr Trump hired a veteran convention fixer, Paul Manafort, to organise his delegate-selection efforts. Mr Manafort promptly supplanted the tycoon’s loutish campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, thereby bringing more professionalism and calm to Mr Trump’s scandal-plagued campaign.

The tycoon’s New York victory speech, delivered in Trump Tower, the Manhattan skyscraper where he lives and from which he launched his campaign, exemplified that change. Gone—or at least much pared back—was the usual ad hominem invective and rambling braggadocio. For the first time in months, Mr Trump referred to his main rival as “Senator Cruz”, not “Lyin’ Ted”. He did not indulge in his usual diatribes against Mexicans or Chinese people. Instead, with great clarity, he nailed his main campaign pledges, to bring back lost factory jobs and build up the armed forces; briefly railed against the “rigged” and “crooked” Republican nomination system; then thanked his supporters. As a display of the political skills Mr Trump has added to his charisma, it was rather worryingly impressive.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21697269-hillary-clinton-and-donald-trump-won-big-big-apple-march-titans/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Psephology

Uptown Trump

It is a myth that he owes his support to disaffected blue-collar workers

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



MOST analysis of Donald Trump’s support has focused on his appeal to poorer working-class whites, who are assumed to have lost the most from globalisation. His victory in New York was a reminder that his appeal is wider than that. He won the Empire State by such a big margin that he could not help picking up the votes of plenty of richer Republican primary voters. But exit polling from those other state primaries where it is available show that better-paid and better-educated voters have always formed as big a part of Mr Trump’s base as those at the lower end of the scale for income and education.

On average, people earning under $50,000 have made up 29% of the Republican electorate in primary states with exit polls, and 32% of Mr Trump’s voting base. However, those earning over $100,000 have accounted for 37% of the electorate and 34% of his base. In Illinois, for example, he took 46% of those earning under $50,000, but they made up only a quarter of the electorate: he won 39% of those earning over $100,000, who were two-fifths of that primary’s voters. Voters with a high-school education or less have made up 16% of the Republican electorate and a fifth of Mr Trump’s base. College graduates and postgraduates account for 43% of his support.

Mr Trump does not have a majority among wealthy Republicans. But the idea that it is mostly poorer, less-educated voters who are attracted to Mr Trump is a myth. Only 13% of the votes in New York’s Republican primary came from New York City; the vast majority were cast upstate. Statewide data show that he won 52% of those earning under $50,000 and 64% of those earning over $100,000. Mr Trump may seem to be a champion of disaffected blue-collar whites. But there are not enough of them among Republican primary voters to account for his success.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21697265-it-myth-he-owes-his-support-disaffected-blue-collar-workers-uptown-trump/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The $20 bill

Not going to Jackson

Harriet Tubman is set to replace Andrew Jackson, and rightly so

Apr 23rd 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

Coming, eventually, to a greenback in your pocket

ANDREW JACKSON, America’s seventh president, lived 78 years and has enjoyed another stint of 88 years as the mournful, impressively coiffed face gracing the $20 note. But Jackson’s days are numbered. Jacob Lew, the treasury secretary, announced on April 20th that the slaveholding leader of the Democratic Party is now to make room for Harriet Tubman, a woman born into slavery who escaped and became a leading abolitionist in the years leading up to the civil war.

This switch is the headline move in the first big revamp of America’s currency since 1929. It erases the visage of a man once praised in high-school history textbooks but whose reputation has taken a turn. “Virtually everything about progressive politics today is about liquidating the Jacksonian influence in American life,” wrote Walter Russell Mead in The American Interest in January.

It has been a long time coming. In 1980, Howard Zinn, a historian, noted that conventional references to Jackson as “frontiersman, soldier, democrat, man of the people” painted a rather sanitised picture of a man who was also “slaveholder, land speculator, executioner of dissident soldiers, exterminator of Indians”. Jackson’s four decades owning hundreds of slaves who picked cotton on his Hermitage plantation in Tennessee make his replacement by a freed slave a potent symbol of America’s inclination to reckon with its past.

Jackson is also notorious for his ruthless treatment of Native Americans. In 1829, the first year of his two-term presidency, Jackson asked Congress to earmark land west of the Mississippi river for Indians. Less than six months later he signed the Indian Removal Act, a law that would eventually push the Cherokee, Creek, Choctaw, Chickasaw and Seminole tribes out of their native lands in the American south-east. In the winter of 1838-39 (Martin Van Buren finished the job Jackson started), a quarter of the 15,000 migrating Cherokee died on the 1,000-mile “trail of tears”, trekking in the cold from their lands in Georgia, Tennessee and the Carolinas to what would later become Oklahoma.

Recent years have seen Jackson’s stock drop. In Jacksonville, Florida, last summer, a statue of him on a horse was defaced with spray paint (“Black Lives Matter”) and adorned with an Indian mask. In March, a similar statue in New Orleans provoked protests linked to the removal of Confederate-era monuments. And a year ago Women on 20s, an advocacy group dedicated to getting a woman’s face on the $20 note to honour the 100-year anniversary of women’s suffrage in 2020, took aim at Jackson and hosted an online election to pick a successor. Out of more than 600,000 votes cast, Tubman emerged on top, edging out Eleanor Roosevelt by a scant 7,000 clicks.

Mr Lew lauded Tubman’s “incredible story of courage and commitment to equality” and noted his excitement that “for the first time in more than a century, the front of our currency will feature the portrait of a woman”. Born Araminta Ross circa 1822, she married John Tubman at 20 and escaped from her owner in 1849. Tubman then undertook a series of 70-odd rescues, ushering slaves to freedom as a “conductor” of the Underground Railroad, a covert network of byways and safe houses running through 14 northern states. The founder of Women on 20s, Barbara Ortiz Howard, celebrated the Treasury Department’s move: “We are delighted”, she wrote, “that the parties involved in the decision are united in their commitment to the goal of honouring women in this most visible fashion.”

But others are cross that the Treasury has reneged on a promise to feminise the $10 bill, a note long fronted by Alexander Hamilton, the founding father and current Broadway mega-star. As he announced plans to nix Jackson, Mr Lew unveiled a new blueprint for the $10 note that would add a covey of suffragists—Susan B. Anthony, Lucretia Mott, Alice Paul, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Sojourner Truth—to the back of the bill. This is too little, too late, for some. In a letter to Mr Lew three dozen women, including Gloria Steinem, Arianna Huffington and Cokie Roberts, insisted that “it is about time we put our money where our mouth is”. The fact that the new $20 note featuring Tubman may not appear for a decade or more is “undoubtedly...a major blow to the advancement of women”, they reckon.

There is another potential hitch. With Barack Obama moving out of the White House in January, a new administration could tweak these proposals—or scuttle them. Mr Lew, the outgoing treasury secretary, isn’t worried: “I don’t think somebody’s going to probably want...to take the image of Harriet Tubman off of our money.” While Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders both promptly tweeted the Treasury accolades for the new bills, the Republican candidates—one of whom sports an authentically Jacksonian coiffure to match his Jacksonian politics—had no immediate comment on the matter.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21697264-harriet-tubman-set-replace-andrew-jackson-and-rightly-so-not-going-jackson/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The campaigns

Heard on the trail

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



A whuppin’

“We kicked his ass tonight. I hope this convinces Bernie to tone it down. If not, fuck him.”

A senior Clinton aide glories in her win in New York. Politico

“It is impossible to catch us.”

Donald Trump glories equally

Scarlet women

“Medicare-for-all will never happen if we continue to elect corporate Democratic whores who are beholden to big pharma and the private insurance industry instead of us.”

Dr Paul Song, a Sanders supporter, colourfully introduces his candidate in New York

Going Old Testament...

“An eye for an eye.”

Donald Trump’s favourite Bible verse. WHAM 1180 AM

More or less?

“I shook his hand and nothing more. If someone thinks that greeting someone means getting involved in politics, I recommend that he find a psychiatrist!”

Pope Francis doesn’t feel the Bern when meeting him in Rome. New York Times

Voter suppression

“If I wasn’t a felon, I would vote for you.”

A Sanders fan in New York

Hot sauce in my bag, swag

“I’ve been eating a lot of hot sauce. Raw peppers and hot sauce. Because I think it keeps my immune system strong.”

Hillary’s surefire health tip. 105.1FM

Quid for quo

“Delegate, listen, we’re going to send you to Mar-a-Lago on a Boeing 757, you’re going to use the spa, you’re going to this, you’re going to that, we want your vote.”

Mr Trump defines corruption

Breaking news

“Bill Clinton was married to Crooked Hillary Clinton. You know that?”

Mr Trump unearths a shocking fact

Open all hours

“It’s very close to my heart because I was down there, and I watched our police and our firemen down at 7-Eleven…and I saw the greatest people I’ve ever seen in action.”

Mr Trump confuses the worst terrorist attack on America with a corner shop known for its slurpees

Inside out

“I’m an outsider…Sanders is an outsider. Both with the same diagnosis, but …with very different paths to healing.”

Ted Cruz makes a surprising, but probably prescient, comparison



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21697262-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Immigration and the Supreme Court

Branching out

The even-number court is likely to hand the president a defeat

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

As in Immigration and Customs Enforcement, rather than cubes

AMERICA’S framers designed separate institutions to make, enforce and interpret laws. But when Congress ceases to function as it should, the division of labour becomes blurry. Comprehensive legislation to deal with 11.3m undocumented immigrants has long proved elusive. In November 2014, a year and a half after a bipartisan Senate bill was rejected by the Republican leadership in the House of Representatives, Barack Obama picked up his pen and issued executive orders shielding about a third of illegal immigrants from deportation and allowing them to work. On April 18th, the Supreme Court considered whether his actions were legal.

At issue in United States v Texas is Mr Obama’s move granting “deferred action” to undocumented aliens whose children are American citizens or lawful permanent residents. The policy, known as Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents (DAPA), aims to grant relief to those “who have become integrated members of American society”, and to keep families from being dispersed across international borders. The programme lifts the threat of removal from over 4m people but does not confer “any form of legal status” on its recipients.

Republicans in 26 states condemned DAPA as executive overreach and won an injunction against it from a district-court judge in Texas, a ruling that was upheld by the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals. In defending the policy at the Supreme Court, Donald Verrilli, the solicitor-general, pressed the case for not breaking up families where some children are American citizens. Since immigration officials have discretion over whom to deport, he said, and since the government “has resources only to remove a fraction of the unlawful aliens”, there is no legal barrier to favouring the removal of some over others.

In a question to Scott Keller, the lawyer for Texas, Justice Stephen Breyer referred to the politics colouring the fight and suggested that the case before the court may have been cooked up in the hope of getting a hearing. The states’ supposed injury—having to pay for the subsidised driving licences of DAPA recipients—is a rather weak claim, Justice Breyer suggested, to “standing”, a constitutional requirement for all lawsuits. Allowing Texas to sue on fiscal grounds would lead “taxpayers all over the country” to sue “in all kinds of cases, many of which will involve nothing more than political disagreements”, which courts are ill-equipped to adjudicate. “Before you know it”, Justice Breyer warned, “power will be transferred from the president and the Congress, where power belongs, to a group of unelected judges.”

Before the hearing, court-watchers thought the chief justice, John Roberts, might be sympathetic to this argument on standing, and would decide to leave the president’s actions intact without the court ruling on their legality. A dozen years before he became chief justice, he warned of the danger of the court “aggrandis[ing] itself…at the expense of one of the other branches” if it was not picky about which cases to hear. But in his determined questioning of Mr Verrilli, Mr Roberts did not buy the government’s argument on standing—that Texas suffered no real injury because it could decide not to pay for immigrants’ licences. Withdrawing that subsidy may subject Texas to lawsuits from immigrants claiming discrimination, he said: “That’s a real Catch-22”.

If, as it appears, the liberal and conservative justices are split evenly on both the legality of Mr Obama’s immigration policy and the “standing” question, a 4-to-4 divide will affirm the lower court’s rulings, the president will be handed a defeat—and many undocumented migrants will have to worry again that a routine traffic stop could lead to deportation.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21697244-even-number-court-likely-hand-president-defeat-branching-out/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The cost of college

Delayed gratification

Home-owning is falling among young adults, but don’t blame student debt

Apr 23rd 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



A COLLEGE degree has never been more necessary: graduates earn, on average, 80% more than high-school graduates. Yet ever more Americans are taking on serious debt in exchange for that diploma. Between 2004 and 2014, student-loan balances more than tripled to nearly $1.2 trillion. The average debtor leaves college owing around $27,000.

Some of this mounting debt is good news. More Americans are going to college—undergraduate enrolment rose by nearly 40% between 2000 and 2010, according to the National Centre for Education Statistics. Many are also staying around for a second degree. But the cost of college has also risen sharply, as state spending on higher education has plummeted. Average tuition fees have surged 40% in the decade to 2015-16 for full-time students at public four-year colleges, and 26% at private ones. Those who take longer to graduate—as many increasingly do—simply rack up more loans.

Outstanding student loans are now second only to mortgages when it comes to household debt in America. This makes some economists worry about their macroeconomic effects. Though the housing market has been steadily recovering, the share of first-time buyers continues to decline, and is now at its lowest point in nearly three decades, according to the National Association of Realtors. The home-ownership rate among 30-year-olds has been tumbling, but the fall has been especially fast among those paying off student loans, according to the New York Fed.

So are the soaring costs of college keeping millennials from starting households of their own? Not according to a new paper from Jason Houle of Dartmouth and Lawrence Berger of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Using longitudinal data on college-going Americans who were aged between 12 and 17 in 1997, the authors found that student-loan debtors were in fact more likely than non-debtors to own a house by the age of 30. But this was mostly because debtors tended to be older, employed, married and with children, and the debt was largely irrelevant.

Others have found that student debt may delay home-ownership, but does not deter it entirely. In an analysis of data from the National Educational Longitudinal Survey, Daniel Cooper and J. Christina Wang of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston noted that young debtors were less likely to own a home than their debt-free peers. Yet when the authors confined their analysis to college graduates, they found that debtors in their late-20s were more likely to own a home than non-debtors. So the reason for the delay in home-buying among those with student loans seems to have been that many had dropped out before earning their degree.

The decline in young home-owners seems to be part of a larger trend of deferring the conventional trappings of adulthood. The share of 18- to 34-year-olds who are married with children has fallen from 27% in 2000 to 20% in 2015. Several studies have asked whether student debt is nudging youngsters to put off marriage vows and stick to birth control, but the link seems tenuous. As for home-ownership, perhaps the biggest challenge facing young home-buyers is the fact that prices have outpaced income growth for 15 years.

The amount of debt a student has is often less important than the college or the degree. Students with the most debt often have the greatest earning power, as degrees in business, law and medicine tend to be especially costly. The young adults who tend to be most hobbled by their student debt are those who either dropped out or went somewhere non-selective.

There are even signs that taking on more student debt reduces the odds of bouncing back home to live with one’s parents, as long as it results in a degree. In an analysis of longitudinal data on college-going Americans born between 1980 and 1984, Mr Houle and Cody Warner of Montana State University found that the young adults who returned home tended to be younger, underemployed, modestly indebted and from privileged homes. College drop-outs had a particularly high risk of returning to the nest. Every 10% rise in college debt reduced the odds of returning home by around 17%.

Millennials may be sluggish about starting their own households, but college graduates are more likely to do so than their less-educated peers, according to the Pew Research Centre. The earnings of young degree-holders are nearly double those of young high-school graduates. There is little question that the rising cost of college education is a problem, but the cost of not going—or, worse, dropping out—is higher still.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21697242-home-owning-falling-among-young-adults-dont-blame-student-debt-delayed/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Cocaine

Nosedive

Why so few people are snorting white powder for fun

Apr 23rd 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



“COCAINE”, said Robin Williams, a comedian who was rueful about addiction, “is God’s way of saying that you’re making too much money.” No longer. The total amount of pure cocaine consumed by Americans fell by half between 2006 and 2010, and there is nothing to suggest the trend has changed since. The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) says the supply of coke is stable. Cocaine-related deaths fell by 34% between 2006 and 2013.

Credit for this decline must go to policing and changing fashion. In the 1970s and early 1980s, cocaine users were either well-off or had disposable income to waste. By the mid-1980s most cocaine was being smoked as crack by poorer Americans. Sentencing laws changed and incarceration rates, especially for young black men, began to soar. One 1986 study showed that in Manhattan 78% of those who agreed to be tested after an arrest for a serious crime tested positive for cocaine. In 1985 there were nearly 6m cocaine-users, according to the University of Michigan’s national household survey on drug use.

Beau Kilmer, who has pondered the “cocaine nosedive” for RAND, a think-tank, thinks some of the decline is due to supply-side changes. Cocaine’s slump began shortly after thousands of acres of coca were eradicated in Colombia. Large quantities of cocaine were seized there and in the rest of Central America from 2006 onwards. Around the same time, local criminal organisations became interested in illegal gold mining and were weakened, both by internal fighting and by government crackdowns. Mr Kilmer adds that increased demand outside the United States may also have played a role. Cocaine costs more in Europe than in America.

Yet part of the explanation lies in changing fashion. The University of Michigan’s survey reports that young people are less inclined to try cocaine than was once the case. Cigarette companies used to observe that nobody liked to smoke the same brand as their parents. The same may be true of drugs. Would-be cocaine-users have turned to other substances. Methamphetamine is one, but a striking variety of synthetic drugs are now available. “I went to see a dealer the other day in Manhattan and the guy had an astounding array of things,” says Ric Curtis, an anthropologist at John Jay College of Criminal Justice. Although cocaine is still very much on the DEA’s radar, says Russel Baer of the agency, it is not the threat it once was. Heroin, methamphetamine, opioid and synthetic consumption, meanwhile, are all going up.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21697241-why-so-few-people-are-snorting-white-powder-fun-nosedive/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

Ben Heard

The junior senator for Nebraska thinks both parties are breaking apart

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



CALL it the “Sunset Boulevard” riposte. Too many candidates have spent this election declaring that America is too diminished or plain dumb to keep its people prosperous and safe. Such gloom has served some of them dismayingly well. Filter out this doomy din, though, and a bunch of young, reform-minded conservatives can be heard making a different case. To paraphrase Norma Desmond, these reform Republicans believe America is still big; it’s the politics that got small.

One of them is Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska, a 44-year-old former college wrestler, business consultant, policy adviser in the government of George W. Bush, university president and, to date, one of the only members of Congress to say that conservative principle will stop him voting Republican in November if Donald Trump is the party’s nominee.

After his election in 2014 Mr Sasse waited a year to give his first speech on the Senate floor. He spent those months watching debates and, heeding his training in corporate crisis-management, interviewing fellow-senators about why the Senate is a “broken institution”. In his maiden speech he reported back. With its six-year terms and nearly limitless hours for debate, the Senate was built as a sort of national board of directors, he thinks: rising above short-term popularity to consider big things that America needs to get right. Yet it has fallen prey to “soundbite culture”, Mr Sasse told his colleagues. Too many debates are “fact-free zones” full of straw-man attacks. He urged both parties to accept that “the people despise us all”.

Conventional wisdom holds that Washington’s ills stem from excessive partisanship and incivility. Mr Sasse demurs. He does not want less fighting between the left and right. He wants more “meaningful fighting” about issues of substance. America’s big problems are no mystery, he notes. A post-industrial age is imposing breakneck change on the world of work. Both parties have promised federal benefits, notably for the old, that are not “mathematically possible”—but called them “entitlements” so that voters imagine that they have paid for them. The government does not really know how to fight radical jihadism, or cyber-attacks. At the same time the public is impatiently tuning out traditional sources of authority, from politicians to the mainstream media.

Alas, the Democratic and Republican Parties are “obsessively” focused on what Mr Sasse calls “a bunch of stuff that is not big enough”. On paper, such criticism from a newbie might make him sound bumptious. In person he is more disarming. Many senators resemble Victorian bishops in their slow-moving pomposity. Not Mr Sasse, a young-professor type who talks at machinegun pace. Loping along Senate corridors to his office, he abruptly ducks into the next-door office of Senator David Perdue of Georgia. Lucky Georgia is home to giant firms like Coca-Cola which sponsor free drinks and coffee for Mr Perdue’s visitors, he explains—and as a poor Nebraskan, he has established a permanent claim. He kneels by a small fridge to help himself and his spokesman to Cokes, offering Lexington some, too. “What, now you help others to our stuff too?” asks a young Perdue staffer, half-amused and half-incredulous, as Mr Sasse jogs out.

The senator sometimes sounds like another lean, sports-mad 40-something farm-state Republican with young children: the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Paul Ryan of Wisconsin. In late March Mr Ryan gave a speech seen as a rebuke to Mr Trump, telling a gathering of congressional interns to believe in a “confident” politics based on ideas, not insults.

Mr Sasse goes further. He sees both parties breaking up as they focus on “26% issues” rather than “70% issues”—meaning questions that interest impassioned partisans on left or right, rather than problems that most Americans know to be important. At times he sounds like a physicist, describing party coalitions drifting apart in the absence of principles weighty enough to exert a gravitational pull. Mr Sasse says calmly that he expects both political parties to fall apart within the next decade. He had thought the Democrats would break up first, given the distance between the party’s pragmatic wing and leftists like Bernie Sanders. Instead, he marvels, it looks as if the Republican Party “is going to come apart first”, undone by Mr Trump, a man who scorns so many organising principles of conservatism.

What happens next

In an open letter explaining his opposition to Mr Trump, the Nebraskan reminded fellow-conservatives that they believe in limited government, constrained by a constitution whose “heartbeat” is the First Amendment, guaranteeing freedom of religion, freedom of the press, freedom of association and freedom of speech. In contrast, he wrote, Mr Trump has praised Chinese leaders for showing “strength” in crushing the Tiananmen Square protests, threatened to toughen libel laws, and says that Mr Obama has "lead the way" in using executive orders. If Mr Trump is his party’s nominee, Mr Sasse says conservatives will need a “third option”.

The senator is no moderate: his voting record is sternly conservative, and he accuses Democrats of exploiting racial issues for political gain. But he deplores the fact that some in the Republican Party think that “white working-class identity politics”, as stirred up by Mr Trump, might be a legitimate tactic. He thinks Mr Trump is a warning. A lack of “shared facts” and broad national discourse undermines accountability. This creates an opportunity for big men (or women), with big personal brands, even if Mr Trump himself fades from the scene. Mr Sasse is sure big government is not the solution, saying: “Monopolistic, insular, unaccountable bureaucracies will do really stupid things.”

Pressed to spell out big, bold alternatives of his own, Mr Sasse notes that he is just one senator, new to the job. For now he is focused on sounding the alarm about America’s shrinking politics. It’s a start.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21697246-junior-senator-nebraska-thinks-both-parties-are-breaking-apart-ben-heard/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Brazil’s political crisis: The darkest hour

Brazil’s terrible politics: Dilma, out!





Articles Sections Next

Brazil’s political crisis

The darkest hour

The economy is in freefall. The president is likely to be impeached. Brazil’s democracy faces its toughest moment since the end of dictatorship

Apr 23rd 2016 | BRASÍLIA | From the print edition



ON THE night of April 17th Brazil stood still. In the streets, hundreds of thousands held their breath, many sporting the yellow-and-green jerseys of the national football team, brandishing Brazilian flags, vuvuzelas at the ready. Millions more were glued to television screens in homes, bars and restaurants across the country.

Contrary to appearances it was political, not sporting, history that was being made. At 11.07pm it was all over. Bruno Araújo of Pernambuco state, a federal deputy for the centre-right opposition Party of Brazilian Social Democracy (PSDB), cast the 342nd vote in Congress’s 513-seat lower house in favour of sending impeachment charges against the president, Dilma Rousseff, to the Senate for trial. That breached the necessary threshold of two-thirds; Ms Rousseff’s foes in the chamber burst into song. Outside Congress, and in dozens of cities, car horns blared.

By the time voting ended, the government had been trounced by 367 votes to 137 (plus seven abstentions and two absentees). In ten-second speeches during a rowdy, six-hour roll-call vote, pro-impeachment lawmakers railed against economic mismanagement and corruption under Ms Rousseff’s Workers’ Party (PT). Brazil is suffering its worst recession since the 1930s, and the PT and its allies are embroiled in a vast bribery scandal centred on the state-run oil company, Petrobras. They were voting for their families, many proclaimed, or their constituents, or God (see article). Others nodded to the special interests that got them elected. Few mentioned the specific charge against Ms Rousseff: that she had fiddled government accounts to disguise a big budget deficit.

The next morning Brazil awoke to a changed political landscape. Ms Rousseff looks likely to follow in the ignominious footsteps of Fernando Collor, the country’s first directly elected president after two decades of military rule ended in the mid1980s. He was impeached for corruption in 1992, less than three years into his term.

Ms Rousseff’s departure would bring to an end the PT era, which began 13 years ago under her predecessor and patron, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. It would upend Brazil’s politics—and increase uncertainty—even as the country struggles to halt an economic crisis. This is perhaps the most dangerous moment for the still-evolving democracy since the generals stepped down in 1985.

Ms Rousseff and her party denounced the lower-house decision as a coup d’état—like the one in 1964, but with the role of the generals played by biased media, a “selective” judiciary and compromised legislators. Forty of the congressmen who voted against her have been indicted for various crimes; 15 more are under investigation in Lava Jato (Car Wash), as the Petrobras corruption investigation is known. She compared her ordeal to the torture she suffered as a left-wing guerrilla under the dictatorship, and vowed to fight on.

But she looks unlikely to win over the Senate, which began to set up a commission to analyse the lower-house motion on April 19th. The Senate’s make-up is somewhat more friendly to her than that of the lower house: larger and richer states in the south and south-east, where she and her party are widely loathed, account for half of lower-house seats but only a quarter of the Senate’s. But only a bare majority is required for the Senate to accept the impeachment motion for trial. Estado de São Paulo, a newspaper that has been tracking voting intentions, reckons that 46 out of 81 senators want an impeachment trial (and 20 are against).

The Senate is likely to vote by mid-May. If the result is as expected, Ms Rousseff would have to step aside and the vice-president, Michel Temer, would take her place for up to 180 days. Should two-thirds of senators then vote to remove Ms Rousseff from office, he would serve until her term ends in December 2018.

In office, Mr Temer would have to tackle several Herculean tasks. Brazil’s economy is tanking, chiefly as a result of interventionist mismanagement during Ms Rousseff’s first term from 2011 to 2014. Output fell by 3.8% in 2015 and could do so again this year, the IMF reckons. Per person, output could be down by a fifth since its peak in 2010. Since the start of Ms Rousseff’s second term 1.8m jobs have been lost. Some 10m Brazilians, or one in ten workers, are out of work, and unemployment is likely to increase further, as businesses struggle under debt incurred in the boom years. Inflation has eased slightly but remains near 10%, further eroding incomes.

Cleaning the stables

To restore confidence Mr Temer would need urgently to cut the budget deficit. On Ms Rousseff’s watch it ballooned from 2.4% of GDP to a terrifying 10.8%. Restoring public finances would take a combination of spending cuts and tax rises, neither of which is popular—and some measures would require constitutional changes. In November Mr Temer outlined business-friendly reforms that would mark a break with the PT’s left-wing programme.

But he would struggle to push them through. Ms Rousseff tried similar, smaller measures several times, and appointed a market-friendly finance minister, Joaquim Levy, on her re-election. The real jumped when he was named, and again whenever reforms looked likely to make it through Congress (see chart)—only to slump again when they were stymied by politics. Mr Levy stepped down late last year, having achieved less than he had hoped. The markets’ spirits recovered as the odds of impeachment improved.



Just because 72% of the lower house backed impeachment does not mean Mr Temer would be assured of simple majorities in both houses to pass legislation, let alone the three-fifths in each needed to amend the constitution. He could not even rely on his own centrist Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB): seven of its congressmen backed Ms Rousseff in the impeachment vote, including its leader in the chamber.

Even more worryingly, many PMDB leaders are beholden to business interests that back reform in principle but not always in practice. A tangle of tax breaks is unlikely to be relinquished without a fight, and the coddled manufacturing sector cherishes the subsidies and trade barriers that shield it from foreign competition. Austerity would hardly be a vote-winner in October’s local elections. These are especially important to the PMDB, which is more a coalition of regional bigwigs than a grouping of politicians with similar ideas about how to run a country.

The vice-president’s party is not only fractious but tarnished by allegations of corruption. It was the PT’s main ally until it pulled out of the governing coalition last month, and several of its congressmen have been accused of involvement in the Petrobras affair. On April 18th a former executive at the company claimed that Renan Calheiros, the PMDB speaker of the Senate, had taken $6m in bribes from a supplier of oil rigs. The supreme court has already indicted his opposite number in the lower house, Eduardo Cunha, for corruption and money-laundering. Four other senior PMDB congressmen are under investigation. (All deny wrongdoing.) Meanwhile, the electoral authority is investigating whether Ms Rousseff and Mr Temer took money from the Petrobras scheme for their re-election campaigns. If it concludes they did, it could call a new election for both president and vice-president.

With friends and donors thus tainted, Mr Temer would struggle to attract talent to his government. Arminio Fraga, a former Central Bank governor close to the PSDB, is reported to have spurned Mr Temer’s advances, though the PSDB itself has hinted that it might unofficially support his government. And he would have to balance the pressing need for competence against the steps required to build a coalition in a Congress that houses 27 parties.

Brazilian analysts forecast that GDP would shrink by 3-4% this year with Mr Temer at the helm. That is better than 4-6% under Ms Rousseff, but still horrible. Inflation might be a shade lower than otherwise, and the currency a touch stronger. But few see growth returning before 2018, and then only sluggishly. Unemployment could reach 11% by the end of the year—and stay there. João Castro Neves of Eurasia Group, a consultancy, speaks of a slew of “unknown unknowns”. The PT has vowed “total” opposition in Congress to a government led by Mr Temer. Its allies among trade unions and social movements are considering roadblocks and perhaps a general strike—especially if Mr Temer were to pursue the measures needed to stabilise the economy, which they dub “neoliberal”.

Unlike Mr Collor, who had no popular or political backing to speak of, Ms Rousseff still enjoys some. And the third of Brazilians who oppose impeachment see the vice-president as a usurper. During the house vote, 26,000 of Ms Rousseff’s supporters gathered in front of Congress, separated from 53,000 pro-impeachment protesters by a steel fence erected by the police. Similar scenes—minus the fence—were repeated across Brazil. Some fear that they symbolised a country rent asunder—and a democracy at risk of tearing apart. All this leaves Mr Temer vulnerable to discontent and puts Brazil at risk of further turmoil and decline.

But there are reasons to think that the damage will be limited. The country’s institutions have shown an ability to withstand the twin traumas of the impeachment process—even one as contested and flawed as Ms Rousseff’s—and the Lava Jato investigation.

Even in the rush for impeachment the supreme court, despite being packed with PT appointees, set out guidelines but did not second-guess the legislature on the merits of the case against the president. All involved obeyed the rules; though the vote was decried by her supporters in the lower house, no one suggested that it should be overturned by force. Emotions ran high during the voting, and some of the rhetoric was intemperate, but the deputies mostly observed parliamentary decorum. “Few countries could have pulled this off,” marvels Matthew Taylor, a political scientist at American University in Washington, DC.

The protesters outside also behaved well. There was no violence that warranted intervention by the police, let alone the army. Crowds dispersed peacefully. The next morning, normal life resumed.

Students of democracy

Brazilians are not given to revolutions; they have never had a bloody one. The “coalitional presidentialism” that grew out of the system enshrined in the constitution adopted in 1988, in which a strong executive co-exists with a multiparty legislature, both reflects and reinforces a cultural affinity for consensus. Since 1995 the sitting president’s party has never held more than 20% of all seats in Congress, points out Saulo Porto of Prospectiva, another consultancy. To secure backing for policy measures, a leader must coax and cajole a broad range of allies.

This has sometimes taken an unseemly form: in the mensalão (big monthly) scandal in Lula’s first term, the government paid small coalition parties regular kickbacks in exchange for their support in Congress. The petrolão (big oily), as the Petrobras affair is known, appears to have had a similar aim. Alliance-building also tempers any radical instincts. Brazil was slower than some of its neighbours to embrace—and then only half-heartedly—the “Washington consensus” of liberal reforms in the 1990s, notes Mr Castro Neves. But it also resisted the siren song of the far-left “Bolivarian revolution” led by the late Hugo Chávez in Venezuela in the following decade.

In choosing between political boldness and stability, Brazil generally plumps for the latter. It is no surprise that its most revered post-war presidents were not visionaries but wheeler-dealers: from Juscelino Kubitschek in the 1950s to Lula himself. Mr Temer is also comfortable in smoke-filled rooms. Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Lula’s two-term predecessor from the PSDB, was enough of a political operator to be unfazed when the PT forced an impeachment motion (over helping out troubled banks) onto the lower-house agenda after his re-election in 1999. It was roundly defeated by 342 votes to 100. Dozens of other attempts to oust Mr Cardoso and Lula never got that far.

“Presidentialism doesn’t work without a strong president,” says Nilson Leitão, a PSDB leader in the house. Ms Rousseff is singularly weak. She has barely tried to hide her disdain for Congress—or her lack of interest in political horse-trading. On her watch coalitional presidentialism turned into “collision presidentialism”, jokes Murilo de Aragão, a political scientist. Congressmen punished her by elevating Mr Cunha, for years a thorn in her side, to the position of house speaker in February 2015. He accepted the impeachment motion last December partly to divert attention from his own mounting legal woes, but also because of personal animosity. Without him, her position would probably have been secure.

A glimmer of dawn

Ms Rousseff’s likely downfall is the result of a string of personal failures—economic errors, tolerance of sleaze and political ineptitude. That is not to say that Brazilian democracy will function well without her: absurd electoral rules, for instance, force would-be federal deputies to campaign across entire states, the largest of which is home to 44m people. That is a recipe for corruption. And with no minimum vote-share required to enter Congress, parties are excessively fragmented, weakly led and clientelistic. These are flaws in the design of democracy, but not threats to democracy itself.

Lava Jato, too, revealed the seriousness of Brazil’s situation—and the resilience of its institutions. Public prosecutors and judges have wielded their constitutionally guaranteed independence with gusto. They have also gained new tools. Ms Rousseff pushed through laws rewarding plea bargains and mandating stiff penalties for corporate bribery. These have been essential in uncovering the corruption at Petrobras; dozens of defendants collaborated in return for leniency. And firms are now shutting bribery departments, quips one consultant, to replace them with compliance offices.

While denouncing the Lava Jato investigators as coup-mongers, Ms Rousseff has not tried to stop them—much to the dismay of many of her allies. (An attempt in March, shortly after he was detained for questioning, to shield Lula from prosecutors by naming him chief of staff with ministerial immunity was a rare lapse.) A PMDB-led administration could try to rein in Lava Jato. Yet such is Brazilians’ weariness with dirty politics that Mr Cardoso, the former president, was surely right when he intimated recently that they would rebel.

After decades of passive acceptance, Brazilians are fed up with graft. Despite the weak economy, corruption has replaced health and security as their top concern. As Lava Jato progresses from businessmen to politicians—the supreme court is expected soon to indict congressmen, who are protected from prosecution in lower courts—politics could be purged of its dirtiest practitioners. Even before sentencing, which could take years, voters may punish the worst at the ballot box.

After 13 years of PT rule, during the first decade of which rising prosperity and enlightened social polices turned millions of poor people into consumers, Ms Rousseff’s mistakes and her party’s moral collapse are now helping to turn Brazilians into citizens. It will not happen quickly. One executive of a big investment bank likens Lava Jato to chemotherapy: “It may weaken Brazil now but will help it survive in the long run,” he says. The catastrophe of Ms Rousseff’s presidency has given Brazilians an invaluable political education. Eventually, that should strengthen the country’s democratic foundations.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21697291-economy-freefall-president-likely-be-impeached-brazils-democracy-faces-its/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brazil’s terrible politics

Dilma, out!

Few pro-impeachment congressmen cited the specific charges

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



DILMA ROUSSEFF, Brazil’s embattled president, is accused of fiddling government accounts. But the congressmen who voted in favour of impeachment on April 17th mostly cited other reasons. The lowest point came when Jair Bolsonaro, a hard-right ex-soldier, dedicated his vote to the torturer-in-chief of the dictatorship that imprisoned thousands in the 1960s and 1970s—including Ms Rousseff herself.

The majority invoked the Brazilian version of motherhood and apple pie. Only a handful referred to the charges. Others cited special interests and fringe causes. A smattering is given here.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21697284-few-pro-impeachment-congressmen-cited-specific-charges-dilma-out/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Myanmar-China relations: High mountains, distant emperors

War in Afghanistan: Fresh offence

Kashmir in stasis: Rough sleeping

The Koh-i-Noor diamond: Rock in a hard place

Banyan: Open wounds





Articles Sections Next

Myanmar-China relations

High mountains, distant emperors

Aung San Suu Kyi extends a wary welcome as China tries to regain lost influence

Apr 23rd 2016 | BEIJING, MUSE AND YANGON | From the print edition



JUST days after her government took office late last month, Aung San Suu Kyi, the world’s best-known democracy activist, welcomed her first foreign dignitary: Wang Yi, foreign minister of the world’s biggest authoritarian state, China. They smiled and shook hands for the cameras. Miss Suu Kyi welcomed China’s “substantial assistance”. And Mr Wang praised the pauk phaw (fraternal) warmth between the two countries.

Yet the warmth is not what it was. Indeed, so deep had resentment become in Myanmar of China’s growing influence that it helped push the generals who had long ruled the country towards a democratic opening in 2011, and towards the West. With waves of Chinese investment bringing tens of thousands of Chinese workers and traders, ordinary Burmese, particularly in Myanmar’s north nearer the Chinese border, were beginning to feel that their country was at risk of becoming just another Chinese province.

As Chinese influence grew, at least some of the much-loathed generals appeared to understand what a liability China’s backing was becoming. In September 2011 the president, Thein Sein, an army man, suddenly announced the cancellation of a vast Chinese dam at Myitsone, at the top of the Irrawaddy river. It was a huge surprise. Other Chinese-backed projects, including a copper mine and a railway linking China’s Yunnan province with the Bay of Bengal, were also called off. By then Mr Thein Sein and Miss Suu Kyi, recently released from years of house arrest, had already discussed the outlines of a democratic transition. The job of handling tricky relations with Myanmar’s big neighbour is now hers. (On April 1st, the day after he stepped down as president, Mr Thein Sein shaved his head and disappeared into a Buddhist order.)

China is no longer the patron of a pariah state. In modern Myanmar it must contend with Western powers for influence. But it still has huge commercial and strategic interests in Myanmar. The conciliatory nature of Mr Wang’s visit suggests that it wants to manage these more adeptly.



With Chinese dams and mining projects dotted around the country, and high-end Chinese condominiums rising in Yangon, the commercial capital, China remains the biggest foreign investor in Myanmar. Central to its needs are two pipelines, owned by China National Petroleum Corporation and designed to bring gas, from platforms in the Bay of Bengal, and oil, shipped to the Burmese coast from the Middle East, into China’s fast-growing interior (see map). Another Chinese state-owned giant, CITIC, leads a consortium developing an industrial zone and deep-sea port near Sittwe in Rakhine state, where the two pipelines start. Guangdong Zhenrong Energy plans a $3 billion oil refinery further south in Dawei, near the border with Thailand. And in January a 300-acre, Chinese-backed business district opened in Muse, just a few miles inside Myanmar’s border crossing with Yunnan (pictured above). Its purpose will be to handle and perhaps eventually regularise a thriving (if often illicit) cross-border trade.

With some of these projects, Miss Suu Kyi inherits headaches. The outgoing government is rumoured to have reached an agreement months ago over the Dawei refinery project, but, worried about a public outcry, it waited for its last day in power to hold the signing ceremony. With oil prices low, some consider the refinery a white elephant and doubt that China will actually pay for a project inked by an over-eager company and a government on the way out. Du Jifeng, an expert on South-East Asia at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences in Beijing, says that “China will be quite unhappy” should Miss Suu Kyi cancel the Dawei project. To date, Miss Suu Kyi has made only pragmatic noises about Chinese investment. Her government is bent on rapid economic development, for which Chinese help will be indispensable. She is trying to make that case to her compatriots, who are suspicious of China.

Managing formal Chinese trade and investment is one thing. Other aspects of the relationship are even trickier, especially the complex dynamics of ethnic insurgencies that have long rumbled along Myanmar’s border with China. A year ago the Burmese army bombed and killed Chinese civilians inside China, while fighting rebels from the Kokang region in northern Shan state. To signal its displeasure, China’s army held live-fire exercises along the border. The message from China was clear: keep the instability on your side of the border, where it belongs.

Bloodlines complicate matters: several of Myanmar’s rebel groups, all of whom chafe at central rule, have historical ties to China. For instance, the Kokang, who launched a sudden and spectacular attack on the Burmese army in February 2015, are ethnic Han who speak Mandarin, and their militia leader, Phone Kyar Shin, lived for years in China. Chinese nationals may have fought alongside the Kokang against the Burmese army. A number of ethnic groups in conflict with the Burmese army inhabit both sides of the border, including the Kachin, Shan and Palaung. The United Wa State Army, which controls one of the most redoubtable holdout territories in Myanmar, has Chinese backing, uses the Chinese currency and conducts its affairs in Mandarin. With ties going back centuries, the interests of locals in Yunnan often run at cross-purposes with the desires of the central government in faraway Beijing.



Myanmar in graphics: An unfinished peace

Smuggling also complicates matters along the porous border. Tucked among the watermelons and maize in lorries trundling into China are jade, illegally felled rosewood and heroin. Paying the Burmese police to turn a blind eye costs lorry drivers around $80 a trip, but the profits in China can be stupendous. Proceeds from the trade enrich the ethnic rebel groups, the Burmese army and corrupt officials on both sides.

Officially, China wants stability along the border. In March its ambassador to Myanmar promised to “promote the peace process” with these rebel groups—a priority of Miss Suu Kyi’s as well—and offered “material and financial support”. Mr Wang, the foreign minister, reiterated China’s support for “peaceful reconciliation” with the ethnic groups when he visited Miss Suu Kyi. Yet for years China played both sides, signing deals with the junta while funding rebel groups. It is not clear what might now change—especially since the Burmese army, anxious to call the shots in their country’s regions, may deny Miss Suu Kyi a significant role in negotiations with the ethnic groups.

Still, China acknowledges the political change that has taken place in Myanmar—and how that has altered China’s position. At his big press conference, Mr Wang said that Chinese companies must “respect Myanmar’s social customs” and “protect the local ecology and environment”. China can no longer simply buy goodwill. These days, Myanmar has other suitors.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21697287-aung-san-suu-kyi-extends-wary-welcome-china-tries-regain-lost-influence-high-mountains/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

War in Afghanistan

Fresh offence

The Taliban tighten a deadlock, with a grisly start to the new fighting season

Apr 23rd 2016 | KABUL | From the print edition



WHEN the Taliban announced the start of their annual spring offensive last week, Afghans braced for bloodshed. It came this week. On April 19th, during morning rush hour, a member of the Taliban drove a truck laden with explosives to the gates of an elite military base in downtown Kabul and set off his charge. Guerrillas stormed the compound amid the dust; a battle with security forces ensued. At least 64 people were killed and about 350 wounded, making it the deadliest strike in the capital since 2001.

The target was a training ground for the bodyguards who protect Afghan and foreign dignitaries. Not even those to whom you entrust your protection are safe, the insurgents seemed to be telling their foes. Most of the casualties were civilians. “The Taliban always say they kill the foreigners and security forces,” said Haroon Faqiri, who was 100 metres from the blast. “But I saw hundreds of wounded civilians.”

Even for a city accustomed to explosions, this bomb’s power was shocking. The blast rattled windows miles away and blew open wooden doors. Metal storefronts near the site crumpled like cellophane. Kabulis responded with grief and solidarity, queuing outside hospitals to donate blood.

The Taliban’s announcement of a spring offensive is an annual occurrence. Warmer weather and new foliage for battle-cover herald months of intensified fighting. But this winter hardly saw a lull. In the vacuum left by the withdrawal of foreign soldiers, the Taliban made advances not only in their southern and eastern heartlands, but also in the north.

Facing a leadership battle after it was made public last summer that the movement’s founder, Mullah Mohammed Omar, had died more than two years earlier, the Taliban need military successes to unite their ranks. A demonstration of strength, like the attack this week, might help foot-soldiers regain lost confidence.

The new commander of the American and NATO troops in Afghanistan, General John Nicholson, and the Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani, saw it differently. The attack was a sign that “the insurgents are unable to meet Afghan forces on the battlefield and must resort to these terrorist attacks,” as General Nicholson put it—a sign, essentially, of Taliban weakness.



The reality is that the Taliban currently contest more territory than at any point since 2001. Last year Afghan security forces suffered record casualties: on average more than 1,000 soldiers and police were wounded or killed each month. They lost more men in a single year than the Americans have in the whole war.

The deteriorating security situation is a major factor behind the exodus of Afghans. Last year Afghanistan was second only to Syria as a source of migrants to Europe. More than 200,000 Afghans made the journey.

Yet the Taliban are not on the verge of victory. Government forces still control all the main towns and cities. Big advances by the Taliban have usually been reversed within a few days. Moreover, the Afghan army has learned to operate with fairly minimal help from NATO forces. Tactics have changed, from exposed outposts towards mobile units that can be concentrated when and where needed. Those troops will also enjoy more close air support this year. Although the Afghan air force remains very much a work in progress, for this year’s “fighting season” it will be equipped with three new Mi-25 helicopter gunships and eight A-29 Super Tucano light attack aircraft.

The chances of the American-led mission being boosted next year are high. Officially the American contingent assisting NATO is due to fall from 9,800 now to 5,500 by the end of the year. But the American president’s military advisers are opposed to the drawdown. If Barack Obama’s successor is Hillary Clinton, she will not want to start out with an Afghan security crisis; she may well prefer a small increase in troop numbers. Defeating the Taliban proved impossible; preventing them from winning is probably easier.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21697196-taliban-tighten-deadlock-grisly-start-new-fighting-season-fresh-offence/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Kashmir in stasis

Rough sleeping

The idyllic valley is less violent, but anger lingers

Apr 23rd 2016 | SRINAGAR | From the print edition

Holding out, but feeling hopeless

MUSLIMS know the parable as the story of the People of the Cave: some men fall asleep and find, on waking, that centuries have passed and the world is transformed. The people of the Kashmir valley in the lush uplands of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir have their own version. Ever since 1947, when they found themselves east of an active frontline between the two new states of India and Pakistan, valley folk have watched the world evolve. But for them, politically at least, nothing changes. Leaders come and go; promises are made and betrayed; anger erupts into violence, which is crushed with greater violence. And still the valley’s 7m people, who speak their own unique language, are nearly all Muslim and generally disdain India and Pakistan alike, remain hapless pawns in a vicious game between those rivals.

A recent twist in this cycle was sadly typical. In the town of Handwara on April 12th, a 16-year-old girl stepped into a public toilet. According to witnesses and human-rights activists who spoke to her, an Indian soldier followed. She screamed, drawing angry residents. When the soldier slipped away to a nearby army post, they demanded his surrender and attacked the position with stones. Police arrived, took the girl into custody and tried to disperse the crowd. But a panicked officer fired in the air, and soon two men were shot dead. In further rioting, army or police gunfire killed another three civilians.

But according to the girl’s testimony as recorded by police, and later repeated by her before a magistrate, there was no soldier at the toilet. Instead, she said two local boys had harassed her outside the facility. The subsequent fracas was due to false rumours. To calm tempers the state government has now launched an inquiry, torn down the army post and lifted a curfew it had clamped on Handwara.

Some facts are clear. Anger at the Indian army’s heavy presence is explosive. Security forces are quick to shoot, and keen to divert attention from their misconduct. The girl has been kept under close watch since the incident, while video of her testimony mysteriously leaked onto the internet, damaging her reputation. The girl’s mother publicly declared that that the testimony was obtained under duress.

Few in Kashmir doubt which version is closer to the truth. They have too often heard of sexual abuse by soldiers, and of police framing scapegoats. Incidents like this often lead to escalating protests and shootings, and end in inquiries with no result. And in any case India’s half-million or so security men in the valley are shielded by laws that grant them legal immunity.



Our interactive map demonstrates how the territorial claims of India, Pakistan and China would change the shape of South Asia

Some 40,000 people, by official count, have died in the valley since 1990, when a bloody insurgency covertly sponsored by Pakistan provoked a brutal Indian crackdown. In recent years Pakistan has throttled the flow of arms; India’s harsh policing and better intelligence have also taken effect. Analysts say there are only a few hundred armed militants left. Their scrapping with Indian forces scarcely disrupts everyday commerce. Dependent on income from tourism, the wider public has scant appetite for jihadist heroics against India’s massive might.

Yet in Kashmir’s main city, Srinagar, struck by a devastating flood in 2014, resentments surface quickly. Unemployment, corruption and shoddy infrastructure—the single, 300km-long road that links the valley to the rest of India is closed half the year and takes eight hours at best to traverse—add immediacy to chronic political despair. “It’s been 26 years since militancy peaked, but there is more anger and alienation among the youth now than then,” says Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, a separatist leader. He points to soaring attendance at funerals for slain guerrillas and to a disturbing trend towards militancy among the better educated. “We want to keep resistance peaceful, but it’s very hard when India bans every outlet for protest or debate, and in fact doesn’t even acknowledge that there is a problem.” Time for India’s leaders to wake from their slumber.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21697283-idyllic-valley-less-violent-anger-lingers-rough-sleeping/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Koh-i-Noor diamond

Rock in a hard place

Less a story of Indian giving than of colonial taking

Apr 23rd 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition



AN AWFUL curse will befall any man who dares wear the Koh-i-Noor, according to a medieval Indian text. On the other hand, it said, whoever owned the “Mountain of Light” would also “own the world”. For centuries Mughal emperors, as well as Hindu and Persian kings, fought over the most legendary gemstone ever dug out. Eventually the Victorian British who took possession of it whittled the rock down from a glassy 186 carats to a brilliant 106, and gave it to their queen. Today it sits in the Tower of London, set in a fur-trimmed crown.

On April 18th its glittering story was set to spin again. The government of India rejected a request by an Indian NGO to reclaim the stone. In a baffling turn, the solicitor-general told the Supreme Court the jewel was neither “forcibly taken nor stolen” from colonial India. Rather it was “a gift” made by the descendants of Ranjit Singh, a Punjabi maharajah, in 1849: specifically, by his child, Duleep Singh, who was less than a year old when his father died and seven when he signed away his kingdom.

The Supreme Court ordered caution in forgoing the nation’s claims; other Indians cried foul; and within two days the government backtracked, resolving to “bring back the Koh-i-Noor diamond in an amicable manner”. Perhaps some official had been feeling over-amicable towards Britain after a holiday spent in India by the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge earlier this month.

Many Indians would like to see the Koh-i-Noor come home. In November some tried invoking the Holocaust Act in Britain, which allows the return of Nazi loot to rightful owners. With the Koh-i-Noor, it is hard to say who the original owners would be. A Pakistani barrister filed a petition last year arguing it should go back to its previous domicile, in Lahore. Descendants of Duleep Singh want it for themselves. Afghanistan and Iran have their own ideas.

Successive British governments have flatly refused their demands. But it is hard to maintain that the Koh-i-Noor was ever a gift. Anita Anand, a historian working in Britain, cites the Delhi Gazette of 1848 which boasts the jewel was kept “under the security of British bayonets” as “one of the splendid trophies of our military valour”. To repatriate any spoils of colonial war might establish a precedent to empty out the British Museum.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21697282-less-story-indian-giving-colonial-taking-rock-hard-place/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

Open wounds

After half a century, Indonesia opens a debate about its darkest year

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



IN LITTLE more than a decade, starting in 1965, Asia suffered four man-made catastrophes apart from the Vietnam war; altogether they cost millions of lives. China endured the Cultural Revolution. Bangladesh was born amid horror and mass slaughter. In Cambodia Pol Pot’s Khmers Rouges inflicted genocide on their own countrymen. And in Indonesia hundreds of thousands of suspected communist sympathisers died in 1965-66 as the then General Suharto consolidated what was to become a 32-year dictatorship. None of these disasters has been subject to a thorough public accounting, let alone a truth-and-reconciliation process. Of the four, however, Indonesia’s has been the least examined at home. Unlike the others, it has remained a taboo topic; its survivors still suffer censorship, discrimination and persecution.

So a symposium held this week in Jakarta, the capital, titled “Dissecting the 1965 tragedy”, was remarkable. Human-rights groups, former army officers, government representatives, victims’ families and survivors met in a public forum. Opinions on the worth of the exercise varied. That it happened at all prompted protests from some Islamic groups, seeing, implausibly, the thin end of a communist-revival wedge. Government spokesmen questioned the scale of the killings being discussed. Even some of the activists, who for decades have been urging Indonesia to face up to the carnage, saw the symposium less as historic breakthrough than as history rewritten.

How many died that year is unknown. It started with the murder of six generals in the early hours of October 1st 1965. This was blamed on an alleged coup attempt by the Indonesian Communist Party, or PKI. Purging the country of supposed PKI sympathisers meant murdering, by one common guess, 500,000 people. Haris Azhar of Kontras, a charity that campaigns for the rights of the victims, thinks it was between 1m and 2m, with a far larger number affected in other ways: by imprisonment, torture, forced labour, rape or exile. The obscurity is deliberate. Suharto held power until 1998; twice as much time to bury the truth as to unearth it. But the period is still glossed over in school history lessons and books about it are banned.

Its shadow falls across islands where millions live side-by-side with former tormentors or victims. An estimated 40m are still excluded from government jobs because of their families’ alleged association with the PKI. Some of the bloodiest massacres happened in Java and Bali, but violence scarred most of the archipelago. Indonesia, hiding its past, never learns its lessons. The grim techniques of control that were honed during the terror were later used with disastrous effect against faraway secessionist movements: East Timor (now Timor-Leste), Aceh and Papua.

It counts as progress that the symposium drew together so many people on both sides of the killings—or at least their children. One of the organisers was Agus Widjojo, an intellectual former general and a son of one of the six assassinated in 1965. One delegate was the daughter of D.N. Aidit, leader of the PKI at the time—when only the Soviet Union and China had larger communist parties. Another was Sukmawati Sukarnoputri, one of the daughters of Sukarno, Indonesia’s founding president, who was squeezed out of power by Suharto in 1966.

Yet the former army men and the government seemed to cast doubt on whether there was anything to discuss at all, dismissing the notion that hundreds of thousands had died. A retired general, Sintong Panjaitan, said the figure was closer to 80,000. Another former general, Luhut Panjaitan (no relation), now the government’s security minister, went further: “I don’t believe the number was more than 1,000; probably fewer.”

Some activists claimed that the symposium, a worthy idea of academics and NGOs, had been “hijacked” by the government. Mr Haris of Kontras boycotted it, arguing it was designed to portray the tragedy as the result of a “social conflict” between rival groups—ie, ignoring the “dirty hand” of the government and army. Others, however, such as Andreas Harsono, of Human Rights Watch, a New York-based lobby group, welcomed the symposium as a “tiny” but important first step. Optimists hope it will be followed by other meetings round the country and so, at long last, by a national reckoning. The generals’ estimates of the death toll may be ludicrously understated, but at least they open the way for a discussion about the real numbers.

Many hoped that the administration of Joko Widodo, the president elected in 2014, might be happy to open such a debate. The first president from outside the old elite, with no military links, he seemed to have much to gain. But maybe the Islamic groups, the army and others opposed to open discussion have more political clout, even today, than survivors and victims’ descendants. Mr Luhut ruled out any government apology, and appeared to see calls for openness as a foreign plot, thundering: “I’ll be damned if this country is controlled by other countries.”

The sound of silence

Perhaps he was thinking of the part played in raising awareness of the slaughter by two harrowing, prizewinning documentaries (“The Act of Killing” and “The Look of Silence”) by an American film-maker, Joshua Oppenheimer. But in fact for years the West connived in the silence: America, Britain and other countries were aware of the massacres. In 1966 Australia’s prime minister, Harold Holt, seemed pleased that Indonesia had been straightened out, telling an audience in New York that “with 500,000 to 1m communist sympathisers knocked off...I think it is safe to assume a reorientation has taken place.” It is not only inside Indonesia that an examination of the year of living dangerously raises embarrassing questions about the cold war and its effect on basic human values. But it is Indonesia that has to live with the consequences, and Indonesians, above all, who are demanding truth in the hope that one day justice and reconciliation may follow.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21697252-after-half-century-indonesia-opens-debate-about-its-darkest-year-open-wounds/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Ideology: The return of correct thinking

Genetically modified crops: Gene-policy transfer

Communist Party membership: Hammer and shackle





Articles Sections Next

Ideology

The return of correct thinking

To keep the party and public in line, Xi Jinping is using Marxist classics

Apr 23rd 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



ON APRIL 6th Xi Jinping, China’s president, launched yet another ideological campaign. It is named (as most such initiatives are) with a low number and a couple of nouns: “Two Studies, One Action.” The aim, says Mr Xi, is to “strengthen the Marxist stance” of Communist Party members and keep them in line with the party leadership in “ideology, politics and action.” Previous such efforts under his rule had focused on officials, he said. Now it was time to focus on the rank and file.

Ideology has always mattered to the party’s leaders. University students endure lessons on “Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought”. Soldiers have to spend hours a week studying the party’s history and the military writings of its leaders. Applicants for party membership undergo rigorous indoctrination. Chen Xiaojie, a 25-year-old official, recalls weekly classes on party theories and having to write a 1,500-word essay every three months on the latest doctrine. “When you’re in the party, you’ll join a group at least every month to learn about the latest thing they’re promoting.” Officials take regular refresher courses at party schools.

Since Mao’s rule, when ideological training took up a considerable portion of almost everyone’s lives, leaders have given people much more time to get on with their jobs. Deng Xiaoping’s catchphrase, “It doesn’t matter if a cat is black or white so long as it catches mice,” captured a new mood of pragmatism. But the party continued to stress the importance of indoctrination. After the pro-democracy upheaval of 1989, Deng expressed regret that there had not been enough of it. Since taking over in 2012, Mr Xi has shown particular enthusiasm for ideology. One of his first moves was to set up a National Ideology Centre to push—or invent—his own interpretation of Marxism-Leninism. He quickly spelled out to officials that ideological work was of “vital importance” to the party.

Numbers and nouns have come thick and fast. Some have been aimed at improving the behaviour of a corrupt bureaucracy. Mr Xi’s “Eight Points” campaign launched in 2012 required party officials to eschew such things as lavish welcoming ceremonies and traffic-snarling cavalcades when they tour the country. His “Three Stricts, Three Honests” drive of 2014 was about strengthening officials’ moral rectitude. Other campaigns have been more ideological: the “Eight Musts” of 2012 stressed the importance of the party’s monopoly of power as well as of “reform and opening”; a campaign was launched in February requiring officials to bone up on Mao’s essay, “Working Methods of Party Committees”, and “improve their consciousness of democratic centralism”.

Mr Xi’s attentions are not confined to the party. In 2014 he said students and teachers at universities (fountainheads of dissent, historically) both needed greater “ideological guidance”. They soon got it from the party’s Central Committee, which told universities in January 2015 to make the teaching of Marxism a higher priority. The education minister then restricted the use of foreign textbooks (Chinese microbloggers were quick to point out a problem with the party’s efforts to combat “Western values” on campuses—Marxism-Leninism being a Western import, too).

It is not clear how much the president really expects to change people’s beliefs. He will certainly have difficulty doing so. Some folk are clearly indifferent to ideological browbeating. Lin Qun, a 52-year-old teacher and party member since 2003, says he occasionally has to turn in 5,000-word essays on the latest theories. “They just have different themes once in a while.”

Bore them into submission

Why, then, has Mr Xi chosen to put such stress on ideology? Roderick MacFarquhar of Harvard University says that Leninism may be the part that most appeals to Mr Xi. Lenin has a lot to offer someone trying to establish centralised one-party rule. The campaigns, with their emphasis on discipline, also help Mr Xi in his efforts to root out corruption—a problem so pervasive when he took over that he saw it as a threat to the party’s survival. By requiring members actually to attend classes as rituals of loyalty, Mr Xi is tightening his grip over the party’s 88m members and, he hopes, strengthening the party itself. The head of his new ideology centre, Zhu Jidong, argued last year that the Soviet Union had collapsed in part because it failed to maintain ideological standards.

The party’s concerns were made clear in a document that began circulating in secret in April 2013 and was later leaked. Document Number Nine, as it is called, describes “the current state of the ideological sphere” and identifies seven challenges to it. They include Western constitutional democracy, universal values, civil society, neoliberalism and “the West’s idea of journalism”. To combat these, the communique says, party members must make ideological work “a high priority” in their daily lives. The document was approved by the central leadership and appears to represent Mr Xi’s thinking. Its ideas have permeated his subsequent campaigns as well as his broader efforts to tighten social and political controls.

Mao emphasised the supreme importance of being “red”—that is, imbued with Maoist fervour—over that of being “expert”. Much of the suffering China experienced during his misrule stemmed from that. Mr Xi is hardly a man of Mao’s stripe. But after years of technocratic government that has stressed the expert end of the spectrum, he is taking a risk in tilting the balance back towards the red zone.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21697266-keep-party-and-public-line-xi-jinping-using-marxist-classics-return-correct/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Genetically modified crops

Gene-policy transfer

China may relax its almost total ban on growing GM food

Apr 23rd 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



AFTER years of fierce debate in China about whether to allow widespread growing of genetically modified (GM) food crops, a strong signal emerged in 2013 that the leadership wanted to push ahead. It was given in a speech on agricultural policy by President Xi Jinping. In it he recounted his own experience of hunger during China’s great famine in the early 1960s. He also recalled lean times later that decade during the Cultural Revolution when he went months without “seeing the tiniest drop of oil” or “knowing the taste of meat”. He said that guaranteeing China’s “food security” was still a serious worry. Hinting at what he saw as a possible remedy, he said China must “occupy the commanding heights of transgenic technology” and not yield that ground to “big foreign firms”.

Twenty years earlier, visiting European scientists had been flabbergasted at how much progress China appeared to be making in this area. Unlike the Europeans, who had had to beg regulators for permission to experiment with a few hundred square metres of GM plants, their Chinese counterparts were conducting trials across tens of thousands of hectares.

Since then, however, Chinese policy had grown much more conservative, for two main reasons. The first is anxiety among some members of the public about the safety of GM foods. The other is a worry that China’s food market might become reliant on foreign GM technology. True, a large share of the soyabeans imported by China are genetically modified. So is the vast majority of the cotton it grows. In 2015 there were more than 6.6m farmers growing GM cotton, and a total of 3.7m hectares of GM crops under cultivation, including cotton and papaya, according to Randy Hautea of the International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-biotech Applications, an industry group. But the government has been reluctant to approve the growing of GM staples such as maize (corn) and rice.

Concerns about China’s growing dependence on food imports (see chart) may be causing policymakers to rethink. This year’s Document Number One, the name given to an annual statement on agriculture that is released by the leadership in January, said for the first time that China would “carefully promote” GM food crops. On April 13th Liao Xiyuan, an official at the agriculture ministry, said China planned to “push forward” commercial cultivation of GM maize over the next five years.

Worries about foreign domination of GM technology may ease if a $43 billion deal reached in February goes ahead for the takeover of Syngenta, a Swiss agricultural firm, by a Chinese company, ChemChina. The acquisition must still be approved by regulators in several countries, but it could give China control of Syngenta’s valuable GM-seed patents.

China’s policymakers may be trying to bring belated order to what is already thought to be the widespread, illegal, growing of GM crops. Greenpeace, an NGO, reported in January that 93% of samples taken from maize fields in Liaoning province in the north-east tested positive for genetic modification, as did nearly all the seed samples and maize-based foods it gathered at supermarkets in the area. Anti-GM campaigners in China may be too late in trying to close the barn door.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21697272-china-may-relax-its-almost-total-ban-growing-gm-food-gene-policy-transfer/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Communist Party membership

Hammer and shackle

To keep party members clean, officials try outing them

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



ROUGHLY one adult Chinese in every 13 is a member of the Communist Party, yet identifying such people can be difficult. In private businesses, especially foreign-invested ones, they are often reticent about revealing their status; doing so, they fear, might complicate relations with bosses who dislike the party’s meddling. There are also many who prefer not to advertise their membership because they do not want to be held to the party’s notionally high moral standards and its irksome principles of thrift and self-sacrifice.

In recent months, however, numerous local party organisations have been telling their members to identify themselves by wearing a badge showing the party’s red hammer-and-sickle. Often this requirement applies just at work. In some places, however, members are being instructed to wear their badges (over the left chest, above any other badges they may be sporting) whenever they appear in public. Some party committees have issued such orders before, but the frequency with which badge-wearing edicts are now being reported by official media suggests a broader push.

Typically, members are being told that wearing their little red badges will help others to supervise their work and boost the party’s image. One district of Zhanjiang, a city in the southern province of Guangdong, is reported to have handed out more than 10,000 badges to party members this year. Their “enthusiastic” wearing of them is said to have “whipped up a red whirlwind”. The local party chief has praised the badges’ ability to “restrain the speech and actions” of those displaying them.

If local committees are finding this beneficial, it might be thought that President Xi Jinping, in his anti-graft campaign, would require all 88m members to wear badges all the time. On April 16th a professor at the country’s most prestigious police academy posted an “online friend’s” suggestion to this effect on his Weibo microblog (which has nearly 94,000 followers). Those who refused to wear their badges, it said, should be treated as “traitors to the party”. Censors eventually deleted the post. The party, it seems, is not yet ready for the shock of having its members exposed so permanently. Too many fall short of the ideal.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21697267-keep-party-members-clean-officials-try-outing-them-hammer-and-shackle/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Burundi: Sliding towards anarchy

African hospitality: No room at the inn

Egypt’s prickly president: Permission to speak, sir

Tech startups in Africa: Africa uber alles

Syria: Drifting back to war

Israeli politics: Curtains for Herzog?





Articles Sections Next

Burundi

Sliding towards anarchy

Political, ethnic and economic crises stalk Rwanda’s neighbour

Apr 23rd 2016 | BUJUMBURA | From the print edition



ON THE hard-packed dirt roads of Cibitoke, a northern suburb of Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi, police ask residents who have them to put on electric lights at night. They impose a penalty of 50,000 francs ($25 at black market rates) on those who don’t comply. Leaving the lights on allows the officers to see better when they come through looking for suspects. Most young men in the neighbourhood have fled to the countryside or other districts; those who remain tell stories about how they dodged arrest.

Burundi, a tiny green country of 10m people bounded by Rwanda, Tanzania and Congo, has become a place of fear. In cities, people fear police abductions, torture and murder. In the countryside, they fear hunger as the economy collapses. Even among the government’s higher ranks, there is the constant fear of assassination. But the biggest fear of all is that a conflict so far fought on political lines could once again divide Burundi on ethnic ones, between Hutus and Tutsis, and lead to new massacres.

The crisis began in April last year when Pierre Nkurunziza, the president since 2005, announced he would run for a third term. He argued that this was compatible with the constitution, which limits presidents to two terms. Mr Nkurunziza claims his first term did not count, as he was appointed to it by parliament.

Mr Nkurunziza’s announcement produced protests in many of Bujumbura’s neighbourhoods. These were followed in May by an attempted coup launched by a former intelligence chief and supported by soldiers from the president’s own Hutu majority. Mr Nkurunziza was then reelected in July by a comfortable margin. But opposition, much of it from Hutus, did not stop. On December 11th last year, a campaign of grenade-throwing culminated in fighting on the streets as armed opponents of the president, both Hutu and Tutsi, mounted an attack on a barracks. Afterwards, government troops rampaged through those neighbourhoods of Bujumbura that were thought to have supported the rebels, killing people indiscriminately and burying them in mass graves.



So far, there has been no repeat of fighting on that scale. But peace is elusive, too. Instead of warfare, the government has adopted a strategy of eliminating its opponents. “When the police come now, they know exactly who they are looking for,” says one young man in Cibitoke, who has been dodging night-time patrols for months now. But the grounds for suspicion can be razor-thin. The things he lists that can be suspicious include wearing jeans, travelling and socialising in groups larger than three.

Ominously, there is growing evidence that the government crackdown is seeing people being targeted for their ethnicity as well as just for their political affiliation. Certainly plenty of Hutu men have been arrested; but the neighbourhoods of Bujumbura targeted most heavily by the security forces are disproportionately Tutsi. Tutsis are also being sidelined from government institutions. On April 15th the government announced that 700 soldiers—almost all of whom served in the army when it was an entirely Tutsi institution—were to be forced to retire. “Retiring Tutsis is not genocide”, says one Western diplomat. “But it is a sign.”

Worse, some politicians have used language that is strikingly reminiscent of the Rwandan genocide of 1994. Révérien Ndikuriyo, the president of the Senate, has talked on the radio about “spraying cockroaches” with bullets and “starting work”, a euphemism for killing used in Rwanda. Persistent rumours fly that the government is co-operating with groups linked to the Rwandan Hutu killers who fled into Congo after the genocide of 1994.

The most immediate problem is that people are beginning to starve. Insecurity has plunged the economy into a tailspin—GDP contracted by 7% in 2015, according to the IMF. People cannot move around because of the proliferation of police roadblocks and the chance of being arrested if caught in the wrong place. In the capital, people who fear arrest are also going hungry. In some neighbourhoods the price of rice has trebled. But the effect is creating problems in the countryside, too. The farmers near Ijenda, a village 45km from Bujumbura, used to sell vegetables to people on the road and use the proceeds to buy flour and fertiliser. But the customers have disappeared. “Look at these,” says a man, bringing over a box of peppers. “They are going to rot and no one will buy them.”



The economic crisis is likely to worsen. In March the European Union announced it would no longer give money directly to the Burundian government, because it refuses to take part in peace talks. It is also looking for a means to pay 6,000 Burundian soldiers fighting in Somalia directly, rather than through the government. Not all aid will be cut—some will be “reprogrammed” through the UN. But the share of the budget accounted for by aid is likely to fall from half in 2015 to less than a third this year. Whether the squeeze will do much to prevent the violence is difficult to say. For the moment, the government has redirected spending from social programmes to pay the army. Mr Nkurunziza shows little interest in talks. An evangelical Christian as well as a former rebel, he is said to believe he has a God-given right to rule. Perhaps fearing assassination, he rarely enters Bujumbura and seems to have bunkered down with a small group of cronies in the countryside.

Insofar as he has a strategy, it seems to be to crush opposition and wait for donors to tire of complaining. Sadly, it may work. The alternative idea to sanctions—an international intervention—has not got far. An African Union proposal in January to send 5,000 peacekeepers was vetoed by Mr Nkurunziza. A UN Security Council proposal to send several hundred peacekeepers has also been watered down after objections. But while the world prevaricates, the crisis gets worse. Across Lake Tanganyika, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, sporadic fighting that started after the Rwandan genocide in 1994 continues. This year, Joseph Kabila, Congo’s president, seems likely to try his own version of Mr Nkurunziza’s three-term gambit. The result could well be similar to what has happened in Burundi. And Congo is dramatically larger.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21697289-political-ethnic-and-economic-crises-stalk-rwandas-neighbour-sliding-towards/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

African hospitality

No room at the inn

Africa needs decent hotels, but building them is not easy

Apr 23rd 2016 | LAGOS | From the print edition

A view without many rooms

THOSE who have spent years travelling in Africa have learned to do so with good humour. A decade ago, when Angola’s economy was booming, one businessman remembers being forced to share his posh hotel room with a total stranger. More recently, another tells how the water dried up at his smart lodging in Lagos, Nigeria’s heaving commercial capital, leaving him to shower using soda from the minibar. A third recalls inquiring about gym facilities at a big-brand hotel in Ethiopia’s capital, Addis Ababa, only to have an ancient exercise bike dumped at his door.

Bills can be even scarier than the service. Low supply, high construction costs and power problems push charges at international hotels above $500 per night in certain cities. Even at those prices, the lights can go off.

Other than housing bigwigs, hotels create employment (more than two direct jobs for every room, one World Bank study reckoned) and support local industries. Africa badly needs more of them. Khaki-clad tourists have been washing up on its shores for generations, but with fewer wars breaking out their numbers are increasing. The UN’s World Tourism Organisation says that 56m holiday-goers visited the continent in 2014. Within 15 years, it predicts that figure will more than double. And although overall regional trade measures a tiddly 12% of the total, airlines now link east and west Africa, so more locals are travelling internally, too.

Hoteliers are trying to keep up. W Hospitality Group, a Lagos-based consultancy, counts 365 hotels in the African pipeline this year—an increase of almost 30% on the number planned or under construction in 2015. The Hilton is doubling its presence in Africa and AccorHotels, whose brands include Sofitel and Ibis, recently signed a deal to open 50 properties in Angola, which is currently negotiating an IMF bail-out. Nowadays only a handful of Africa’s poorest countries are without big-name hotels. International chains are investing in lower-cost brands, not just watering holes for the rich and famous. Local groups are moving over borders, helped by online booking sites which raise their profile. Azalaï, a Malian company, has bought a string of government-ownd hotels across west Africa. Kenya’s Serena Hotels has 35 destinations in the east and south.

Occupancy rates are reasonable—and so are profits. But getting a hotel up and running is not easy. There are few acquisition opportunities for existing hotels south of the Sahara, so most chains rely on local investors to work with them to build new ones. Often those are fat-cats or families who lack experience and underestimate the costs, which can stretch as high as $350,000 per room, according to Jones Lang LaSalle, a property group. Because profits are slow to materialise, getting finance is a perennial struggle. Starwood, which runs Sheraton and Westin hotels, reckons it takes twice as long to complete a development in Africa as in the Middle East. Andrei Tomilin, who invests in hotels for the International Finance Corporation, thinks that a “very small fraction” of the promised hotels will ever see a cocktail sipped by their pools. In Lagos’ smartest district, the hulking shell of what was supposed to be a Meridien hotel testifies to the trouble. Work on the huge project ground to a standstill last year after its owner defaulted on payments to his bankers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21697288-africa-needs-decent-hotels-building-them-not-easy-no-room-inn/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Egypt’s prickly president

Permission to speak, sir

Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi can’t handle his growing army of critics

Apr 23rd 2016 | CAIRO | From the print edition



THE table was round, suggesting there might be a discussion. But Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt’s president, had no intention of letting his guests speak. For nearly two hours on April 13th he defended his policies before a group of officials and journalists on state television. When he finally stopped, there was applause, then silence. One politician tried to ask a question, but Mr Sisi cut him off: “I did not give permission for anyone to speak.”

The president must dream of controlling the public in such a way—and oh, how he’s tried, cracking down on civil society and banning protests. But criticism of Mr Sisi has grown louder of late, culminating in a burst of outrage over his decision to cede two uninhabited islands in the Red Sea, called Sanafir and Tiran, to Saudi Arabia. As pressure has mounted, Mr Sisi has looked unsteady. The once-beloved former general appears shocked and angered by the public’s lack of obedience.

Take the islands, which Mr Sisi claims to be returning to their rightful owner. He is probably right: Saudi Arabia transferred them to Egypt in 1950 for fear that Israel might grab them. But few Egyptians know that. And their return, after months of secret talks, was announced while the Saudi king was in Cairo approving billions of dollars worth of investments in Egypt. So many saw it as a dodgy swap of land for cash, and therefore as an affront to Egyptian national pride.

The backlash seems to have surprised the president, whose supporters quickly scrambled to justify his actions. Did people not realise that Mr Sisi was their protector, the man who would “remove from the face of the earth” anyone who challenged the state, as he had earlier said?

All this patronising has not gone over well. On April 15th over 1,000 people gathered in downtown Cairo, in defiance of a ban on protests and in the face of the police. It was the largest demonstration since Mr Sisi took office nearly two years ago. While the islands provided the spark, the protesters aired pent-up grievances ranging from economic mismanagement to abuses by the security services. “I was protesting for too many reasons,” says Shady, a young protester. But the aim was clear: “The people demand the fall of the regime,” went one chant.

For now, though, Mr Sisi’s behaviour is more likely to result in ridicule than revolution. He has, for example, come up with unorthodox solutions to Egypt’s economic problems, such as suggesting that citizens text the government one Egyptian pound (about 11 cents) each day. The “remedy” for Egypt’s problems is simple, says Mr Sisi: “Don’t listen to anyone but me.” Some observers are drawing parallels with Anwar Sadat, the thin-skinned former president who tolerated the “loyal opposition”, while denouncing the “agitators, traitors and haters who deliberately distort Egypt’s image.” Mr Sisi has condemned “people of evil among us working on sabotaging our achievements by promoting lies”.

The institution that Mr Sisi trusts most is the army, from which he came. Since taking office, the president has given it control of large projects, such as the expansion of the Suez Canal, and enabled it to crowd out the private sector. He seems to expect the same loyalty from average Egyptians. “But we’re not soldiers,” says Khaled Dawoud, the spokesman for a coalition of opposition political parties.

Another big protest is planned for April 25th in Cairo. Egypt’s activists, long dormant, appear somewhat renewed. “The spark of the January 25th revolution is still there,” says Mr Dawoud, referring to the uprising that toppled Hosni Mubarak in 2011. “That is something that [Mr Sisi] needs to remember.” But the lesson learned by the president may be that any flicker of opposition must be swiftly snuffed out.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21697280-abdel-fattah-al-sisi-cant-handle-his-growing-army-critics-permission-speak/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Tech startups in Africa

Africa uber alles

The potential and pitfalls of African tech innovation

Apr 23rd 2016 | KIGALI | From the print edition



THE fastest, and cheapest, way to zip around the hilly capital of Rwanda is to catch one of the many motorcycle taxis, or motos, that attract custom by hooting at pedestrians as they drive along. Grab a ride on one and you can nip from one end of Kigali to the other for less than $1.

Yet catching a ride is a white-knuckle affair. Drivers seldom expect repeat custom so make no effort to be nice (which can be a welcome respite from over-chatty London cabbies). Most want to finish the journey quickly to look for their next fare. So many of them race about the city as if in a grand prix: they speed around blind corners, brake sharply at the very last minute and take off from traffic lights quickly enough almost to unseat an inattentive passenger.

The solution, according to two entrepreneurs, Peter Kariuki, a Kenyan, and Barrett Nash, a Canadian, is an Uber-style app that not only allows passengers to hail a ride, but also gives them some hope of surviving the journey. Their firm, SafeMotos, insists that taxi drivers own a smartphone, which contains accelerometers that can determine if drivers speed or brake too hard, among other things. The data they collect score the drivers on safety. Only safe ones get business.

Uber, the car-hailing app valued at $51 billion, and local startups have launched similar motorcycle-taxi services in various countries from Indonesia to Uganda, but SafeMotos is more than just a clone. Whereas in many other countries drivers are comfortable using digital maps on their phones, SafeMoto uses a simpler system: directing drivers via a series of well-known waypoints until they are close to the final destination.

Yet the experience of SafeMotos also underscores some of the difficulties of establishing tech startups in Africa. Its founders say that the main problem many face is a shortage of skilled coders. There is no real ecosystem of tech entrepreneurs who can bounce ideas around, or inspire bright young people to quit safe jobs in the civil service and start their own companies.

This is slowly changing. Technology hubs, where startups cluster in shared office space, in Nairobi, Cape Town and Lagos are producing promising companies and attracting international attention. Last year African tech firms raised $186m in funding, says Disrupt Africa, an analyst, and it has finally produced a “unicorn”, or tech company valued at more than $1 billion. Yet plagued by power shortages, expensive and unreliable internet connections, and ruinous bank rates, the continent has a way to go.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21697278-potential-and-pitfalls-african-tech-innovation-africa-uber-alles/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Syria

Drifting back to war

Both the partial ceasefire and peace talks are breaking down

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



HOW long is a piece of string? That is about as good a response as there can be to the question of when the “cessation of hostilities” in Syria, partial though it was, will be deemed to have broken down entirely. The fighting has abated to a surprising and welcome degree since the ceasefire came into force on February 27th. But violations are now on the increase, which suggests that a new crisis has begun.

Since the first week in April the Damascus-based regime of Bashar al-Assad has been bombing areas south of Aleppo. They have got away with this in part because the opposition there is dominated by Jabhat al-Nusra, al-Qaeda’s affiliate in Syria, one of the terrorist groups excluded from the ceasefire, along with Islamic State (IS). But recent air strikes have also hit civilian areas there and beyond. On April 19th bombings by Mr Assad’s forces killed 50 people in two towns in Idlib province, including one that is known for its resistance to extremist groups.

Opposition violence has risen too. On April 18th a group of rebels announced a new offensive in response, it said, to government attacks. That was followed by reports of rebel assaults in Latakia province, a regime stronghold. Rebel mortars and snipers killed at least 16 people in Aleppo over the weekend, according to the Syrian Observatory, a monitoring group.

Not surprisingly, this has put the kibosh on peace talks in Geneva, which got under way again only this month. The High Negotiations Committee (HNC), the body representing the non-jihadist Syrian opposition, said on April 18th that it was stepping away from the table over the rising violence and also because of the unacceptable proposals for a political solution in the country being discussed.

These ideas, dubbed “dumb” on Twitter by Robert Ford, a former American ambassador in Damascus, include putting in place three vice-presidents from the opposition to serve under President Assad. Like parliamentarians and other civilian officials, Syria’s deputy presidents have no power compared to that of the president and his security forces.

Indeed, the flaw in both the ceasefire and the political talks is that they duck the main problem: that it will be hard to find peace in Syria with Mr Assad still in charge. America and the UN have become willing to compromise on Mr Assad’s fate in order to concentrate on IS, despite ever more evidence of industrial-scale torture by the regime, including sodomy, burning using welding torches, and castration that is being documented by the Commission for International Justice and Accountability, an independent investigative body working on Syria.



An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts

Russia, which backs Mr Assad, and America, which nominally backs the opposition, are trying to put things back on track. Both say they will put pressure on the parties to abide by the ceasefire. Both want to see a broader deal, and now. Not only has the war dragged on for five ghastly years, but the American administration will soon change. American and Russia co-operation rests largely on the relationship between John Kerry, the current secretary of state, and his Russian counterpart, Sergey Lavrov.

Still, Russia is hardly helping. American officials told the Wall Street Journal that Russia is moving artillery units back to the north of Syria, where some Iranian forces have also returned, suggesting preparations to resume fighting.

The rebels are being squeezed not only by the regime, but also by IS, which is not party to the partial ceasefire. Despite setbacks, such as the loss of Palmyra, IS continues to capture some new territory. It has taken land north of Aleppo, close to the Turkish border, including camps for displaced Syrians. Médecins Sans Frontières, a medical charity, says 35,000 have fled and a total of 100,000 Syrians are trapped between the fighting and the Turkish border, which for months has been closed to all but a few. Peace is as vital as ever, but seems no easier to achieve.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21697157-both-partial-ceasefire-and-peace-talks-are-breaking-down-drifting-back-war/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Israeli politics

Curtains for Herzog?

The opposition leader looks doomed

Apr 23rd 2016 | JERUSALEM | From the print edition



AS IF things could not get any worse for the embattled leader of the Israeli opposition, Yitzhak “Bougie” Herzog, a year on from his general-election loss to Binyamin Netanyahu in March 2015, it has now emerged that he is under investigation for receiving illegal funding in his leadership campaign three years ago. Mr Herzog, who was questioned by police on April 17th, denies any knowledge of such payments.

But the investigation has put paid to secret talks he had been holding (through intermediaries) to join Mr Netanyahu’s coalition, and has led to calls for Mr Herzog’s suspension from parliament. A coalition position, most likely that of foreign minister, would have proved to be a lifeline for the leader of the Labour Party (the main component of Zionist Union, itself the largest opposition party). He is widely regarded even by his colleagues as incapable of mounting an effective campaign against the prime minister.

Recent polls, taken before the allegations against Mr Herzog were made public, show Zionist Union at risk of losing a third of its current seats in the Knesset to Yesh Atid, a centrist party headed by Yair Lapid, a popular former talk-show host. Mr Lapid is something of a political lightweight and not considered by many Israelis as a credible candidate for national leadership; but he has succeeded where Mr Herzog has failed in keeping up a constant barrage of criticism of the government.

Mr Herzog has succeeded in postponing scheduled leadership primaries which he is obliged to call as a result of his loss to Mr Netanyhu; but challengers are already preparing their campaigns. While rivals have yet to declare officially, they already include a number of prominent Labour parliamentarians such as two former party leaders, Amir Peretz and Shelly Yachimovich, as well as a venture-capitalist millionaire, Erel Margalit, and a former commander of the special forces, Omer Bar-Lev.

In the past 20 years Likud has had only two leaders, Ariel Sharon and Mr Netanyahu, both of whom managed to win elections. Labour has gone through seven in the same period, only one of whom, Ehud Barak, made it to prime minister. Not only has Labour failed to challenge Likud’s dominance of politics; it seems incapable at the moment of presenting a coherent alternative even to other centrist parties that are eating away at its constituency. All this is good news for Mr Netanyahu.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21697243-opposition-leader-looks-doomed-curtains-herzog/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




Reunifying Cyprus: You say raki, I say ouzo

Germany sours on Russia: Fool me once

Roundabouts: French revolution

Czech name change: Metamorphosis

German beer laws: Pure swill

Charlemagne: Quantum of silence





Articles Sections Next

Reunifying Cyprus

You say raki, I say ouzo

Greek and Turkish Cypriots, close to a deal, may yet call the whole thing off

Apr 23rd 2016 | KORMAKITIS AND NICOSIA | From the print edition



PERCHED on a hilltop a few miles from the sea, the Christian Maronite village of Kormakitis, in Turkish-controlled northern Cyprus, is running out of time. In 1974, when Turkish troops invaded the island following a Greek Cypriot coup, the town was home to some 2,000 people. Today about 110 pensioners remain. They spend their time at the café joking in the indigenous dialect, a blend of Arabic, Aramaic and Greek. Their children, who have moved to the richer Greek part of the island, visit on holidays. A Lebanese priest leads prayers at the newly restored church. Every fortnight a UN convoy arrives from Nicosia, the capital, carrying supplies.

“There is no work here, no school and no room for investment,” says Napoleon Terzis, who worked in the Greek south as an air-traffic controller before returning to retire. Without jobs, he says, the town, its language and its people, who moved here from Lebanon in the 12th century, all face extinction. Mr Terzis and his friends place their hope in a united Cyprus.

That prospect may be within reach. Since last year, Nicos Anastasiades, president of the Republic of Cyprus, and his counterpart, Mustafa Akinci, of the self-declared Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), have met at least 25 times to hammer out a deal. Both sound optimistic. “A solution is possible within months,” says Mr Akinci.

Analysts agree. The Eurasia Group, a consultancy, estimates the likelihood of a settlement at 60% by the end of 2016. A parliamentary vote in the south, scheduled for May, and a government crisis in the north may delay the talks, but will not scupper them.



Cypriots have been here before. In 2004, on the eve of the island’s accession to the European Union, a UN reunification plan was put to a referendum. Turkish Cypriots voted in favour. The Greek side voted against. Cyprus remained split, with the north recognised by only one country, Turkey. The difference now, says Espen Barth Eide, the UN envoy chairing the talks, is that both sides are on board. In 2004 the then Greek Cypriot president campaigned against reunification. “This time, the deal will be written by Cypriots,” Mr Eide says.

Officials on both sides say they have made headway in areas including power sharing, property and applying EU law in the north. But the biggest hurdles are ahead. One anxiety is the bill. Compensation for the 160,000 Greek and 40,000 Turkish Cypriots forced to abandon their homes in 1974 will cost billions of euros. “There’s no way the international community will offer that kind of money,” says Fiona Mullen, head of Sapienta Economics, a Nicosia-based consultancy. The south, still convalescing from a banking crisis and a €7.3 billion ($8.3 billion) bail-out, cannot take on much more debt.

But concerns about money are also driving the talks forward. A settlement could add almost 3 percentage points to the country’s annual growth rate over the next 20 years, says a report by the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO). For the south, reunification would mean access to the $800 billion Turkish market, as Turkey does not recognise the republic. For the north, it would be a chance to tap EU funds and revamp an economy that now subsists on tourism, casinos, strip clubs and a bloated public sector bankrolled by Ankara. Cypriots on both sides know that a deal might be their only chance to market the island’s plentiful offshore gas deposits.

Reminders of old grievances abound. Near a crossing on the southern side of the UN buffer zone, photos document the killing of a Greek Cypriot protester by Turkish ultranationalists. On the northern side, a sign bears the words “Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus—Forever”.

It will take more than a peace settlement to compel Greeks and Turks to live as neighbours again. “People cannot imagine going back to their old homes,” says Cevdet Ozguler, a Turkish Cypriot who fled his village in the south after the war. “They would rather stay where they are and seek compensation.” Even when unified, the island will remain a loose federation divided on ethnic lines.

For many Greek Cypriots, anything short of a complete withdrawal of the 40,000 Turkish troops stationed in the north would be a deal-breaker. That gives Turkey and its president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, a veto over the talks. Turkey has publicly backed a settlement. Buffeted by IS suicide bombings, a Kurdish insurgency, a row with Russia, and nearly 3m refugees, Mr Erdogan’s government might be glad to take at least one longstanding conflict off the table. It could also use the $1 billion it spends each year on the TRNC.

Yet Mr Anastasiades and Mr Akinci both say time is working against reunification. Young Cypriots, accustomed to life on a divided island, are drifting further apart. In Kormakitis, the sense of urgency may be even greater. Without a solution, the town’s children and grandchildren may never come back, frets Mr Terzis, as he drinks coffee beneath portraits of Lebanese politicians and Catholic popes. “We do not want to be the last generation.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21697230-greek-and-turkish-cypriots-close-deal-may-yet-call-whole-thing-you-say-raki-i-say/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Germany sours on Russia

Fool me once

Germany’s establishment once believed in conciliation with Russia. No longer

Apr 23rd 2016 | BERLIN | From the print edition



IN HER colourless suit, Angela Merkel looked like a grey mouse, too ashamed to face the German public after her cowardly decision to permit investigation into a comedian who had insulted the Turkish president. She is the epitome of hypocrisy and double standards. Her migration policy is an act of political suicide which has empowered Germany’s fascist right...and so on, and so forth. This was the sneering tone with which Russia’s state television channels portrayed Germany’s chancellor last week. No other post-communist German leader has come under such fire from the Russian propaganda machine.

Only a few years ago Russians saw Germany as one of their closest allies. Opinion polls show they increasingly see it as an enemy. In contrast to Gerhard Schröder, the former German chancellor who now lobbies for Mr Putin, Mrs Merkel has become a steadfast ideological opponent. She has taken a firm stand against Russian aggression in Ukraine, and the campaign of lies deployed to legitimise it. According to one of Mrs Merkel’s aides, Mr Putin’s mendacious denials that the “green men” who seized Crimea were Russian soldiers were a turning point for her. In turn, it is Mrs Merkel’s adherence to principle that makes her so alien to the Kremlin, which operates in a postmodernist world where truth and facts do not apply.

Mr Putin excels at exploiting other countries’ weaknesses. The Kremlin is now working hard to exacerbate the political damage done to Mrs Merkel by her policy of openness towards refugees. “Putin tries his best to topple Merkel, and he has a lot of instruments at his disposal,” says Stefan Meister, a Russia expert at DGAP, a think-tank in Berlin.

One of these instruments is television, aimed at both the domestic audience and native Russian speakers elsewhere, including 3m in Germany. In January Russia’s Channel One aired a story about a 13-year-old Russian-German girl allegedly gang-raped by a group of immigrants in Berlin. The report sparked large protests in Germany by ethnic Russian-Germans and anti-Muslim activists. German police soon learned that the story was false, but Russian television continued to report it. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, even accused Germany of a cover-up.

The flagrant deceit of the so-called “Lisa affair” shocked the German public. Russia had employed similar disinformation tactics in the war against Ukraine, but never in Germany. “The Russians went too far,” says Mr Meister. “They have largely lost the German establishment.”

“I used to see Russia as a strategic partner and competitor,” says Roderich Kiesewetter, an MP from Mrs Merkel’s Christian Democratic party (CDU). “Now it has become a potential enemy.” Even proponents of Ostpolitik, Germany’s traditionalpolicy of accommodation with Russia—mainly members of the centre-left Social Democratic Party (SPD), the junior partners in government—felt let down. Remaining Russia sympathisers such as Alexander Rahr, director of the German-Russian Forum in Berlin, are left appealing to his country’s deep-rooted fear of war. “The most important issue at the moment is not Ukraine, but preventing a third world war,” says Mr Rahr.

Russia once counted on business ties with Germany to secure the relationship. It miscalculated. Among Germany’s trade partners, Russia ranks below the Czech Republic. Before the EU’s Ukraine-related sanctions, Russia accounted for 4% of German trade; that has fallen to 2.4%. “Our overriding goal is to show that we will not accept violations of the post-war order,” says Markus Kerber, director of BDI, a business association.

The Kremlin has also tried courting the SPD to split Germany’s governing coalition. Sigmar Gabriel, the SPD leader, was received in Moscow by Mr Putin last autumn to agree on the construction of Nord Stream 2, a gas pipeline that would circumvent Ukraine and the Baltic states. The EU may block the deal; privately, Mrs Merkel “would be happy to see the project fold”, says one of her advisers.

More important is the roll-over of sanctions in July. Getting them removed would be a victory for Mr Putin and a defeat for Mrs Merkel. But Frank-Walter Steinmeier, the foreign minister and member of the SPD, has advocated more diplomatic co-operation with the Russians, arguing that without them “none of the major international conflicts can be solved” (eliding the point that Russia causes many of those conflicts in the first place).

Mr Putin cultivates links with parties on both the extreme right and the extreme left. One ally is the right-wing Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) party. Another is the ex-communist party, Die Linke. Many supporters of the xenophobic Pegida movement are also pro-Putin. At anti-immigrant rallies last year in Dresden, where Mr Putin was stationed as a KGB officer in the 1980s, demonstrators waved Russian flags and chanted “Help us, Putin.” Russian propaganda activities in Germany have prompted the BND, Germany’s security service, to launch an investigation.

Yet Mrs Merkel has come to see that Mr Putin’s antipathy to her stems from weakness rather than strength. In a storied encounter with the chancellor a decade ago, Mr Putin, aware of Mrs Merkel’s fear of dogs, brought his black Labrador into the room. Mrs Merkel froze; Mr Putin smirked. A fluent Russian-speaker brought up in East Germany, the chancellor understood Mr Putin’s language. “I understand why he has to do this—to prove he’s a man,” she told a group of reporters afterwards. “Russia has nothing, no successful politics or economy. All they have is this.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21697236-germanys-establishment-once-believed-conciliation-russia-no-longer-fool-me-once/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Roundabouts

French revolution

Invented in Britain, modern traffic circles invade France’s hexagon

Apr 23rd 2016 | CORMEILLE-EN-PARISIS | From the print edition

The rond-pointlessness of existence

A TRAFFIC intersection may not seem an obvious subject for metaphysical reflection. But in France, few aspects of life escape philosophical investigation. Now it is the turn of the roundabout, a humble road-junction improvement which is invading the French landscape and unsettling the order of things. Uncommon in France a generation ago, they number some 30,000 today—more than in Britain, which invented the modern version—and an estimated 500 more are built each year. According to a French radio programme, they are not merely a tool for traffic management and road safety, but “an example of when the absurd becomes banal.”

It was a French town planner and architect, Eugène Hénard, who in the early 1900s invented what is officially known as a carrefour giratoire (gyratory crossroad). New York built the first, Columbus Circle, in 1905. Two years later, Hénard installed his version in Paris, designed to circumnavigate the Arc de Triomphe from the star of avenues that lead to it, which were laid out by Baron Haussmann in the mid-19th century. To this day, this form of traffic circle obliges vehicles already circulating to give way to those approaching, in line with the French rule of giving priority to cars coming from the right. The modern roundabout, by contrast, pioneered by British traffic engineers, forces vehicles approaching from an access road to await a gap in circulating traffic.



Why have the French become such roundabout enthusiasts? The main reason is road safety. In America, for instance, which has a mere 4,800 roundabouts, a quarter of all road deaths take place at intersections. America’s Federal Highway Administration, which helpfully supplies a “roundabouts outreach and education toolbox” to overcome public distrust, says that they reduce deaths or serious injuries by around 80%, compared with stop signs or traffic lights (see chart).

France has other reasons for roundabout mania, too. The country prides itself on its public infrastructure: the National School of Bridges and Roads, founded in 1747, remains one of the more prestigious engineering schools. Another is the opportunity roundabouts afford to indulge the national obsession with municipal gardening. At Cormeille-en-Parisis, in the Paris suburbs, two brand-new roundabouts on near-empty roads are already neatly planted with tulips, spring blooms and whispery architectural grasses.

Indeed, roundabout decoration has turned some intersections into art statements for French mayors, who began spending heavily on such matters after gaining decentralised powers in the 1980s. (Local-authority spending has risen faster than any other public spending over the past decade.) The mayor of La Haye-Fouassière, in western France, says that his roundabout installation—a hovering spaceship—has singlehandedly made a name for the town. Roundabout kitsch has proliferated; another radio station last month ran a competition to select the nation’s ugliest. The top three included a giant mustard-yellow arm (Châtellerault), pictured above, and a colossal red sausage and doughnut (Montpellier).

Some venture deeper explanations. Motoring along French national roads, Michelin touring guide in hand, used to involve regular stops at traffic lights; now, constant movement prevails. “The roundabout has accompanied the development of the fluid society,” suggests Laurent Devisme, of the National Architecture School in Nantes. Like modern life, it requires “judgment, anticipation and commitment”. Kevin Beresford, founder of Britain’s Roundabout Appreciation Society, says the French may like the roundabout’s “zen-like” quality: calm, order and civility, in contrast to the authoritarian traffic light. Others still point to the roundabout’s sense of the absurd, ingrained in the French mind thanks to the final scene of Jacques Tati’s “Playtime”, a film made in 1967. His rond-point turns like a fairground carousel, and a metaphor for life: cars are set in perpetual circular motion, devoid of jams, but heading nowhere.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21697235-invented-britain-modern-traffic-circles-invade-frances-hexagon-french-revolution/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Czech name change

Metamorphosis

The Czech Republic awakens to find itself transformed into Czechia

Apr 23rd 2016 | PRAGUE | From the print edition



SOME countries change their names for ideological reasons (the Soviet Union), some as part of a break-up (Bangladesh) and some on a dictatorial whim (Myanmar). It is a bit of a relief that the Czech Republic wants to change its name—or rather, the way it is referred to in English—simply for stylistic reasons. On April 12th the country’s foreign minister, Lubomir Zaoralek, gently suggested that English-speakers should begin referring to it as Czechia.

The new moniker is backed by the cabinet and the president, Milos Zeman. Wiseacres noted that it might have been better to have made the decision earlier: the uniforms for the athletes competing in this summer’s Olympics are already emblazoned with the name Czech Republic.

The announcement caused some backlash and a fair bit of confusion. Czech leaders insist that the country’s full official name is not changing: they are merely requesting that the United Nations register Czechia as an official shortened name (like “Russia” for “the Russian Federation”). Mr Zaoralek says the shift is meant to prevent future “distortions and misspellings”. But the underlying argument is that Czechia is just a little more modish.

“It is short, and very similar to the name used in other languages,” says Lubos Motl, a physicist and longtime advocate of the change who, in addition to being a leading expert on string theory, claims to be the world’s foremost modern user of the name Czechia. Yet even Mr Motl admits he does not understand “why exactly this happened now”.



Czechia can be seen as a literal translation of Cesko, which entered into common use after the 1993 break-up of Czechoslovakia, though some historians argue it dates back as far as 1634. Mr Zeman has long advocated its use. Supporters say it is analogous to the shortened names used for other countries (France, after all, is officially “the French Republic”), and note that it is closer to the names used in most Romance and Germanic languages, as well as Hebrew. Even the New York Times used Czechia once, in 1925.

But Czechs seem less convinced. A 2013 survey by Mlada Fronta Dnes, the country’s leading daily, found 73% opposed to Czechia. The antipathy may reflect long-standing mixed feelings towards Cesko. Back in the 1920s, the writer Karel Capek said Cesko was “not musical”; for foreigners “it even sounds a little facetious.” Czechoslovakia’s first post-communist president, Vaclav Havel, said it evoked images of “crawling slugs”. More important, the word reminded him of the break-up of Czechoslovakia, which he opposed so strongly that he briefly resigned as president, returning as the first president of the Czech Republic.

During the break-up, as now, several names were suggested, but many came with baggage. Some Czechs would prefer a name referring to the country’s two main regions, Bohemia and Moravia. But that would bring up unpleasant memories of the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, the name by which German-occupied territory was known in the Nazi era.

It is not yet clear whether Czechia will be widely embraced. Karla Slechtova, the regional development minister, has suggested holding a referendum on the name. Adding to the confusion, the “Cz” spelling used in English comes from Polish, not Czech. It may have been adopted as a result of the influx of Jews from Poland to the anglophone world in the 19th century.

In short, while adopting Czechia in the English-speaking world would be an improvement, its spelling is essentially a mistake. But Mr Motl, who taught at Harvard University from 2004 to 2007, thinks that a small country may have to put up with a certain amount of ignorance on the part of foreigners: “I am used to the fact that people in America, for example, don’t know anything about us.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21697158-government-prefers-english-version-name-reminded-vaclav-havel-crawling/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

German beer laws

Pure swill

A half-millennium of regulated brewing leaves a hangover

Apr 23rd 2016 | BERLIN | From the print edition

No mere alcoholic malt drink

WITH films, exhibitions and a commemorative stamp, Germany is marking the 500th anniversary on April 23rd of an event considered central to the national identity. It is not Martin Luther’s nailing of his 95 theses to a church door in Wittenberg—that anniversary falls next year. Rather, it is the passing of a law concerning beer by two Bavarian dukes, Wilhelm IV and his brother Ludwig X. Henceforth, they decreed, brewers in Bavaria were to use only three ingredients: water, barley and hops. (They did not yet know about yeast, which occurs naturally in beer but was officially permitted as an additive only later.)

Subsequently dubbed the Reinheitsgebot, or “German beer purity law”, the regulation spread. Otto I, a Bavarian prince who became king of Greece in the 19th century, subjected his new country’s brewers to its stringent rules (becoming perhaps the first German to impose austerity on the Greeks). Other German regions adopted it after unification in 1871, and from 1906 the whole of Germany did. Today the Reinheitsgebot—which governs lagers but is more relaxed for top-fermented ales—is in effect a marketing tool for the country, a liquid extension of “Made in Germany”.

But the purity law was always an impostor. True, nasty things could be found in 16th-century swill, from traces of chalk and pitch to ox gall. But the primary purpose in 1516—as with many regulations today—was market-rigging and protectionism. By excluding wheat and rye in beer, the law aimed to keep grain prices low for bakers. It also kept out northern German and foreign beers that contained other ingredients. (That bit, at least, has been rectified: in 1987 the-then European Economic Community ruled that brews produced abroad and not compliant with the purity law may be sold as beer in Germany.)

The law’s real victim is variety. Germany makes some fantastic beers, of course. Connoisseurs such as Johannes Tippmann, a scholar of brewing at the Technical University of Munich, reckon that more than 3,500 different compliant beers are made today, and more than 1m variants could be made just by tweaking the mineral content in the water, the type of yeast and so forth.

But the prevailing view is that the purity law has stifled German beer innovation. Nimble craft breweries in California and makers of lambic beer in Belgium—fermented by exposure to local and wild yeasts and bacteria—have left the Germans in the foam. While foreigners can experiment with spices, fruits and much else, most of Germany’s 1,388 breweries must stick to their four traditional ingredients if they want to call their product “beer” (as opposed to, say, “alcoholic malt drink”).

That helps explain why Germans are increasingly turning to wine. At reunification in 1990, annual beer consumption per head was 148 litres. By last year it had fallen to 106. The Oktoberfest may still be the quintessential German party. But it’s not the beers that make it exciting.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21697256-half-millennium-regulated-brewing-leaves-hangover-pure-swill/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

Quantum of silence

Europe and Russia no longer know how to talk to each other. That is dangerous

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



AS ANY fan of action movies knows, the best way to keep a madman from executing a dastardly plan is to keep him talking. The distraction buys time to save the hostage or defuse the bomb. With luck, you might persuade the villain that violence is against his own interests. This, more or less, is the approach adopted by some European countries towards Russia. Vladimir Putin appears to have lost any interest he once had in a rapprochement with the West, and in the east of Ukraine the bullets still fly. But, the thinking runs, an isolated Russia could turn yet more unpredictable and dangerous. Better, surely, to talk.

The trouble is finding things to talk about. NATO suspended all co-operation with Russia after its annexation of Crimea and invasion of Ukraine. This week the NATO-Russia Council, a forum set up in 2002 to build mutual trust, met for the first time since June 2014 after prodding from the Germans and French, as well as Jens Stoltenberg, the alliance’s secretary-general. But with so much separating the two sides—over Ukraine, NATO’s plans to station more troops on its eastern flank, even the accession of tiny Montenegro—it was a predictably flat affair.

That is worrying enough. But military officials’ nerves were further jangled last week by incidents in the Baltic Sea: Russian warplanes buzzed an American destroyer and performed aerial acrobatics over a reconnaissance plane. John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, said the ship would have been within its rights to open fire. Last November Turkey, a NATO member, did just that to a Russian plane that had entered its airspace. A similar incident on NATO’s eastern flank, particularly if it involved American forces, would make Europe’s other crises look like child’s play.

To reduce the chance of a nasty accident, the European Leadership Network (ELN), a London think-tank, has been urging NATO and Russia to negotiate a memorandum of understanding on how to conduct themselves in emergencies. But that assumes a willing partner on the other side. Russia has shown little interest in Mr Stoltenberg’s plan to modernise the Vienna Document, an ageing agreement on military transparency and information exchange. The problem, says one senior Western official, is that Russia sees value in behaving unpredictably, perhaps in part to compensate for its disadvantage in conventional forces.

This is of a piece with Russia’s general diplomatic stance. Behind closed doors Russian diplomats are increasingly boorish, say their Western counterparts. They particularly enjoy the spectacle of the EU ripping itself apart, from the refugee crisis to the looming Brexit vote. Some Western military types are nostalgic for the later part of the cold war, when American and Soviet officials worked out mechanisms to avoid military accidents. Today such arrangements have largely vanished.

Where does that leave Europe? Its diplomats abhor a vacuum, and from time to time a proposal to “engage” Russia on this or that dossier, from cyberterrorism to climate change, wafts vaguely out of some European foreign ministry. Grand ideas, such as formalising the European Union’s relationship with the Eurasian Economic Union, a Kremlin-backed regional vanity project, have not yet died. But such schemes rarely amount to much.

That is partly because of splits among, and within, EU countries: according to one source this week’s talks were held largely to placate German Social Democrats in whom vestiges of the old Ostpolitik linger (see article). Russia’s military exploits in Ukraine and Syria have left Europe to wonder where it will point its guns next (perhaps Libya). Kremlin-backed media spew anti-Western vitriol. Russia disdains NATO and the EU, preferring to deal with the United States on military matters and Germany on most political ones.

And so Europe’s Russia policy has been whittled down to the periodic drama over renewing sanctions—the latest round expires in July—plus exercises to improve resilience at home. These include improving energy flows across the continent, countering Kremlin propaganda and helping weak non-EU states like Moldova. Despite the “sanctions fatigue” of Italy and a few other countries, the measures will probably be maintained at June’s summit of EU leaders: Mr Putin has supplied few reasons to relax them.

Russia’s insistent provocations also explain NATO’s plans to station around 5,000 more troops in the Baltic states, Poland, Bulgaria and Romania, a decision likely to be formalised at a summit in Warsaw in July. The alliance will get around the ban on “permanent” bases enshrined in the 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act by regularly rotating its troops. That should placate a sceptical Germany, but will hardly satisfy the Kremlin. Last week Alexander Grushko, Russia’s ambassador to NATO, told reporters that NATO’s actions contradicted the principles and logic of the act.

No country for bold men

Together this presents a puzzle, for any political attempts by Europe to lower the temperature with Russia will be cancelled out by the stepped-up troop presence. Mr Putin, the provoker-in-chief, will declare this a grave provocation. To Russian ears, NATO’s repeated insistence that its actions pose no threat sound like a textbook case of protesting too much. There may be more close calls in the run-up to the Warsaw summit, and more arms piled into Russia’s military exclave of Kaliningrad, nestled between Poland and Lithuania. That in turn will unnerve NATO’s eastern members further. Thus does the negative spiral continue.

It is the Russian president who faces the worse predicament. Russia’s creaking economy can no longer deliver the rising living standards that were once the basis of the compact between state and citizen, and the Kremlin’s adventurism abroad has a limited shelf life. In cheap action films the bad guy is taken out by force. In the better sort, he falls victim to his own hubris. The great risk, though, is that Europe and Russia find themselves in a film noir, where the villain’s plot fails but takes everyone down with it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21697239-europe-and-russia-no-longer-know-how-talk-each-other-dangerous-quantum-silence/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




America and Brexit: More special in Europe

Britain in Iraq: The beginning of the end

Queen Elizabeth at 90: Long to reign over us

Brexit brief: The ins and the outs

Scottish languages: To speak in tongues

Brexit and the young: Turning out the teens

Nuclear energy: Is smaller better?

Bagehot: B for Brexit





Articles Sections Next

America and Brexit

More special in Europe

As Britain’s EU referendum nears, Barack Obama joins the Remain campaign

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN people wheel out the old quotation by Dean Acheson to the effect that Britain had lost an empire and not yet found a role, the rest of his speech is often forgotten. Acheson, who was President Truman’s secretary of state, went on to say that Britain’s attempt to play the part of a world power aloof from Europe by leveraging its “special relationship” with America was almost “played out”. That was in 1962. More than 50 years later, those pushing for Britain to vote on June 23rd to leave the European Union are still in denial.

On April 22nd Barack Obama will be in London to tell people arguing for Brexit, as politely as he can, that they are mad, and that if Britain wants to retain much influence in the world, let alone a special relationship with America, it must stay in the EU. Jeremy Shapiro of the European Council on Foreign Relations, a think-tank, puts it starkly: “Britain can be a geopolitical actor within the EU or it can be a geopolitical irrelevance outside it.”

Mr Obama will not go that far, but last year he told the BBC that Britain’s place in the EU was a cornerstone of post-war peace and prosperity. He added: “We want to make sure that the United Kingdom continues to have that influence.” There is much at stake for America too if the British people choose not to listen.

For Mr Obama this is a farewell visit to an old ally and a chance to have lunch with the queen, who will just have celebrated her 90th birthday (see article). But he might have skipped it were it not for the looming referendum. Shocked by the near break-up of Britain in 2014 when the Scots came closer than expected to voting for independence—a triumphant Scottish Nationalist Party would have closed the nuclear-submarine base at Faslane, with worrying implications for NATO—Mr Obama has decided to speak his mind.

NATO and the EU (and its previous incarnations) have been the basis of America’s post-war engagement in Europe. The EU may be unexciting, with confusing institutions and rules, but seen from Washington, it has been a huge success.

In the first place it has helped to stop Europeans killing each other and thus reduced the need to send American armies across the Atlantic to fight. More recently, it provided both an example and magnet for the countries of the former Soviet empire. The EU’s important part in ending the cold war on Western terms, and its setting of democratic norms and values for aspirant members from the east, has been of incalculable benefit to America.

It is to Europe that America turns when something needs doing in the world that it either cannot or does not want to undertake alone. Its first port of call is still likely to be NATO. But it was the EU’s embargo on Iranian oil exports rather than American sanctions that brought Iran to the negotiating table and paved the way for the recent nuclear deal. It is EU sanctions on Russia that have substantially raised the costs of Moscow’s aggression in Ukraine. It is to the EU that America looks as a main partner in the fight against jihadist terrorism.

If the EU is a critical part of the West’s security architecture, it is even more fundamental for world trade. Should the negotiations between America and the EU to establish the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) succeed, it will be the biggest bilateral trade deal in history. The TTIP has its opponents on both sides of the Atlantic, but the gains are worth having. A study by the Centre for Economic Policy Research estimated possible benefits at up to €119bn ($134bn) a year for the EU and €95bn for America. A British government report suggested a gain for Britain of £100 billion ($144 billion) over ten years.

From the outside in

Without Britain’s free-trading tradition and voice in the EU it is unlikely that the TTIP would have got this far. Were Britain to leave, it could deal a mortal blow to the treaty. If it still went ahead, Britain would find itself looking forlornly in from the outside. “I imagine the White House is absolutely bewildered by the proposal to leave,” says Dana Allin of the International Institute for Strategic Studies, a think-tank.

All Britain’s allies and friends outside Europe are at least as flummoxed. The other Anglosphere countries (Canada, Australia and New Zealand) are horrified. It matters less to them, but the Indians and the Japanese, who are big investors in Britain, are quietly dismayed. India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, says he sees Britain as “our entry point into the EU”. Even China hopes Britain will stay in. Only Russia’s Vladimir Putin is cheering the Brexiteers.

Mr Obama’s concerns go beyond a Britain intent on self-harming. He fears the smouldering forces of nativism, populism and isolationism could be ignited across Europe by Brexit. The long euro-zone crisis has left raw scars, while the massive inflow of migrants from the war-torn Middle East is creating new divisions and anxieties.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

In Washington’s view, the last thing Europe needs is for Britain to give its foundations a further hefty kick. As David Miliband, a former British foreign secretary, put it: “Brexit would be an act of arson on the international order.” Brexit on its own might not be a catastrophe for America, says Mr Allin, “but it could be a stage in the unravelling of the Western liberal order.” No wonder Mr Obama is worried.

Leaders of the Leave campaign—including the mayor of London, Boris Johnson—have got their retaliation in first, calling Mr Obama’s anticipated pro-EU message “hypocritical” because America would never consent to pool its sovereignty as Britain must do in the EU. Mr Johnson, who hopes to become prime minister should Brexit win and David Cameron fall, appears not to have heard of NATO, which obliges America to go to war should any other member be attacked. On April 20th, when eight former American treasury secretaries described Britain’s departure from the EU as a “risky bet” that would jeopardise the City’s role as a global financial centre, their advice was derided as an attempt to belittle Britain’s place in the world.

How much a warning from Mr Obama will pierce voters’ consciousness is hard to gauge. He is more popular in Britain than he is at home, especially with the young. If Mr Obama talks frankly about the perilous future of Britain’s trading relationships, and the weakness of its negotiating hand should it stand alone, he may hit home.

As for the special relationship, Britain will continue to be an important security partner for America because it has the biggest defence budget in Europe and the most deployable armed forces. The unique intelligence relationship will also endure, although it will have less value to America if Britain is excluded from EU information-sharing arrangements.

But so much of the case for Brexit is built on the idea that a buccaneering Britain would forge wonderful new partnerships with powerful and dynamic countries outside Europe. When Britain’s oldest and closest partner says, sorry, you won’t be nearly so interesting to us in the future if you take this step, that idea crumbles.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21697251-britains-eu-referendum-nears-barack-obama-joins-remain-campaign-more-special-europe/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Britain in Iraq

The beginning of the end

The interminable Chilcot inquiry into the Iraq war is on its last lap

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

The dust begins to settle over Britain’s involvement in Iraq

ALMOST seven years after the announcement of the Iraq Inquiry by Gordon Brown, then prime minister, the completed report of the committee led by Sir John Chilcot was delivered into the hands of a team of Whitehall officials and spooks this week for national-security vetting. Mr Brown’s successor, David Cameron, hopes they will complete their checks on a document the size of 15 chunky novels within two weeks.

John Penrose, the Cabinet Office minister in charge of shepherding the report through to publication, reassured MPs on April 14th that nothing would be censored to save ministers or officials from embarrassment. Its long-awaited release is likely to be soon after, rather than before, the EU referendum on June 23rd.

Sir John and his committee have been the butt of much criticism, including from Mr Cameron himself, for the time they have taken to complete their work. They are accused of failing to respect the desire of families who lost loved ones to learn what happened and put it all behind them. That was never the purpose of the report. It was intended to provide a complete record of Britain’s involvement in Iraq from mid-2001 to 2009, two years after British forces ignominiously pulled out of Basra. It is hoped that future governments will be able to draw lessons from it.

One reason why the report has taken so long is the amount of material that had to be gathered and examined. To draw defensible conclusions and make recommendations that will be heeded, an inquiry has to show that it has left no stone unturned and has weighed the evidence objectively.

Another is the need for fairness. Inquiries of this kind are set up on the assumption that some people made mistakes or behaved badly. Those whose reputations may be damaged by its conclusions must be allowed to see and respond to the case against them. Some accuse individuals including Tony Blair, the prime minister who took Britain into Iraq, of using the process both as a delaying tactic and as a way to deflect or dilute criticism. Mr Blair strongly denies such charges. The responses of some others were worth the wait as they made a positive contribution to the report.

A third reason for the almost interminable wait is the need to negotiate with other governments, particularly America’s, before making public material they regard as sensitive or confidential, such as the undertakings made by Mr Blair to President George W. Bush in private conversations. Britain’s military and intelligence relationship with America, however awkward at times, remains the cornerstone of British security. An agreed path through this diplomatic minefield had to be found.

Sir John hopes that when people see the comprehensiveness of the inquiry they will understand the time it has taken. The reality is that it can only disappoint many of those who have been demanding its publication most stridently. They will be satisfied only when Britain’s role in the war has been officially declared illegal and Mr Blair is convicted as a war criminal. Neither is imminent.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21697250-interminable-chilcot-inquiry-iraq-war-its-last-lap-beginning-end/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Queen Elizabeth at 90

Long to reign over us

Familiarity with this long-serving monarch has not bred contempt

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



THE queen celebrated her 90th birthday on April 21st and notched up her 23,451st day on the throne. While other monarchs succumb to the Grim Reaper or the discreet charm of retirement, she remains a firm fixture on the list of the world’s most durable rulers. Only Thailand’s King Bhumibol Adulyadej has been calling shots for longer, and that is because he ascended the throne as a teenager (see chart).

The queen and her British subjects have had their fallings-out—most notably when many thought the queen insufficiently moved by the death of the “people’s princess”, her daughter-in-law Diana. These are now behind her. Polling by Ipsos-MORI this month shows that the older she gets, the less people want her to retire. Belief in the monarchy as an institution remains strong: 76% of respondents think Britain should continue with a king or queen as head of state, up from 65% in 2005. When the explicit alternative is an elected president, 86% think so.



The queen at 90: And a ranking of other crown-clutching monarchs

Outside Britain the queen is head of state in 15 countries. There the picture is more mixed. Australians like “Lizzie” better as she ages, it seems, and jolly visits from Princes William and Harry have no doubt helped. The desire for a republic down under has dropped from over two-thirds in 2010 to less than half. New Zealanders too are disinclined to replace their British sovereign. Polls show Canadians are cooler, especially towards the queen’s heir, Prince Charles.

It is in the West Indies that republicanism is brewing. On April 14th the governor-general of Jamaica announced that a constitutional amendment to make the island a republic was on the agenda. The prime minister of Barbados is thinking along the same lines as his country approaches the 50th anniversary of its independence from Britain in November. One thing seems clear: when the queen eventually slips off the list of long-serving royals, her successor will have fewer crowns to juggle.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21697258-familiarity-long-serving-monarch-has-not-bred-contempt-long-reign-over-us/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit brief

The ins and the outs

Britain has the best of both worlds

Apr 23rd 2016 | BRUSSELS | From the print edition



IT HAS been a busy week for Britain’s Treasury. On April 18th its study of the costs and benefits of European Union membership concluded that Brexit could reduce GDP after 15 years by as much as 6.2%. George Osborne, the chancellor, called Brexiteers who claimed there would be no costs in leaving “economically illiterate”. Yet his bigger concern over Britain and the EU is not economic: it is whether the euro zone might unfairly discriminate against non-euro countries like Britain.



Mr Osborne put this issue at the heart of the government’s effort to renegotiate its EU membership. Since November 2014 the 19-member euro zone has in itself constituted a “qualified majority” that can, in theory, take decisions without consulting the nine non-euro countries. Before then, in January 2014, Mr Osborne warned that, if non-euro countries felt their interests were not protected, they would “have to choose between joining the euro, which the UK will not do, or leaving the EU”.

At a Brussels summit in February, Mr Osborne’s boss, David Cameron, won several concessions. One was recognition that the EU has more than one currency. Next was an undertaking that the euro zone would not damage the wider 28-strong single market—although in return non-euro countries promised not to obstruct deeper euro-zone integration. He also secured the right to appeal to a full EU summit against euro-zone decisions that Britain disliked. And he won acceptance that, within broadly agreed boundaries, the British could apply their own detailed rule book when regulating financial services.

Mr Cameron hailed this deal as giving Britain the “best of both worlds”. It is in the single market but not the euro (and so liable for euro-zone bail-outs), just as it is in the EU but not the Schengen passport-free zone (with its refugee crisis). Many in Brussels reckon Britain frets too much about the euro zone ganging up on non-euro countries. The top official working for the euro group of finance ministers says that, far from forming a rapacious caucus eager to do down non-members, his political masters find it hard to agree on anything. One observer, Iain Begg of the London School of Economics, also argues that the British fear is more theoretical than real.

Yet the Treasury points to cases where British interests have been overlooked. The European Parliament imposed an EU-wide ban on excessive bankers’ bonuses. Several euro-zone countries are trying (so far unsuccessfully) to impose a financial-transactions tax. The European Central Bank sought to stop the clearing and settlement of euro transactions in London, though the British successfully challenged this in court. Last summer euro-zone ministers used an EU-wide rescue fund to help Greece despite promising not to (later they agreed to cover any losses by Britain and other non-euro countries).



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

So British concerns over euro-zone caucusing may not be wholly hypothetical. Many on the continent resent the dominance of London as Europe’s financial centre and would like to grab some of its business. They are also clear that they cannot allow Britain a veto over financial regulation, as they showed when they sidestepped an attempt in December 2011 by Mr Cameron to block a fiscal treaty unless he was given just such a veto. And they do not want to extend the “double majority” mechanism of the London-based European Banking Authority, whose decisions require the approval of majorities of both euro and non-euro countries.

Will Mr Cameron’s deal safeguard British interests? Only time can tell, but there are reasons for moderate optimism. One is that the EU will have many non-euro countries for years to come. The Poles, Swedes, Danes, Hungarians and Czechs seem in no hurry to adopt the single currency. A second is that, for all the talk in Brussels of another leap forward in euro-zone integration with a euro-zone finance minister, a common budget and mutually backed Eurobonds, there is as yet no agreement on any of it. The Germans remain hostile to anything that could be seen to turn the monetary union into a “transfer union”.

And third there are the February concessions, which will be written into the EU treaties. They should make it harder for the euro zone to dictate terms to non-euro countries, even if Britain feels increasingly uneasy as more join the euro. The paradox is that, although this may be the most important part of the renegotiation, it is the hardest to explain to voters—and so barely features in the referendum campaign.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21697253-britain-has-best-both-worlds-ins-and-outs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Scottish languages

To speak in tongues

Gaelic is making a comeback

Apr 23rd 2016 | INBHIR NIS AND DOOLISH | From the print edition



TRAVELLERS at the airport in Inverness navigate a revolving door adorned with posters urging them to teach their children Gaelic. “Being bilingual is magic! Bilingual children find it easier to learn a third language,” claims one which depicts a cherubic toddler waving a magic wand over a rabbit in a hat. “Give your child a flying start—learn Gaelic,” says another.

The posters are part of a larger effort in Scotland to preserve its Celtic language, which was disappearing at a precipitous rate until recently. In 1755 almost a quarter of Scotland’s people spoke Gaelic. A new education law in 1872 forbade the language in classrooms, and children caught speaking it got the belt. Another statute in 1918 required authorities to “make adequate provision for Gaelic,” but by 1981 only 1.6% of people in Scotland spoke it. Many of them were older folk or clustered in the Highlands and islands. Their slim ranks thinned by 21% in the ten years from 1981 and by 11% in the one after that.

Now, however, Gaelic is fighting back. The proportion of Scots who speak it barely dipped between 2001 and 2011, when the most recent census was finished. And more than before are under the age of 20.

Robert Dunbar, head of the Celtic-languages department at the University of Edinburgh, attributes the uptick to the spread of Gaelic education outside the Western Isles. In 2007 one school taught in Gaelic. Five now do—including one in Glasgow and another in Edinburgh—and the number of pupils has grown by a third. The government minister in charge of Scotland’s languages, Alasdair Allan, holds that the bigger budget for Gaelic education (up by £400,000 over the past eight years) is being driven by parental demand. “The government is struggling to keep up,” he says.

For Karen Campbell of Kilmaluag, a windswept village at the northern tip of the Isle of Skye, the decision to send her children to a Gaelic school was an easy one. “Gaelic was my own first language… I feel being able to read and write the language, as well as speak it, leaves children better placed to appreciate their own unique culture and, in turn, other cultures.” Parents who do not speak Gaelic may think a bilingual education will help their child learn other tongues, says Mr Dunbar.

Gaelic television is also stirring up interest. Founded in 2008, BBC Alba—a collaboration between the BBC and MG Alba, a Gaelic broadcasting company—reaches 700,000 viewers a week, eight times the number of people who are thought to understand Gaelic. All the programmes, which include Scottish rugby and football, traditional music and a popular drama series, are subtitled in English.

Both Mr Dunbar and Mr Allan deny that the recovery of Gaelic has anything to do with independence aspirations or tension between Scotland and its southern neighbour. Instead they attribute it to a growing appreciation for cultural and linguistic diversity in the age of globalisation—a trend that transcends Scotland’s borders. Manx, the Celtic language historically spoken on the Isle of Man, has also made a comeback after having been declared extinct by UNESCO in the 1990s.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21697255-gaelic-making-comeback-speak-tongues/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit and the young

Turning out the teens

Universities want students to vote in the EU referendum

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

Glastonbury or the EU referendum?

BEFORE the general election in May 2015, Warwick University had iPad-bearing volunteers running around campus registering students to vote. De Montfort University in Leicester got students to confirm their address when they logged on to the student portal to ensure that they received a polling card. Sheffield went even further: it integrated voter and start-of-term registration. They all had one goal: to get as many names as possible on the electoral roll.

It did not work. Turnout in 2015 among those aged 18 to 24 was just 43%, one percentage point less than in 2010. Over 66% of all registered voters showed up at the polls but not the young.

Their voice could well prove decisive in the referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union on June 23rd, but boosting students’ participation will be difficult. For one thing, they move frequently. Britons at university tend to live in short-term, rented accommodation, which makes it hard for the authorities to register them.

A change in the law in 2014 made the problem worse. Voters must now register individually, so neither parents nor a hall of residence can do the paperwork on students’ behalf. Although a student can enroll at two addresses, it is up to local councils to decide whether a person spends enough time in the area to qualify to vote there. Not all meet the test.

Another difficulty is the date of the referendum. It falls just after the end of term at most universities. And the local elections on May 5th add a confusing wrinkle. Students will sign up using their term-time address for May’s vote, but most will have to re-register after that using their out-of-term contact details to take part in June’s referendum. It is a considerable hassle.

Universities have every reason to seek a solution to the problem of low student turnout. They rely on the EU for both funding and students, and young people are the most pro-European of any age group. So the iPads are out again. Student- union officers encourage students to post selfies on social media when they register to vote. Mock referendums are organised on campus. Lectures include information on how to register and why.

It may not be enough. Even in the referendum in 2014 on Scottish independence, when overall turnout was 85%, just over half of 18- to 24-year-olds voted. If their peers are not keen on casting a ballot, says Ed Fieldhouse, a politics professor at Manchester University, students are unlikely to do so themselves. That may explain why some universities are encouraging foreign students to take an interest even though they are not eligible to participate. They would be advised to talk about postal votes too. Glastonbury Festival, a huge music event that is popular among the young, kicks off on June 22nd.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21697249-universities-want-students-vote-eu-referendum-turning-out-teens/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Nuclear energy

Is smaller better?

Small reactors are promoted as a way to save the nuclear industry

Apr 23rd 2016 | SHEFFIELD | From the print edition

Coming soon to a field near you

THE horizontal boring machine at the nuclear Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre (AMRC) in Sheffield cuts large steel components with microscopic precision. Judging by the build-up of swarf around it, the machine is much in demand; some of the world’s biggest engineering firms are using it to help design what some say is the next big thing in civil nuclear power—Small Modular Reactors, or SMRs.

Such reactors are often billed as one solution for a nuclear industry bedevilled by massive cost overruns and technical snafus. The spiralling cost of the proposed Hinkley Point C power station in Somerset is a case in point; Électricité de France (EDF), the main contractor, has been hesitating over whether to press on with the controversial £18 billion ($25.9 billion) project. SMRs are mini-reactors that can produce anything from about 50 to 400 megawatts of electricity, much less than the gigawatt or so that most existing big reactors can put out, or the two 1,600MW reactors planned for Hinkley Point. Their backers argue that SMRs make more sense.

First, small reactors can be built by the dozen in a factory, proponents argue, and then transported to sites and plugged in. This means economies of volume rather than of scale. SMRs should also produce revenues more quickly than big reactors. Around eight SMRs in the same place would be needed to produce the equivalent power of, for example, Hinkley. But whereas the first SMR on site could be lighting up the country within three to five years of being ordered, thus beginning to pay for itself and the SMRs to come, conventional big reactors can take ten years or more to plug in and start making money.

SMRs have other advantages too, their fans allege. Rolls-Royce is designing a 220MW SMR that, at 16 metres in height and four metres in diameter, could be transported by truck, train or barge. They are supposed to use much less water for cooling than conventional reactors, so they need not be located by the sea or large rivers. Easier to power up, they could respond more flexibly to peaks in demand than many of their larger counterparts.

Britain’s government is in theory enthusiastic: it needs a nuclear option to meet stringent emissions targets and replace ageing plants. The National Nuclear Laboratory estimates that SMRs could provide 7GW of power, equivalent to a bit over two Hinkleys. In 2015 the government promised £250m for nuclear research, part of it to finance a competition for the best SMR design. Rolls-Royce, which makes nuclear reactors for submarines, is submitting what is likely to be the only domestic proposal. Foreign companies such as NuScale and Westinghouse of America may also bid.

This official commitment sounds encouraging, but for many in the industry it is too little and perhaps also too late. To develop and test a prototype SMR, according to Mike Tynan, the head of the nuclear AMRC, could cost up to £2 billion. The licensing process alone, to ensure that this new technology is safe, would cost millions and take five years or so. Its probable share of the British market is too small to cover such sums and sustain a profitable domestic manufacturing operation, argues David Orr, head of developing SMRs at Rolls-Royce. Britain may be too far behind the field to pick up much foreign business.

While Britain has dithered, the American government has spent hundreds of millions of dollars encouraging and commissioning prototype designs. NuScale’s design, backed by $217m from the American Department of Energy, could begin its licensing process this year. NuScale also has a prospective customer for an SMR, a municipal utility in Idaho. China, South Korea and other countries have a lead on Britain too. Mr Tynan argues that if the British government decided quickly to bear more of the risks in developing SMRs, the country could still exploit its nuclear know-how to compete in a global market that may be worth up to £400 billion.

Not everyone believes that SMRs are the nuclear industry’s silver bullet, however. Some of the challenges that face big reactors—in particular, safety—confront smaller ones too. There is a reason why, historically, reactors have grown bigger and bigger: similar solutions to similar problems can be exploited more efficiently. SMRs have the edge when they can be placed in locations where big reactors cannot. But Britons are not famous for welcoming unwanted developments into their green and pleasant neighbourhoods.

The government may have been slow to see the potential of SMRs. More importantly, successive generations in government have been slow to pick a design for big reactors and stick to it. If there is to be a nuclear future for British industry, this is the nettle that politicians must grasp.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21697254-small-reactors-are-promoted-way-save-nuclear-industry-smaller-better/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

B for Brexit

For diehard Eurosceptics, the Leave campaign is a national liberation movement

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS a bright cold day in April and the clocks are striking 13 (the 12-hour clock having gone the way of the pound and the ounce, the mile and the inch). Britain is no longer a democracy, nor an independent country. Rule the waves? It does not even rule its own borders. For that strength which in old days moved earth and heaven is now a beleaguered outpost of someone else’s empire. Such remnants of the old glories as remain—the army, or British nationality—are one stroke of a colonial administrator’s pen away from extinction. Farms and factories lie devastated by vindictive diktats channelling wealth to the imperial centre. And Britain’s ministers, legislators and judges? They are but puppets answerable only to a distant capital. Along with the media elites, the education system and the spies, they blind the people to their country’s quiet abolition.

Still, a revolution is coming. Foolish David Cameron, Britain’s Potemkin prime minister, has been forced to put his country’s subjugation to a vote for the sake of appearances. Of course, he and his masters in Brussels plan to fix it: the state, the newspapers and the broadcasters flood every home with propaganda dictated by the security services at shadowy meetings in London hotels. Foreign leaders and tycoons close to the regime are trying to frighten voters into backing the status quo.

But in small towns and villages far from journalists—who are paid not to be interested in what real people think—the resisters are gathering. Mr Cameron’s establishment may have the power and the money, but the rebels have boots on the ground and the truth on their side. On June 23rd they will deliver the biggest upset in Britain’s political history. Ordinary Britons, at last conscious of their shackles, will cast them off and in doing so inspire other peoples under the European jackboot—the mighty Danes, the noble French—to begin their own revolts. June 24th will be Independence Day: the beginning of the end for an empire that, like those of Caesar, Napoleon and Hitler, is doomed to fall.

Enough. Bagehot may have applied some creative licence in the paragraphs above, but he was astonished to encounter every single one of the arguments therein at a recent pro-Brexit meeting in Hampshire. The setting was genteel: South Wonston, a cosy cluster of houses and farms north of Winchester, on a crisp April afternoon. The arguments advanced in the packed village hall were anything but genteel. From the platform Ray Finch, an MEP of the UK Independence Party (UKIP), and Rupert Matthews, a former Conservative candidate for the European Parliament, presented a chillingly dark, dystopian vision of Britain as an EU member. If anything they were restrained: Mr Matthews once claimed that the European Commission would send German tanks to London in the event of popular unrest. All but two members of the audience cheered them on.

The two were a Frenchwoman and her British husband. She contested the notion that her compatriots were clamouring to leave the EU, he the claim that European defence collaboration was necessarily contrary to British interests. From the mostly rural, aged and thus (in line with demographic trends) pro-Brexit crowd, the response was baffled tutting. From the speakers it was sheer pity at the couple’s ignorance. “British troops will be subsumed into an EU army,” counselled Mr Finch, sympathetically. “Do you want British servicemen to be sent to die on the casting vote of Latvia?” inquired Mr Matthews.

This is an aspect of the anti-EU campaign that some of its more enlightened lieutenants would rather bury. The referendum will not be decided by die-hards like those in South Wonston but by the voters (almost a third of the total, according to some projections) who have not made up their minds and do not feel strongly either way. The designation on April 13th of Vote Leave, rather than the more right-wing Leave.eu, as the official pro-Brexit outfit ensured that the campaign’s focus would be on transactional factors like wages, unemployment and national security rather than wide-eyed talk of national liberation.

Yet that talk matters. Contrary to what the businesslike pronouncements of Vote Leave might suggest, for swathes of the Leave camp—exemplified by the burghers of South Wonston and by Nigel Farage, the UKIP leader—the upcoming referendum is about more than the best economic and geopolitical posture for Britain’s future. It is about making the country democratic again, about freeing it from foreign tyranny. If, as is likely, Britons vote to stay in the EU, this contingent knows whom to blame: meddling ministers, nefarious MI5 officers, corrupt journalists and, among the electorate, those “youngsters” who “don’t know how to make grown-up decisions”. Mr Finch even claimed confidently that the Out campaign is trying to keep the referendum date off websites heavily used by young Britons, in order to reduce their turnout.

Vive la résistance!

In other words, this part of the Brexit campaign does not intend to take “Remain” for an answer. Mr Matthews admitted as much: “If it is close we will keep fighting; if [the margin] is ten points we will push for a referendum at the next treaty change.” Only if the Remain side wins by 20 points or more (which is unlikely) will the Brexiteers give up, he predicted. At which Mr Finch chided his comrade-in-arms for being too polite.

For all the nonsense that the two men spoke, this part struck Bagehot as accurate. Because as defeatist, paranoid and neuralgic as the hard-line Brexiteers are, their resolve seems strong and sincere. They have their excuses at the ready in the event of a Remain win. They will fight on, perhaps as part of a swollen UKIP, perhaps within a newly Eurosceptic Conservative Party, or perhaps as some new political force outside the existing party landscape altogether. Britain’s referendum throws many political realities up in the air. But one thing is for sure: whatever the outcome the Brexiteers will still be with us.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21697259-diehard-eurosceptics-leave-campaign-national-liberation-movement-b-brexit/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




Counterfeiting and piracy: Stamping it out

Counterfeiting and piracy: Internships





Articles Sections Next

Counterfeiting and piracy

Stamping it out

As China grew richer and more innovative, people assumed it would counterfeit less. Think again

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



IF YOU have bought Ferragamo shoes recently, fancy footwear was not all that came in the box. Inserted in the left shoe’s sole is a passive radio-frequency identification (RFID) tag. A transmitter-receiver known as an interrogator can send a signal to the tag and read its response. Only genuine Ferragamo shoes send back the correct one. The RFIDs are the Italian shoemaker’s latest weapon in its campaign to protect its brand from fakes. Last year alone, the company says, it took down tens of thousands of ads for fakes bearing its label from online auction sites, and recovered or revoked 140 domain names and websites which, it argued, infringed its copyright, most of them belonging to Chinese people or firms.

It has long been known that counterfeiting and piracy (respectively the infringement of trademarks and copyright, together known as intellectual property, or IP) make up a vast global business. But a report published on April 18th by the OECD suggests that, despite the advent of such high-tech counter-measures, it is far bigger than previously thought. The last such survey by the club of 34 mostly rich countries was in 2008. Updated the next year with data from 2007, it put the value of cross-border trade in fakes at $250 billion, or 1.8% of the total for all goods. The latest report estimates that by 2013 those figures had risen to $461 billion, and 2.5%.

Some increase was predictable: global trade has recovered since the financial crisis, and it is natural that illicit commerce should, too. But, says Piotr Stryszowski, the report’s lead author, he had not expected the rise in percentage terms to be so high. In part, it could be thanks to better data. Mr Stryszowski likens the difference in quality between today’s figures and those on hand in 2007 to that “between a communist-era Polish Fiat and a Lamborghini”. But he thinks the rise is real, nonetheless. Branded, knowledge-based products make up an increasing share of the global economy. And the rise of e-commerce has made selling and transporting fakes much easier: almost two-thirds of seizures nowadays are of postal shipments, mostly of goods bought online.

The sincerest form of flattery

Counterfeiting and piracy cover an immense gamut: from synthetic cinnamon to fake Louis Vuitton luggage to copies of the world’s most elaborately programmed computer software. Some manufacturers and distributors are out-and-out hoodlums: investigations in America, Canada and Sweden have linked biker gangs to counterfeit medicines, notably drugs used to treat erectile dysfunction. Others are guileful entrepreneurs who would doubtless shrink from other areas of organised crime. A Chinese woman accused of selling bogus branded luxury goods worth millions of dollars was found last year to be living in a quiet Californian suburb, studying for a university degree.

Measured by the number of customs seizures, footwear was the most-affected industry in each of the three years studied by the OECD, from 2011 to 2013. Other popular items to rip off included clothing, electrical equipment, leather goods and watches. The country that suffers most from trademark infringement is, of course, America. Next is Italy, a country long notorious for making sham products, but which is also home to many of the world’s most envied brands.

Globalisation has enabled traffickers to run rings round officialdom, says Candice Li, vice-president of the International Anti-Counterfeiting Coalition (IACC), a lobby group. “There isn’t an international legal or enforcement framework with which to confront the problem,” she says. Counterfeiters can make parts in one country, assemble a product in a second and package it in a third—without stepping outside the law in any of them.

Even when laws are broken, the risks are slight. “Nobody is sitting in jail for taking fake shampoo or bouillon cubes across international borders,” says Hans Schwab, the founder of Illicit Trade Monitor, a website. “[Drug] cartels in South America are starting to move towards the counterfeiting of consumer products because it is more lucrative, and there is no need for bribes or fast boats or planes.”

Establishing the origins of internationally traded counterfeit or pirated goods is not easy. Distributors go to great lengths to zig-zag around the world. A consignment of counterfeit versions of Avastin, a cancer drug, found in America in 2012 had travelled through Turkey, Switzerland, Denmark and Britain. Free-trade zones are particularly favoured as transit points—as are poorly governed or war-torn countries. Afghanistan, Syria and Yemen are all leading countries of provenance.

Even so, the data from seizures support Mr Stryszowski’s conclusion that “China is the super-producer in almost every sector”. Including Hong Kong, it was the origin in 84% of cases (see chart). For comparison, in 2013 its share of global manufactured exports was only 17%. Another report released this month, by the American customs bureau, also named China as the primary source, saying it accounted for more than half of the $1.35 billion-worth of fake products the bureau had seized in the most recent tax year.





Occasionally, Chinese customers fall victim to foreign fraudsters: Chinese wine collectors were prime targets for the most famous producer of bogus rare and fine wines, Rudy Kurniawan. An Indonesian living in Los Angeles, Mr Kurniawan mixed his brew in his kitchen sink and printed fake versions of the labels of winemakers such as Château Pétrus on his computer. He is appealing against a ten-year sentence for fraud and one other offence.

When China joined the World Trade Organisation nearly 15 years ago, hopes were high that it would crack down on IP violation—especially as its economy developed and more Chinese firms and artists had valuable trademarks, patents and copyrights to protect. Surely, the argument went, Chinese enforcement would improve when Chinese firms were being ripped off as well as Hollywood film studios and Italian fashion houses?

And indeed Chinese entrepreneurs are gradually becoming victims as their brands acquire lustre. But the seizure of fakes masquerading as Chinese brands still accounts for barely 1% of the global total. And strolling the streets and market stalls of Beijing, where pirated DVDs and bogus Rolexes abound, it is clear that Chinese consumers are themselves often duped into buying fakes (or, like consumers elsewhere, knowingly buy good imitations because they are cheaper). In just the latest scandal, China’s food regulator said earlier this month that a rogue factory had produced 17,000 tins of counterfeit brand-name infant milk powder and distributed them nationwide.

Visiting America this month Zhang Xiangchen, China’s deputy international-trade representative, said that the very concept of intellectual-property rights was relatively new to China and—an understatement—there remained “a lot of room for improvement”. In fact there has been some progress. Surveys find that foreign firms in China continue to name IP violations as one of the top constraints on their operations. But many respondents also say that enforcement has improved in recent years.

According to legal experts, China’s supreme court and senior prosecutors are taking the issue more seriously, and have streamlined procedures for accepting cases, including those brought by foreign firms. Police sometimes make a great show of burning, crushing or steamrollering seized counterfeit goods. Wang Yang, a deputy prime minister, said last month that tackling piracy was essential if China is to become an innovation-driven economy. He promised a crackdown on fake agricultural equipment and pirated software, and greater scrutiny of exports.



Holders of intellectual-property rights argue that fakery discourages innovation, diddles the taxman and funds terrorism (though hard evidence of links between terrorists and counterfeiters is elusive). But many in the developing world see strict IP laws as a way of keeping poor countries down. The argument gets especially heated when it comes to pharmaceuticals. Governments in poor countries, and NGOs, argue that the poor cannot afford costly Western patented drugs and should be allowed to buy cheap copies even before the patents expire. An attempt in 2006 to frame a global approach to counterfeit medicines foundered on resistance from India and Brazil.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has since limited the definition of counterfeit drugs to those “deliberately and fraudulently mislabelled”, rather than those competently made without the consent of the inventor. Pills that are bogus by the WHO’s definition are often useless or dangerous. Most contain the wrong ingredients, incorrect quantities of the right ingredients or, in about a third of cases, none of the listed active ingredients at all. In 1995 bogus meningitis vaccines led to the deaths of more than 2,500 people in Niger.

Not only medicines, but other fakes, such as vehicle brake parts and pesticides, can be lethal. Falsely branding merchandise is theft. It erodes the brand-owner’s profits or, if the goods are poorly made, its reputation. However, fakes can also build brand awareness. As people in emerging markets grow richer, more of them will doubtless upgrade to the real thing. For software, in particular, fake copies are as good as real ones at building brand loyalty, squeezing out the competition and creating a de facto standard. That may help explain why firms have been slow to exploit new technologies that could allow consumers to differentiate between genuine products and rip-offs with a click of their smartphones.

Damming the source

The most important recent development in the war on fakes has come from a different direction. On April 13th Alibaba, China’s biggest online retailer and, until now, the marketplace of choice for many Chinese producers of counterfeits, joined the IACC. Two years earlier Jack Ma, the firm’s founder and boss, had called counterfeit goods a “cancer” and vowed to fight them. The new partnership—the first between the anti-counterfeiting group and an online retailer—suggests he is serious.

But powerful opposing forces are still at work. For Chinese local-government officials, who are responsible for providing health care, pensions, housing and so on, enforcing intellectual-property laws is hardly a priority. And because they are evaluated almost exclusively by their economic performance, it is easy to see why many tolerate a factory that employs workers and pays tax—even if it steals other people’s intellectual property.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21697218-china-grew-richer-and-more-innovative-people-assumed-it-would-counterfeit-less-think/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Internships

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

Internships: The Economist is seeking two summer interns, one to write about foreign affairs and one to work on our newsdesk. The pay is £2,000 per month. Anyone is welcome to apply. For both positions we are looking for originality, wit, crisp writing and clarity of thought. Please see www.economist.com/foreignintern and www.economist.com/newsintern respectively for details of how to apply.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21697219-internships/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Europe v Google: Android attack

Pemex: Turning the tanker

Theranos: Blood sports

Cigarettes: Smoke signals

India’s most colourful tycoon: Hangover

Picking the boss: The outside track

Business in Iran: The over-promised land

Schumpeter: Pay dirt





Articles Sections Next

Europe v Google

Android attack

The European Commission is going after Google again—this time with a better chance of success

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



IN 2001—aeons ago in internet time—the European Commission sent a sternly worded missive to Microsoft. It accused the software maker of having illegally extended its dominance in operating systems for personal computers (PCs) into adjacent markets, for instance by tying Windows to programs that play music and videos. The legal action lasted more than a decade and took many turns, but Microsoft eventually had to unbundle its Windows monopoly from other software, in particular by giving consumers the choice of which web browser they want to use.



On April 20th the commission presented Google, one of the brightest stars in the modern tech firmament, with a similar “statement of objections”, as the charge sheet in European Union (EU) antitrust cases is called. Google, it argues, has followed a strategy to “preserve and strengthen its dominance in internet search” by tying this service and some of its popular apps to Android, its mobile operating system, which powers around 80% of all new smartphones (see chart). As in the Microsoft case, Google may ultimately be forced to unbundle its package of software and services.

This is not the only bit of Google’s business that is facing antitrust scrutiny. Last year the commission accused it of having harmed consumers by using its dominance in the internet-search market to steer them away from rival offerings and towards its own comparison-shopping service. Also in the pipeline are probes into Google’s behaviour in other online services, digital advertising and Google’s use of content from other sites (for things like Google News). On April 18th News Corp, a media giant, filed a second complaint against such “scraping”, alleging that this keeps consumers from visiting its sites and strengthens Google’s search dominance.

But the Android case stands out. It is particularly timely: the action in the tech industry has long moved from PCs and online search to mobile computing and apps. It is more of a threat to Google: Android is a key part of the firm’s money-making machine. And the case is more straightforward from the trustbusters’ point of view. In terms of remedies, Google wouldn’t have to rewrite its software, but simply change its conduct. It is also harder to accuse the commission of once again picking on American tech firms, since the Federal Trade Commission in Washington, DC is also looking into the matter.

On the face of it, putting Android at the centre of an antitrust case seems silly. It faces competition from iOS, Apple’s mobile operating system. It is also “open-source”, meaning any hardware-maker can adapt the program as needed and install it on its devices for nothing. Yet since Apple doesn’t license its software to other smartphone and tablet brands, they are stuck with Android. And to be able to offer commercially viable products, it helps to pre-install some of Google’s popular apps, particularly Google Play, which is the dominant app store for Android.

The problem is that these add-ons are not open source and come with strict licensing rules. The commission focuses on three of these: handset-makers that wish to pre-install Google Play must, among other apps, also add Google Search and make it the device’s default search service; if they want to share in Google’s ad revenues they have to exclusively pre-install Google Search; and if they pre-install Google’s apps on any of their models, they must commit to install only Google’s standard version of Android on each and every one of their models.

The case hinges on whether such restrictions are deemed legitimate. It is easy to see why Google would want to promote its search and other apps. They are a vehicle for advertising, help the company to make money from Android, in which it has invested billions, and let it collect all sorts of data about users. The licensing terms, the firm argues, also serve to keep Android from fragmenting into incompatible versions and “make sure that people get a great ‘out of the box’ experience with useful apps right there on the home screen”, in the words of Hiroshi Lockheimer, who is in charge of Android at Google.

The commission begs to differ. The licensing conditions, it argues, limit the freedom of manufacturers to choose the apps they want to pre-install, and make it hard for rivals to compete on their merits. This stifles competition and harms consumers, especially by limiting innovation, according to Margrethe Vestager, the EU’s competition commissioner. “A strong incentive for innovators is that they can present their product to consumers,” she said this week. “If that isn’t possible, why bother?”

The case won’t be decided soon, unless Google opts to settle, which seems unlikely. The firm has 12 weeks to respond, after which Brussels could take several months to come up with a final ruling and a remedy (it still has to issue a decision in the search case, which is now expected to come before the summer break). This ruling can be appealed to the European Court of Justice, meaning that a final decision may be years away. If Google loses, it would presumably have to drop the licensing restrictions. It might also have to pay a fine, although it is unlikely to be anywhere near the theoretical limit of $7.4 billion, 10% of the firm’s 2015 revenue.

Google has a point when it says that it needs to keep Android from fragmenting. If that happened, life would get a lot more complicated not only for app developers, but smartphone users. And it would become harder for Android to compete with iOS. But it is difficult to see, for instance, why Google Search needs to be the default search service. What harm would be done, other than to Google, if Android phones came with Microsoft’s Bing as the default for search? China shows that competition is livelier without such licensing conditions: because Google Play is not available there, most handsets are powered by modified versions of Android and come with different app combinations.

Antitrust sceptics see the Android case as yet more proof that such legal action is just not worth it in the fast-moving tech world. Even if a decision comes soon, it will take time for a remedy to change things on smartphone screens. And by then the market for mobile software may have changed completely: instant messaging apps are growing into application platforms of their own and text-based services called “chatbots” are poised to become an alternative to apps. But it is easy to forget that although in the Microsoft case, too, the remedy came late and was of limited relevance, being under antitrust scrutiny forced the company to offer competitors more room. One of the main beneficiaries was none other than Google.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21697193-european-commission-going-after-google-againthis-time-better-chance/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Pemex

Turning the tanker

A daunting challenge faces the new boss of Mexico’s oil giant

Apr 23rd 2016 | MEXICO CITY | From the print edition



THE radio in the office of José Antonio González is tuned to one of the American classical-music stations that he loves. The sounds may be relaxing, but the firm Mr González has led since February—Pemex, Mexico’s state-owned oil company—is in crisis. On April 13th the Mexican government was forced to respond to the firm’s troubled finances with a 73.5 billion peso ($4.2 billion) aid package and a 50 billion peso tax cut. This week Mr González headed to New York to soothe the fears of banks and rating agencies.

They will take some persuading. Pemex’s crude production fell last year to 2.3m barrels a day, down from a peak of 3.4m in 2004. Next year, says the finance ministry, that will probably fall to 2m—“a disaster”, says Adrián Lajous, a former Pemex chief. After taxes and royalties the company made a loss of 522 billion pesos last year. In March Moody’s cut Pemex’s credit rating by two notches to its lowest investment grade. More bad news followed on April 20th when several workers died in a blast at a Pemex facility.

Preparing for wrenching change

A low oil price hurts, of course. But Pemex is also suffering because of years of inadequate investment, unproductive working procedures, over-generous pension promises (pension liabilities at the end of the year stood at 1.3 trillion pesos). A lack of specialisation and massive tax bills have added to the woes. Grim as that sounds, a strong leader, ready to make waves, could turn things around. Mexico’s recent energy reform and the appointment of Mr González give Pemex a faint glimmer of hope.

Analysts like the new boss. One calls him the best possible pilot of the worst possible aircraft. Mr González is not an oil man, but spent three years on the board of Pemex when in a previous job at the finance ministry. As an engineer he is fond of detail, unlike previous managers. He has run huge operations before: in a three-year stint as leader of Mexico’s social security agency, which has around 450,000 staff, he knocked it into better shape. He is a political insider, close to the president, Enrique Peña Nieto, and linked through marriage to an ex-president, Carlos Salinas.

He has started cutting costs at Pemex. Government officials want the firm to lower its budget by 100 billion pesos in 2016. The plan to make two-thirds of the savings by deferring investments will raise some eyebrows. The government’s recent aid package is a reminder that officials cannot let a firm that currently generates a third of all government revenues falter through a lack of investment.

Pemex’s changing status might attract cash from elsewhere. An energy reform signed into law in 2013 is designed to transform the domestic oil and gas industry by letting foreign firms enter the Mexican market. A state-owned monopoly might thus become a “productive state enterprise” able to pursue joint ventures. Mr González suggests partners could take joint ownership of refineries and help modernise them.

Sales of some downstream parts of the company, such as its fertiliser plant and petrochemicals business, would leave Pemex to focus on oil exploration and production. It might do well to concentrate on shallow-water offshore oil fields where it has expertise and which are cheap to operate, rather than bigger, more expensive ones onshore and in deep water.

Much depends on a recovery of the oil price. “Things should look a bit better in two to three years,” predicts Pablo Medina of Wood Mackenzie, a consulting firm. He thinks Pemex is readier than before to take tough decisions, such as cutting jobs. Mr González will have to face the music to put Pemex back on song.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21697277-daunting-challenge-faces-new-boss-mexicos-oil-giant-turning-tanker/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Theranos

Blood sports

Pressure is mounting on a startup that has tried to shake up the lab-test market

Apr 23rd 2016 | SAN FRANCISCO | From the print edition

Harried Holmes

“TRUST me. If the results are not there we would hear,” said Nimesh Jhaveri, a divisional vice-president at Walgreens, the largest pharmacy chain in America, when asked last June about the accuracy of revolutionary blood tests it was offering in some of its stores. A few months later the provider of these tests, a startup called Theranos, began to lurch from one problem to another.

A series of critical articles in the Wall Street Journal has questioned whether Theranos’s technology, which purportedly performs a wide range of tests on just a tiny sample of blood, really works. It has fallen foul of regulators over practices at one of its labs: they have threatened to force its founder and boss, Elizabeth Holmes, out of the blood-testing business. And it emerged this week that the firm is being investigated by American prosecutors and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) over whether it misled investors. Many now write off the firm entirely. Should they?

The company’s biggest immediate problem is the revelation of deficiencies in its laboratory in Newark, California. Of several issues found by the laboratory regulator, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), one was deemed to pose an immediate threat to patient health. Theranos says it has contacted all the doctors who ordered these tests, and that it has no reason to believe any patient was harmed. However, in March the firm received word from the CMS that it was not happy with the reply it had received and sanctions might follow. Theranos has responded again, and is waiting for a ruling.

Until then, it is impossible to know how things will unfold. Despite seeming to be in a heap of trouble, 90% of the firm’s tests are conducted at its Arizona laboratory, which Theranos says was successfully audited by the same regulator last year. Since opening both laboratories the company has conducted 6.1m diagnostic tests.

The firm has taken flak for quietly resorting to using traditional machines for many of its tests, rather than its own supposedly whizzier devices. Yet it appears that the firm can run 80 separate tests on a finger-prick of blood—15 on its own machine, 65 on commercially available equipment. If Theranos has worked out how to dilute small blood samples to run on existing equipment, that could yet constitute a big advance.

Another criticism is that the startup, supposedly a pioneer in testing blood taken through a finger-prick, ended up tapping veins for some of its tests when it expanded to run a full-service laboratory. But Theranos was open about this change at the time. And it was still able to run its test on unusually small blood samples using small, paediatric needles.

If there are big problems with Theranos’s technology, one question is why Walgreens felt able to roll it out, and promote its alliance with the startup so vigorously. Last year Mr Jhaveri said Walgreens’ chief medical officer had “reviewed” the technology and the data before it introduced the service, and also that Theranos’s tests had been compared with traditional methods and it was “getting the results”. Walgreens later said the word “review” was incorrect, but that its clinical office was “integrally” involved in the roll-out and was confident in the quality of Theranos’s services. This week it said it did not independently validate or verify the tests.

An investigation by the SEC into a private tech startup is unusual. But Brooke Buchanan, a spokesperson at Theranos, says: “The feds read the papers like everyone else. The Wall Street Journal has written 21 articles about Theranos comprising 22,000 words since October.”

The controversy will ensure heightened scrutiny of “unicorns”—private technology firms valued at more than $1 billion. The head of the SEC, Mary Jo White, recently indicated she wants to look at startups that could pose risks to investors. You might imagine that those willing to put millions into a new medical technology would be aware of the levels of risk involved. But unicorns have been able to claim lofty valuations without the rigorous scrutiny endured by public firms.

Even among unicorns, Theranos is a unique sort of beast. It has been run secretively, sharing little information with investors. These funders are also atypical in the world of big tech startups: with the exception of one of its early “seed” investors, Draper Fisher Jurvetson, no big venture-capital firm has invested.

It remains to be seen whether the regulatory assault and negative publicity will prove fatal to the firm. 23andMe, a genetic-testing outfit, managed to survive a nasty brush with the Food and Drug Administration a few years ago. But even if Theranos is mortally wounded, finger-prick testing is too good an idea to die with it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21697273-pressure-mounting-startup-has-tried-shake-up-lab-test-market-blood-sports/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Cigarettes

Smoke signals

Philip Morris, health company?

Apr 23rd 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



TOBACCO companies specialise in contradiction. They herald the decline of smoking among youngsters, for example, then flaunt their sales to callow puffers. The most skilled contortionist in the industry may be Philip Morris International, the world’s biggest tobacco firm. To date, any good news for shareholders has been bad news for lungs. But the firm now says it wants to improve profits and health alike.

It may seem an odd goal for a company that last year sold 850 billion cigarettes. But it boss, André Calantzoupolos, insists Philip Morris is on the verge of a revolution. He touts “reduced-risk products”: on April 19th the firm said its top offering in this category, iQOS, accounted for one in 30 cigarette sales in Tokyo, a test market.

The new product resembles a pen. A user inserts a cigarette-lookalike called a HeatStick; iQOS then warms the stick’s tobacco, but doesn’t burn it. That produces an aerosol that carries a traditional cigarette’s taste but, the company hopes, eliminates much of the nasty stuff that comes with combustion. “For the first time in history,” Mr Calantzoupolos declared recently, “we have products with the real potential to both accelerate harm reduction and grow our business.”

This is hardly the first time tobacco firms have peddled healthier-seeming goods. Some have dubious benefits. Consumers have long bought “light” cigarettes to lower their risk of disease, despite evidence they do nothing of the kind. E-cigarettes are less risky than traditional ones, but bring their own challenges. Some fear they will reduce the stigma around smoking. Debate rages over whether e-cigarettes help smokers quit. What is more, many smokers simply don’t like them. Complaints range from faulty batteries to poor taste—e-cigarettes deliver vapour with nicotine, but no tobacco. Their share of the cigarette market remains tiny: 0.4% last year, estimates Euromonitor, a research firm.

Philip Morris’s new products might have broader appeal. Its research staff now includes some 300 scientists, many poached from pharmaceutical and medical-device companies. The company has several alternatives to combustible cigarettes, but iQOS is its most prominent. Bonnie Herzog of Wells Fargo estimates that by 2025 the product could displace 30% of cigarette sales in rich markets.

Philip Morris says that early evidence is promising. It reports that the vapour created by iQOS contains just one-tenth as much “harmful or potentially harmful” chemicals as a standard cigarette.

So far iQOS has been launched in only a few places, including parts of Japan and Italy. There are plans to expand quickly. That will eat into Philip Morris’s cigarette sales, but evidence from Japan suggests consumers might switch not just from the firm’s own brands, but from cigarettes made by rivals too. All in all, iQOS could be a boon: Wells Fargo expects combined profits for iQOS and traditional cigarettes in 2025 to be nearly 50% higher than they would have been for traditional cigarettes alone.

Sales could rise even further if Philip Morris can sway health officials. The company will soon ask American regulators to designate iQOS as a “modified risk tobacco product”. Such a title would let the firm’s partner in America, Altria, hawk iQOS’s claimed lower risks. But regulatory approval is by no means assured. Katie McMahon, a policy expert at the American Cancer Society’s advocacy arm, is sceptical of tobacco firms as allies, given their history of misleading the public. After decades of distrust, it can be hard to know when a tobacco company is advancing health and when it is blowing smoke.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21697275-philip-morris-health-company-smoke-signals/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

India’s most colourful tycoon

Hangover

After the good times comes the reckoning for Vijay Mallya

Apr 23rd 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition

Mallya in more buoyant times

FEW brewery owners think of launching airlines; the synergies are far from obvious. And indeed, sharing a name with a popular lager didn’t help Kingfisher Airlines avoid collapse in 2012 after several years of losses. Now its founder, Vijay Mallya, who inherited a booze empire and personified the Kingfisher way of life as India’s “king of good times”, is struggling to appease the airline’s irate creditors. On April 18th, in the latest turn in a long-running saga, a Mumbai court issued a warrant for his arrest.

Defaulting on loans isn’t usually a criminal offence. But the atmosphere in India is febrile when it comes to “wilful defaulters”, those who could but won’t make good on their debt. Many suspect Mr Mallya has a few rupees lying around to pay what he owes—if the tabloid pictures of his lavish birthday bash in December are any indication. Worse, much of the money is owed to state-owned banks, which are under fire for having extended dud loans to political cronies.

Beyond partying too hard for his creditors’ tastes, Mr Mallya has made it difficult for banks to accept anything less than full repayment—some 90 billion rupees ($1.3 billion) including interest, some of which he has personally guaranteed. He still has a roughly one-third stake in United Breweries, of which Heineken is now the biggest shareholder, though some of his equity is reportedly already pledged as collateral for other loans. In this debacle the personal and the corporate are closely intertwined.

Mr Mallya’s creditors know he has at least $40m, part of a package he received in February from Diageo to resign from the board of a spirits group he sold to the British drinks company in 2013. Diageo can count itself among the stiffed: it agreed to repay $135m to Standard Chartered to settle a loan taken out by a company close to Mr Mallya. It also gave the bearded bon vivant a sweetheart deal on 13 houses the company owned but he had historically used.

Once seemingly immune to the pressure, Mr Mallya left India on March 2nd just as courts were being asked to keep him in the country. (He denied absconding at the time and now a spokesman declines to comment.) His whereabouts are a mystery; he might be holed up in a posh retreat he owns outside London. A regular of Formula One’s travelling circus (he co-owns a team), Mr Mallya has been absent from the trackside of late. His diplomatic passport—a handy perk of sitting in India’s upper house of parliament, as he has done for over a decade—has been suspended.

Mr Mallya has tried to settle his tab by offering the banks 40 billion rupees, to no avail. The latest charge from a government agency is that 4.3 billion rupees of a loan made to Kingfisher for airline-related things was used to buy property instead. Even if he shakes off that allegation, which he denies, a court appearance of the sort he has avoided thus far seems inevitable. Unless Mr Mallya settles up, he may be in for a long hangover.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21697271-after-good-times-comes-reckoning-vijay-mallya-hangover/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Picking the boss

The outside track

Why companies are appointing more outsiders as CEOs

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



TO MAKE or to buy is perhaps the most basic question in business. This week a new report from Strategy&, an oddly named consulting division of PWC, an accounting firm, argues that a growing number answer “buy” when it comes to appointing bosses.

Strategy&, formerly Booz & Co, has been studying CEO succession in the world’s 2,500 biggest public companies for the past 17 years. It found that between 2012 and 2015 boards chose outsiders in 22% of planned successions, up from just 14% between 2004 and 2007. Looking at the numbers in a different way, in cases where outsiders were parachuted in, 74% of them joined as part of a succession that was planned in the 2012-15 period (up from 43% in 2004-07). Traditionally boards have turned to outsiders in the last resort—when they have to boot out incumbent CEOs or when the pipeline of internal candidates runs dry. The new statistics suggest that firms increasingly go for outsiders as part of regular succession planning.

Good reasons exist for this. Boards want leaders who can deal with powerful disruptive forces, such as new technologies and radical business models. Industries that have seen a lot of disruption from technological innovation or regulatory change are particularly keen on outsiders. In the 2012-15 period, outsiders made up 38% of incoming CEOs in telecoms, 32% in utilities, 29% in health care, 28% in energy and 26% in financial services. How far outside firms will go varies: in financial services almost all outsiders (92%) came from other financial firms; in utilities 72% of outsiders came from other industries.

Boards are more independent than they used to be, thanks largely to regulatory changes introduced after corporate-governance scandals early last decade. They are more likely to consist of genuine outsiders unencumbered by ties to the CEO and equipped with a wide range of contacts and perspectives. That makes it harder for bosses to anoint heirs apparent. Spencer Stuart, a headhunter, calculates that last year 84% of all board directors of S&P 500 firms were independent and 29% of boards had a truly independent chair. Strategy& says that only 7% of last year’s incoming CEOs were also named chairman of the board.

Board independence is reinforced by the rise of activist investors. Institutional investors and hedge funds expect as a matter of course that boards will hold managers to account and sack bosses who badly underperform. SharkWatch, a corporateactivism database, says almost half the companies at which an activist investor gains a board seat replace their boss within 18 months.

A fashion for outsiders is at first glance worrying. It probably helps push up bosses’ salaries (see Schumpeter). Insiders have traditionally fared better: in 2005 retiring insiders had a median tenure of 5.8 years, against 4.8 years for outsiders. And some outsiders have proved to be embarrassing flops. Yahoo hired Scott Thompson from PayPal only to sack him a few months later when it learned he had falsified his academic credentials. J.C. Penney recruited Ron Johnson from Apple but dumped him after its share price fell by half.

But outsiders had a poor record in part because companies used only to turn to them in extremis. Now they choose them in good times: last year companies in the top quartile of performance (as measured by total shareholder returns) hired a larger share of outsiders than did poorly performing companies, and retiring outsiders had a longer tenure than insiders. By insisting on considering outsiders as well as insiders, boards give themselves more options. The more important change is not that they sometimes decide to buy from outside, but that they are getting better at doing their most basic job—planning CEO succession. About time, too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21697274-why-companies-are-appointing-more-outsiders-ceos-outside-track/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business in Iran

The over-promised land

It is proving harder than expected for investors to make a start

Apr 23rd 2016 | TEHRAN | From the print edition



IT WAS billed as a once-in-a-generation opportunity. Iran is the “biggest new market to re-enter the global economy in decades”, British trade officials said in January, predicting more than $1 trillion of investment over ten years. “Iran is a new region to conquer,” said an imperial-minded boss of a French luxury-goods firm this month. Sanctions had kept outsiders from an oil-rich economy worth an estimated $400 billion. Although an American trade embargo remains in place, firms from other parts of the world were expected to scramble to enter after the lifting of nuclear-related sanctions in January.

At first glance the influx has begun. Soon after the IAEA, the international nuclear watchdog, said Iran had fulfilled the terms of an agreement with big powers, European firms trumpeted deals potentially worth billions. Airbus said it would sell Iran 118 jets, with bigger orders possibly to follow. PSA Peugeot Citroën and Renault-Nissan said they would assemble and sell cars to Iran’s 80m people. Analysts foresaw record car sales this year.

So many delegations of would-be investors flocked to Tehran that visitors reported struggling to find rooms in the smog-choked city. Earlier this month Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, became the latest to lead a gaggle of businessmen there, predicting a golden era for industrial ties. Italian fashion firms, such as Versace and Roberto Cavalli, and a French cosmetics firm, Sephora, have opened shops in Tehran or plan to do so. In cafés in north Tehran, where peroxide hairdos poke from veils, rumours circulate about a European arm of an American turbine-maker that has agreed a big joint venture. Local “business enablers”—such as Ilia, run by well-connected Iranians and Germans—are popping up like mushrooms. They offer to help outsiders navigate markets, set up joint ventures, rent offices, find pre-paid credit cards and more.

Yet getting started is proving harder than many expected. The biggest problem is a lack of finance. On April 13th a Treasury official denied that America is continuing to freeze Iranian overseas assets. Yet such funds, worth perhaps $100 billion, which had been expected to help pay for an investment boom, do not seem to be flowing. More importantly, America continues to deny firms that operate in Iran access to its financial system. That spooks foreign banks, which are wary of the long arm of American law. Since 2009 the Treasury’s sanctions enforcer, the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), has imposed $14 billion in fines on those dealing with Iran.

Without the banks, those headline-grabbing deals will struggle to go far. Uncertainty lingers. The US Treasury seems unable to define the benchmarks Iran has to meet to regain access to the American financial system. “It was better when sanctions were still in place,” grumbles a wheat merchant, who traded with American suppliers (OFAC approved) throughout the sanctions era. “At least the banks then knew what they could and couldn’t do. Now the lawyers, not the bankers, are taking decisions, and nothing is moving.”

Lacking lubrication

“We can’t sell to Iran because our bank won’t accept payment,” says a British producer of drilling parts for oil platforms, who has stayed out of Iran’s market for the past six years. European export credit agencies are issuing some credit notes, such as a recent Italian one for $5 billion. A few European banks, including Belgium’s KBC and Germany’s DZ Bank, have started handling transactions, probably because neither has a big presence in America. Even so, they cannot trade in dollars (unless, America says, those dollars were already abroad) and appear only to be testing the water.

In Tehran, businessmen and officials say everything is stymied from afar. Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s religious leader, says Americans lifted sanctions only “on paper”. Hamidreza Taraghi, who advises the Supreme Leader, says deals announced, including the largest with Airbus, were “just show”. (Airbus executives have been in Tehran this month, but the deal is yet to be finalised.) An international trade forum due in Tehran this autumn has been cancelled for lack of interest. Iran’s oil ministry has delayed a promised shindig in London five times.

A fast-growing Iranian e-commerce site, Netbarg, complains that an American server shut all its websites this year without warning. “They didn’t do anything when Iran was under sanctions,” says its owner, Ali Reza Sadeghian. Since the lifting of sanctions America has made it harder for Europeans who visit Iran to get visas. An American ban continues on commercial use of American products in Iran. A lawyer in London who advises firms on trade in Iran says visitors there should not use iPads, Microsoft PowerPoint or the like.

The headaches do not end there. Much excitement, for example, rested on the prospect of oil funds being splurged on infrastructure. But despite rising output, revenues will disappoint. In 2010 oil generated $125 billion for Iran; this year, given low prices, it will be lucky to get $25 billion.

Much of Iran’s industry, oil included, is run-down. Once flourishing industrial parks are ghost towns. Though luxury-goods firms see an opportunity, many consumers are short of cash and opt for the cheapest goods. Chinese car parts, for example, outsell pricier European ones.

A labyrinthine bureaucracy frustrates everyone. Since last October many Western visitors (though not Britons or Americans) have been able to get visas on arrival. Getting a work visa, however, still involves tiresome wrestling with red tape. Worse, a few foreigners have been arrested, among them Siamak Namazi, an Iranian-American businessman held since October, and his father, an ex-official at the UN. Statements from some public figures are discouraging. “We’re not going to go in their countries and we don’t want them to come and live in ours,” says Hadi Khamenei, the brother of the Supreme Leader.

Other sources of uncertainty include pervasive corruption and the activities of shadowy groups, such as the Revolutionary Guard Corps, which have big, hidden economic interests. It is hard to navigate Iranian politics, or even to find trusty accounting and legal firms, although several foreign outfits are returning to Tehran.

Spot the foreigner

Iran has a modest ranking, 118th, on the World Bank’s ease-of-doing-business index (see chart). Things might improve if parliament, newly elected, were to pass laws to tidy up customs rules, or to make it easier to hire and fire workers. Some officials also talk of restructuring state-owned firms, such as Iran Air.

Such reforms would make sense, irrespective of the availability of outside financing. Relations with America are unlikely to warm up quickly. America says Iran’s government is violating the spirit of the international deal, by launching missiles and more. This month Barack Obama told Iran to stop “engaging in a range of provocative actions that might scare business off”. America might not ease its position until after its presidential election in November. Were a Republican to win, that “poses a huge risk for investors”, says a Tehran-based consultant. Iran still holds huge promise, but the scramble will be more stately than expected.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21697276-it-proving-harder-expected-investors-make-start-over-promised-land/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

Pay dirt

Shareholders are partly responsible for the latest executive-pay brouhaha

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



FAT cats and big bonuses routinely stoke public anger. Now shareholders are pig-wrestling mad. On April 14th investors in BP rejected a pay rise for Bob Dudley, the oil firm’s boss, furious that he had got a 20% bump in his compensation last year (pension included) for overseeing the company’s biggest-ever operating loss. “Let me be clear,” soothed Carl-Henric Svanberg, BP’s chairman. “We hear you.”

BP’s shareholders are not the only ones being bolshie. On the same day, investors also slapped down Smith & Nephew, a FTSE 100 maker of medical devices, for waving through bonus payments even though targets set under its own pay policy had not been met. Fresh boardroom embarrassments loom. Shareholder-advisory firms have issued many more recommendations to vote against FTSE firms’ pay policies this year than last. Their targets this week included Anglo American, a mining firm, whose boss presided over a loss of £3.7 billion ($5.6 billion) in 2015 but took home a bonus of almost £1m. VW’s board is trying to head off trouble at the pass: it has said it will cut bonuses significantly, given the carmaker’s emissions scandal. Citigroup is lobbying its shareholders to ignore criticisms of its pay policies.

These belches of discontent are striking. First, public breaches between investors and directors happen rarely. True, the BP vote was a charade. It was an advisory vote, not a binding one; Mr Dudley had already banked his pay before shareholders rejected it. Nonetheless, any sort of dissent is unusual. It has been six years since the Dodd-Frank act gave shareholders in American firms an annual “say on pay” vote: the vast majority of them sail through. Less than 1% of S&P 500 firms suffered a defeat on pay last year; half got approval from more than 95% of their shareholders. Apart from a brief “shareholder spring” in 2012, it has been the same in Britain: just one FTSE 100 firm lost a pay vote last year.

Second, pay structures have shifted shareholders’ way in the past few years. The financial crisis underlined how managers could bank millions while shareholders picked up the pieces; public anger over inequality has made boards more conscious of the bad publicity that comes with egregious pay; and the votes on pay have given investors more leverage. Compensation committees claim to have forged a much tighter link between bosses’ pay and corporate performance. There is something to this. The percentage of S&P 500 firms tying pay to performance has jumped from 63% to 83% since 2011, according to Equilar, a research firm.

What, then, explains the current mini-mutiny? Investors have not had some sort of epiphany about the evils of excess pay for executives. The amounts of money involved in CEO pay may be enormous to the eyes of individuals, but they are trifling in corporate terms. Google’s chief executive, Sundar Pichai, just landed a pay award that could leave him $200m better off, for example. But if he makes decisions that add just 1% to the market capitalisation of Alphabet, Google’s parent company, that would be a $5 billion gain to shareholders. Pay is not as big a priority for shareholders when things are going well.

But when investors suffer—as those in oil and mining certainly have over the past year—and executives do not, the mood changes. Willis Towers Watson, another consultancy, analysed the recommendations that Institutional Shareholder Services, a shareholder-advisory firm, issued in America last year: 86% of those advising a “no” vote on pay reflected concern about disconnects between remuneration and performance.

Firms are supposedly making compensation more contingent on performance, yet these disconnects are still happening. One reason for this is complexity. Creating pay structures that perfectly reflect performance is a mug’s game. That hasn’t stopped an entire industry of consultants and proxy advisers from trying. Wading through the remuneration policies of listed firms deserves a bonus in itself: pages of dense text describing varieties of equity award with different triggers for vesting, some related to share prices, others to operational and financial measures.

It all looks very clever on paper. Indeed, BP’s shareholders voted en masse in 2014 in favour of the very pay policies that spat out Mr Dudley’s pay rise this year. But the results can be perverse. Setting detailed targets risks distorting behaviour. The pay policy at Valeant, an imploding drugs firm, used to be lauded for its emphasis on performance; plenty now reckon that setting a target of 15% annual growth in the share price helped it towards disaster. In March a government-sponsored review into gender diversity in British boardrooms called for bonuses to be linked to diversity targets. That would encourage gaming, says Alex Edmans, an academic at London Business School.

Comparing the performance of a firm to a group of industry peers also has an obvious logic to it. Otherwise executives can get rewarded or hurt by things outside their control: a stockmarket buoyed by easy central-bank money, or a slump in the oil price. But falling a bit less far than the worst of your peers, which was BP’s achievement in 2015, is an odd definition of success. It certainly isn’t one that aligns managers’ and investors’ interests.

Comp mentis

In the face of these sorts of anomalies, some heretical thoughts are surfacing. A Harvard Business Review article published earlier this year argued the case for getting rid of variable pay altogether and paying bosses a fixed salary. Shareholders will not go for that. But performance-based pay needs to be simpler: one option is to award stock without setting any performance-based conditions at all, but restricting executives’ ability to sell. That would both tie managers’ payouts to long-term performance, and reduce incentives to game results. This month’s outbreak of rebelliousness may look like a straight fight between tin-eared boards and wronged shareholders. Investors themselves have played their part in bringing about the outcomes they now oppose.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21697240-shareholders-are-partly-responsible-latest-executive-pay-brouhaha-pay-dirt/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Bank of America: The limits of fasting

Buttonwood: The wrong kind of savings

The 1MDB affair: Turning the screw

China’s economy: Romance of the three quarters

Oil markets: Drill will

Blended finance: Trending: blending

Free exchange: Money from heaven





Articles Sections Next

Bank of America

The limits of fasting

Severe cost-cutting is getting a giant of American banking only so far

Apr 23rd 2016 | New York | From the print edition



INVESTORS in American banks are a hardened lot. Profits at the six biggest were down in the first quarter, year on year—by as much as 53% in the case of Morgan Stanley—thanks chiefly to dwindling earnings in their investment-banking units. Earlier this month regulators rejected the “living wills”—blueprints for breaking up or liquidating a bank should it get into trouble—of all six save Citigroup. Yet markets barely flinched. Limp profits and brickbats from regulators, alas, have become routine.

Yet even these grizzled veterans have their doubts about Bank of America. Its profits fell by 13% in the first quarter—much better than some. But that left its return on equity at a measly 4%, the lowest figure among the big six (see chart). Its shares are priced at just 66% of the value of the assets on its books, lower than any of its peers and far below figures of 106% at JPMorgan Chase and 150% at Wells Fargo.



This is all the more disappointing given Bank of America’s many strengths. Its funding is remarkably cheap (it pays just 0.12% interest, on average, on the $1.2 trillion of deposits in its commercial bank). It is a more pervasive presence in America than its rivals, with branches all over the country, bringing it a degree of geographic diversification that others lack. And in Merrill Lynch, its wealth-management arm, it has the biggest salesforce for financial products in America, catering to a wealthy clientele.

What is more, Bank of America’s management has been avidly cutting costs to boost profits. The number of employees has dropped from 288,000 to 213,000; the number of branches has been cut from 6,100 to 4,700. The floorspace occupied by the bank has dropped by one-third, or 44m square feet—equivalent, it proudly declares, to 14 Empire State buildings. All this has reduced operating expenses dramatically, from about $17 billion a quarter to $13 billion.

The current chief executive, Brian Moynihan, has also laboured to clean up the mess left by his predecessor, Ken Lewis, who bought Countrywide, a big subprime mortgage lender, in 2008. Since 2010 Bank of America has spent some $194 billion to cover costs linked to the financial crisis, including $36 billion for litigation and $46 billion to address all Countrywide’s dud loans. It had to hire 56,000 people to sort out delinquent mortgages, which peaked at 1.4m but now number only 88,000.

More prosaically, Bank of America has trimmed back the bewildering thicket of products and systems left over from the acquisitions of Mr Lewis and his predecessor, Hugh McColl. The number of different kinds of current accounts has fallen from 23 to 3, of credit cards from 18 to 6, of savings accounts from 44 to 11, of home loans from 136 to 39 and so on.

The relentless cost-cutting, however, is in part a reflection of how tricky it is for Bank of America to boost income. New rules on liquidity make it harder to lend out those cheap deposits, and low interest rates constrain the profits to be made. The bank’s loan-to-deposit ratio, which often used to exceed 100%, is just 74%. Its net interest margin (the difference between the average rate it pays depositors and that it charges borrowers) is two percentage points, well below the historical average. “All of these numbers add up to significant unutilised earnings capacity,” says Richard Bove of Rafferty Capital Markets, a broker.

Moreover, as one employee says with a sigh, the regulators “keep coming at us”. The latest cudgel is the “fiduciary rule”, which is intended to prevent financial advisers from elevating their own interests above those of their clients and in practice makes it hard to manage money in exchange for trading commissions rather than fees. The companies that stand to benefit from the rule are asset managers that provide cheap index-tracking funds, such as Vanguard and BlackRock. Those that offer more complicated and expensive products face extra compliance costs, at the very least.

Given that Merrill Lynch has America’s biggest network of what were once called brokers but are now wealth managers, Bank of America is bound to be affected. It is putting on a brave face, saying that the rule will affect only 10% of the almost $2 trillion of assets it manages and will have no impact on earnings. But Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, a research firm, says that the rule will reduce the bank’s earnings in 2017 by 2.7%—the most among the universal banks.

In short, regulation is making assets such as a mountain of cheap deposits and a huge network of brokers less valuable to Bank of America than they would have been in the past. Neither low rates nor the onslaught of new regulation will last forever. But in the meantime Mr Moynihan’s response to the lacklustre first-quarter results gives a good sense of Bank of America’s strategic impasse: he promised to cut costs even more fiercely.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21697229-severe-cost-cutting-getting-giant-american-banking-only-so-far-limits/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

The wrong kind of savings

The economic equivalent of St Augustine’s plea

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



NEGATIVE interest rates are surely a sign that something is wrong with an economy. Normally, people have to be rewarded if they are to be induced to postpone consumption. Penalising them for doing so seems perverse.

Admittedly, negative nominal rates apply mostly to commercial-bank reserves held at the central bank. But many savers in the developed world are suffering negative returns in real, after-tax, terms. Larry Fink, the chairman of BlackRock, a fund-management group, recently argued that low rates may not work as central bankers intend: those planning for retirement will need to save more, not less, to generate a given income. By the same token, low rates explain why lots of companies’ pension funds are in deficit.

Many economists argue that low interest rates are the result of too much saving, rather than too little. A “savings glut” means that the returns from investing have inevitably fallen. Unfortunately, the savings aren’t really accumulating in the right places. The ageing citizens of the rich world should be putting lots of money aside for their old age, but personal savings rates are generally low.

Britain’s household-savings ratio perked up after the 2008 crisis, without ever reaching the 16.5% recorded in the last quarter of 1992. In the fourth quarter of 2015 it was 3.8%, well below the average level since 1963, of 10%. The American savings ratio is 5.4%; between 1963 and 1985, it often exceeded 10% (see chart).

In economic textbooks, companies use the savings of households to finance their expansion. But for much of this century companies in the developed world have been net savers. In Japan this has been going on even longer.

Given the ultra-low interest rates available on cash, and with investment-grade corporate bonds yielding just 3%, you might think there would be lots of profitable projects for companies to invest in. Although corporate investment has picked up since the 2008 crisis, it is hardly booming. Perhaps companies are cautious about the outlook for demand; perhaps competitive pressures are not what they were; perhaps they are simply using their cash to buy back shares. Whatever the reason, their behaviour has changed.

In theory, a financially strong corporate sector is good news for workers. Their employers could be putting aside a lot of money to meet their future pension commitments. In practice, however, the switch from final-salary pension schemes to defined-contribution (DC) plans means that employers’ pension contributions are lower than before. The average American employer ponied up just 4.5% of pay in 2013. Many people are going to depend on the state in their old age. As it is, more than a third of retired Americans get more than 90% of their income from Social Security.

If a country’s private sector has net savings, then mathematically the government must be running a deficit or the country must be exporting the excess, generating a current-account surplus. Deficit financing by governments makes sense as a way of stimulating demand in the short term. But it could be argued that rich countries with ageing populations should be running current-account surpluses and investing in faster-growing emerging markets. The euro area, in aggregate, does follow this approach (although Germany, its biggest economy, is often criticised for doing so), but Britain and America run persistent current-account deficits. Instead many countries in the emerging world, including China and Taiwan, are investing huge surpluses abroad. Although very low or negative rates in the developed world should discourage this, they seem to be having little effect.

Meanwhile, governments in the developed world face big long-term financial challenges. A recent report from Moody’s detailed the unfunded liabilities facing the American taxpayer: 75% of GDP for Social Security, 18% for Medicare, 20% for the cost of pensions for federal employees and another 20% for pensions in state and local government. Britain has unfunded pension liabilities (for government employees) of around 66% of GDP.

Perhaps governments will deal with those challenges by cutting benefits or raising taxes. But if workers think that will happen, they should be saving more now in order to compensate for that future hit to their incomes. There is no sign that they are doing so. Indeed, governments don’t want to see a huge rise in household saving in the short term because of the impact on demand. It’s the equivalent of St Augustine’s plea, “Lord, make me chaste, but not yet”. And it is another sign that economies are in a mess.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21697234-economic-equivalent-st-augustines-plea-wrong-kind-savings/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The 1MDB affair

Turning the screw

Investigators focus on the mystery of the missing billion

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



AS IF being investigated by seven countries wasn’t enough, 1MDB is also flirting with default. Government gumshoes in Switzerland, America and elsewhere are said to be close to mapping the full money trail in a suspected multi-billion-dollar scam centred on the heavily indebted Malaysian state investment fund. As their probes intensify, 1MDB’s relationship with a big backer is unravelling: IPIC, an Abu Dhabi sovereign fund, has declared 1MDB to be in breach of an important financial contract between the two—and has duly terminated it. The move complicates an already tricky debt restructuring at 1MDB. It also fans the flames of a scandal that touches the upper reaches of Malaysian politics and international finance.

IPIC bailed out 1MDB last year with a $1 billion loan and an agreement to take responsibility for interest payments on some of 1MDB’s bonds; in return 1MDB was to transfer undisclosed assets to IPIC. But on April 18th the Gulf fund said 1MDB was “in default” on the deal, and stopped making payments to bondholders, including $50m due this week. That kicked off a five-day grace period. 1MDB says it has “ample liquidity” to cover the obligations.

The reason for IPIC’s ire is $1.1 billion that appears to have gone missing. 1MDB was supposed to transfer this to IPIC as part of their deal, but IPIC says it was never received. Investigators believe this was part of a larger sum—perhaps $3.5 billion—that was siphoned off from 1MDB to a shell company in the British Virgin Islands which had an almost identical name to one of IPIC’s subsidiaries, Aabar, but was unconnected to it.

Investigators think some of the diverted money ended up in the personal bank accounts of Najib Razak, Malaysia’s prime minister (pictured). Bank records seen by the Wall Street Journal show that $15m was spent on personal items such as jewellery, with a larger amount funnelled into the ruling coalition’s 2013 election campaign. Mr Najib denies ever having taken public money for personal gain. Malaysia’s attorney-general says a $681m payment into the prime minister’s accounts was a legal personal donation from a Saudi royal.

The investigators believe much of the cash that flowed into Mr Najib’s accounts came via an offshore firm whose beneficial owner was a business partner of a Malaysian financier called Jho Low, a member of Mr Najib’s inner circle at the time, according to the Wall Street Journal. Mr Low is thought to have played a key role in the transfers. He has denied wrongdoing.

Some $150m is also believed to have flowed from 1MDB to Red Granite Pictures, a film-production firm co-founded by Mr Najib’s stepson. This outfit subsequently financed “The Wolf of Wall Street”, a Hollywood film about a hedonistic crook. Red Granite denies wrongdoing. Mr Najib’s younger brother may also be caught up in the affair: Nazir Razak has taken a voluntary leave of absence from CIMB, the Malaysian bank he chairs, while a review is conducted into a $7m transfer into his personal account from the prime minister.

Investigations within Malaysia have been timid or stymied. Last year the attorney-general was replaced—supposedly on health grounds, though leaked documents appear to show he was about to bring criminal charges against Mr Najib. His successor has rebuffed calls by the central bank for 1MDB to face charges. A parliamentary report into the fund’s affairs identified irregularities but stopped short of alleging outright fraud.

That leaves other countries to make the running. On April 12th the Swiss said the scope of their enquiries was widening, and that they were now investigating two former public officials from the United Arab Emirates—understood to be former bigwigs at IPIC and Aabar. The statement, unusually blunt for an ongoing probe, talked of suspected “embezzlement”, “criminal mismanagement”, “forgery” and “money-laundering”.

The Swiss earlier estimated the amount possibly misappropriated through 1MDB to be $4 billion. Some investigators now reckon it could be as much as $6 billion. Switzerland’s top financial regulator calls it a “clear” case of corruption, with “concrete indications” of “inadequate” anti-money-laundering measures by banks that handled 1MDB’s cash, among them some of the biggest names in finance. America’s FBI is believed to be looking at bank transactions, property deals and much else besides. With graft and dodgy offshore manoeuvres high up political agendas after the leaking of the “Panama papers”, investigators have an added incentive to dig deep. The 1MDB affair could become an important test of how the world deals with cross-border corruption.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21697270-investigators-focus-mystery-missing-billion-turning-screw/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

China’s economy

Romance of the three quarters

If the recent pattern holds, China’s latest upturn will be short-lived

Apr 23rd 2016 | Shanghai | From the print edition



“THE empire, long divided, must unite; long united, must divide.” This famous opening from “Romance of the Three Kingdoms”, a classic Chinese novel, refers to the inevitable ebb and flow of dynasties over the centuries. The same principle, in less dramatic fashion, applies to the ups and downs of the economy. But in the past couple of years, the rhythm in China has been unusually fast: the economy, stumbling for a few quarters, must strengthen; strengthening for a few quarters, must stumble.

For now, China’s economy appears to be strengthening again. Real growth edged down to 6.7% year on year in the first quarter, but that figure, subject to fiddling by the authorities, is treated with scepticism by analysts. Instead, they pay more attention to a range of indicators that tell a different story. First, nominal growth—to which corporate earnings are more closely tied—jumped to 7.2% year on year, up from 6% in the final quarter of 2015. Second, the revival of the property sector—the most important part of the economy—gathered pace: the prices of new homes increased by 3.1% in March from a year earlier, the fastest growth since mid-2014. Third, industrial output rose by 6.8% year on year in March, compared with a subdued 5.4% average over the previous two months.

All this is far from the double-digit growth that once seemed so effortless in China, but it is nevertheless striking given investors’ gloomy outlook at the start of this year. Then concerns focused on surging capital outflows, the depreciating yuan and a swooning stockmarket. Now, all three are in much better shape. Foreign-exchange reserves increased in March, for the first time in half a year. The yuan has risen by nearly 2% against the dollar over the past three months, and the CSI 300, an index of Chinese blue-chip stocks, has climbed by 7% since the end of January.

Yet anyone counting on a sustained upturn in the economy would do well to examine the pattern of the past few years. Since early 2012 Chinese growth has been trending downward despite a rapid sequence of ups and downs (see chart). The force behind these fluctuations is on-again-off-again policy support from the government. Determined to keep the economy growing in line with its annual GDP targets, officials have turned to fiscal and monetary stimulus when growth has faltered. Wary of overdoing it, they have pulled back when the economy has picked up.

That might seem to be a feat of fearsomely effective central planning, but, worryingly, each leg-up in the mini-cycle has required a bigger push. The current rebound follows a boom in lending as well as a series of policy incentives that have fuelled a mammoth property rally in the biggest cities. Total new credit rose by 42% in the first quarter compared with a year earlier, the biggest increase in three years. New home prices in Shenzhen, a southern metropolis, soared by 62.5% year on year in March, while those in Shanghai rose 30.5%. When growth flags again, as many expect will happen later this year, the government will have less scope to boost it without raising an already towering debt load.

In the meantime, regulators are trying to undo some of the excesses. They have started to crack down on leverage in the bond market, one of the main channels for new financing in recent months. Officials in big cities have also made it harder for speculators to buy homes. But appetite for the tougher reforms needed to energise China’s economy in the long term—deleveraging the financial system, breaking up state-owned monopolies and eliminating excess capacity in industry—is still wanting. Shen Jianguang, an economist with Mizuho Securities, believes the government will focus on reforms that support growth, such as providing more financing for business startups. It is reluctant to pursue the more difficult reforms, for fear of undermining growth. That means the next downshift in the mini-cycle is, like the current upturn, only likely to go so far.

Some factors are beyond China’s control, however. A big question stemming from its rebound is how that will influence monetary policy in America. The Federal Reserve has refrained from increasing interest rates after an initial rise in December, with Janet Yellen, the Fed’s chair, highlighting risks from China as a prime reason for caution. Now that China is faring better, the path to a second rate increase in America ought to be clearer. But that might lead the dollar to rise and place renewed pressure on the yuan, which would risk stoking capital outflows and, in turn, fresh concerns about the health of the Chinese economy. If it all sounds a bit dreary, one should at least be grateful that the mini-cycle features none of the death and carnage so prominent in “Romance of the Three Kingdoms”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21697261-if-recent-pattern-holds-chinas-latest-upturn-will-be-short-lived-romance/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Oil markets

Drill will

America, not OPEC, decides the fate of global oil markets

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

Where the action really is

“WE DON’T care about oil prices,” Muhammad bin Salman, Saudi Arabia’s deputy crown prince, recently told Bloomberg, a news agency: “$30 or $70, they are all the same to us.” Such comments by the man calling the shots in the world’s biggest oil power should be taken with a pinch of salt. Low oil prices cost the country billions, threaten its credit rating and are turning it from creditor to debtor: this week it set out to raise $10 billion from global banks. Yet the claim is not entirely hollow, either. Saudi Arabia is determined not to give any succour to higher-cost producers, despite the damage the low price does to its own finances.

At a meeting in Doha, the Qatari capital, on April 17th Saudi Arabia blocked an agreement between OPEC and non-OPEC producers, such as Russia, to shore up global oil prices by freezing production at January’s level. The idea that such a deal could have been enforced was fantasy anyway. As Carole Nakhle of Crystol Energy, a consultancy, points out, Russia is pumping at record levels and there was no way to police its compliance with a freeze. Iran, which is vowing to raise output to pre-sanctions levels, had dismissed the notion that it would take part as “ridiculous”.

Prince Muhammad apparently forced his negotiators to shun a deal just as they were about to sign it, insisting that the kingdom would only freeze production if Iran were prepared to do likewise. Some participants were furious at his behaviour. The Saudi delegation “had no authority to decide on anything”, fumed Eulogio del Pino, Venezuela’s oil minister.

For decades Saudi policy has been steered by deft negotiators such as Ali al-Naimi, the kingdom’s oil minister. Now it is under the thumb of the 30-year-old prince, who believes low oil prices will help his drive for economic reform at home and weaken Iran, Saudi Arabia’s arch-rival. “For years we’ve been told that Saudi oil policy is driven by commercial and economic considerations,” says Jason Bordoff of Columbia University’s Centre on Global Energy Policy. “Yet what happened in Doha seems to have had a big geopolitical dimension to apply pressure on Iran.”

Fortuitously for oil prices, the Doha debacle coincided with the start of a three-day strike in Kuwait that temporarily dented the emirate’s crude production. Yet that underscored how daft the effort to impose a freeze was in the first place: low oil prices are already dampening global supply. The strike in Kuwait was the result of public-sector pay cuts brought on by lean oil revenues. Schlumberger, an oil-services firm, says it is reducing activity in Venezuela because the cash-strapped state oil firm there has not paid its fees. Oil traders say they can no longer get letters of credit to trade with Venezuela. They also worry about the counterparty risk of dealing with oil-dependent countries like Nigeria.

The real freeze, says John Castellano of Alix Partners, a debt consultancy, is taking place in America. Shale producers that borrowed heavily to increase production in the boom years are likely to flock to bankruptcy court this year in even greater numbers than in 2015, he predicts. On April 14th and 15th respectively two such firms, Energy XXI and Goodrich Petroleum, filed for Chapter 11 protection. Even those that are still going concerns have no money to invest in maintaining production. As a result, shale production has fallen by 600,000 barrels a day since its peak last year, according to the Energy Information Administration, an official body. That, more than any OPEC posturing, is what is underpinning oil prices.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21697268-america-not-opec-decides-fate-global-oil-markets-drill-will/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Blended finance

Trending: blending

The fad for mixing public, charitable and private money

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

What blended finance hath wrought

MEETING the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals will require additional investments of $2.5 trillion a year in things like health care and education for the world’s poorest people, according to UNCTAD, a UN agency. A further $13.5 trillion is needed by 2030 to implement the Paris climate accord, according to the International Energy Agency, a watchdog group. It is enough to drive development types to drink—which may be how they came up with the term “blended finance”, a heady cocktail of public, private and charitable money.

The phrase is being floated at all manner of gatherings, from the recent meetings of the IMF and the World Bank to the World Economic Forum in Davos, as a way to make the limited pool of money available for worthy causes go further. The new name notwithstanding, however, the idea of using public funds to attract private money is a venerable one. For it to change development finance fundamentally, as enthusiasts claim it can, it will have to become easier to scale up.

Private investors do not typically fund the construction of rural roads in Africa, say, or vaccination drives in villages, even though the returns on such investments are often enormous. That is because the returns are either hard to monetise, or the risks are too great for the private sector to tolerate. The point of blended finance is to use public or charitable funds to remedy those problems, allowing private money to flow to places and projects it would usually shun. According to a WEF survey of 74 blended-finance vehicles, this “honey trap” is working: every dollar of public money invested typically attracts a further $1-20 in private investment.

When Wandee Khunchornyakong, a Thai entrepreneur, wanted to build solar farms in sunny north-east Thailand, commercial lenders were unwilling to take a leap into such an untested market. In 2011 the IFC, an arm of the World Bank, provided an $8m commercial loan blended with a low-interest loan of $4m from CTF, a climate investment fund backed by several governments. This gave three local banks the confidence to lend a further $14m. By 2015 the company had attracted $800m of investment, all but the initial loan from the private sector.

AATIF, a $146m fund which invests in sustainable African agriculture, goes even further to protect private investors. It has three categories of shareholders. The first two, comprising the German Ministry of Development, KfW, a development bank owned by the German government, and Deutsche Bank, which also manages the fund, agree to absorb losses before the third tier—consisting only of private investors—gets hit. That means losses have to exceed 50% of the fund’s net asset value before investors in the third tranche suffer any harm.

In a similar vein GuarantCo, which is backed by aid agencies, helps make investments in infrastructure in poor countries bankable by taking on the most nettlesome risks. For every dollar it invests it has attracted $13.50 in private money. In 2014 it helped Mobilink, a telecoms firm, expand into remote parts of Pakistan by guaranteeing part of an Islamic bond denominated in Pakistani rupees. The Gates Foundation, too, has put aside $1 billion to provide loan subsidies, guarantees and other sweeteners for twitchy private creditors.

Blended finance can also be used to generate financial returns on investments that would normally only yield less tangible benefits. The most common method is the “social-impact bond”, in which “outcome funders”, such as governments and aid agencies, pay back investors who have funded projects that meet goals which, although socially desirable and delivering notional cost savings, do not yield direct profits. In one example, Children’s Investment Fund Foundation, a charity, has agreed to pay a return of 10% on a project designed to improve school attendance among Indian girls if enrolment, literacy and numeracy improve as agreed after three years. If the results exceed expectations, the return rises to as much as 15%.

Social-impact bonds are promising. But they are still very new, and more discussed by wonks than used in the real world. Kois Invest, an impact-investing firm, counts 60 social-impact bonds launched since 2010, mostly in the rich world. The Indian education bond is financed by a sympathetic lender, the UBS Optimus Foundation, which hopes to prove the financial viability of the concept.

Few data exist on the scale and success of blended finance more broadly, but it is still a niche. Two global platforms were recently launched to match investors with projects. One of them, Convergence, has a database of over 150 blended transactions since 2000 with a total value of $40 billion, but says its list is not exhaustive.

For the industry to grow from the billions to the trillions, it will need more than a catchy name. A larger pool of private investors and more easily replicated projects will be essential. At the moment, for instance, every social-impact bond is tailor-made. The mixologists of development finance have to start preparing their cocktails by the pitcher, not the glass.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21697263-fad-mixing-public-charitable-and-private-money-trending-blending/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

Money from heaven

To get out of a slump, the world’s central banks consider handing out cash

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



“HELICOPTER money” sounds like an item on an expense claim at a hedge fund. In fact, it is shorthand for a daring approach to monetary policy: printing money to fund government spending or to give people cash. Some central bankers seem to be preparing their whirlybirds (and their printing presses). In March Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, described helicopter money as a “very interesting concept”. Ardent supporters see it as a foolproof way to perk up slumping economies. Yet helicopter money is a less radical departure from the norm than it sounds. What is more, it fails to remove the political constraints that have been the biggest drag on recovery.

The evocative concept of helicopter money comes from Milton Friedman, the father of monetarism, who mused in 1969 that central bankers could never fail to boost the money supply since they could always drop newly printed bills from the sky onto the cash-starved economy below. The idea cropped up again in the early 2000s, as economists puzzled over how to spring the Japanese economy from its deflationary trap. Ben Bernanke, at the time a new governor at the Federal Reserve, made reference to Friedman’s conceit in speeches about dispelling deflation, earning himself the nickname “Helicopter Ben”.

Helicopter money provokes fewer chuckles today. The world’s big, rich economies have all joined Japan in a rut of chronically low inflation and interest rates. Growth in nominal GDP has been pitifully low in the aftermath of the financial crisis: especially in Europe and Japan, the top candidates for a dose of helicopter money. The weakness persists despite central banks’ vigorous attempts to get their economies moving, by cutting rates into negative territory and printing trillions to buy government bonds (a policy known as quantitative easing, or QE). A new strategy does indeed seem overdue.

Advocates of helicopter money do not really intend to throw money out of aircraft. Broadly speaking, they argue for fiscal stimulus—in the form of government spending, tax cuts or direct payments to citizens—financed with newly printed money rather than through borrowing or taxation. QE qualifies, so long as the central bank buying the government bonds promises to hold them to maturity, with interest payments and principal remitted back to the government like most central-bank profits. (The central banks now buying government bonds insist they will sell them at some point.) Bolder versions of the strategy make the central bank’s largesse more explicit. It could, for instance, hand newly printed money directly to citizens. Jeremy Corbyn, leader of Britain’s Labour Party, has proposed “people’s QE” of this sort.

The advantages of helicopter money are clear. Unlike changes to interest rates, stimulus paid for by the central bank does not rely on increased borrowing to work. This reduces the risk that central banks help inflate new bubbles, and adds to their potency when crisis or uncertainty make the banking system unreliable. Fiscal stimulus financed by borrowing provides similar benefits, but these could be blunted if consumers think taxes must eventually go up to pay off the accumulated debts—a problem helicopter money flies around.

A paper published in 2014 by Jordi Galí, an economist at the CREi, an economics-research centre in Barcelona, reckoned that money from the sky could have “strong effects” on a slumping economy with only mildly inflationary consequences. A recent analysis by economists at Deutsche Bank points out that most rich economies have turned to central-bank-financed spending in past emergencies, especially during the world wars, when America and Britain were notable enthusiasts. In some cases, this led to hyperinflation. Yet printing money to escape a slump should pose less risk than printing money to fund a state too weakened by war to raise taxes, particularly if control of the presses is left in the hands of independent central banks.

The real problem with helicopter money is that it is a technical solution to a political problem. Europe’s economic slump has been worse than those in America and Britain partly because the ECB has been slower to use policies like QE, for instance. That is because European law forbids the central bank from financing governments. Only last year did the spectre of deepening deflation allow Mr Draghi to argue there was an urgent monetary-policy justification for bond-buying. For the ECB to pursue helicopter money, European governments would have to amend the treaty that created it. But if they were willing to give the ECB that kind of leeway, things would never have got to this point.

Money isn’t everything

Similarly, many euro-area governments face borrowing costs close to zero for durations of up to 30 years; even longer in Japan. Thanks in part to QE, debt-financed government spending costs little more than stimulus paid for by central banks. Yet European governments continue to work to cut their deficits. Even in spendthrift Japan, the recovery plan of Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, is threatened by his determination to raise the rate of consumption tax in order to reduce the deficit. Free money is already available: what is missing is political consensus on whether and how to use it. To think helicopter money can help now, you must believe that it would close differences of political opinion in places like the euro area. Given worries in Germany (and elsewhere) about inflation and moral hazard, the opposite seems as likely.

It would be a good thing if governments began building frameworks for the use of helicopter money. When the next crisis strikes, central banks will almost certainly have little room to reduce interest rates. The ability quickly to credit individual bank accounts with cash, for example, would render shocks more manageable. But there is no way without a will.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21697227-get-out-slump-worlds-central-banks-consider-handing-out-cash-money/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Earthquakes: Preparing for the Big One

Martial arts: Modern gladiators

Sleeplessness: Neurological night watch

Keeping the skies safe: Drones club





Articles Sections Next

Earthquakes

Preparing for the Big One

Big earthquakes on either side of the world cause concern about building protection

Apr 23rd 2016 | LOS ANGELES, MASHIKI AND QUITO | From the print edition



THE giant tectonic plates which make up Earth’s outermost layer are always on the move, sliding past and colliding with each other. This creates plenty of seismic activity, especially in the area around the Pacific Ocean known as the “Ring of Fire”, which accounts for some 90% of the world’s earthquakes. On April 14th a magnitude 6.2 tremor shook Kumamoto prefecture on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu. Then, in the early hours of the morning on April 16th, a magnitude 7.0 quake struck the same area. On the same day, on the opposite side of the ring, a coastal region of Manabí and Esmeraldas provinces in Ecuador was shaken violently by a magnitude 7.8 quake—15 times stronger in terms of the energy released than the second Japanese quake. In Japan more than 40 people died; in Ecuador the death toll is expected to exceed 525.

The greatest risk posed by earthquakes on land comes from buildings collapsing. Whether or not they fall down depends both on circumstance and on how they are built. This was evident in both disasters. In Ecuador, traditional homes made largely from bamboo withstood the quake better because of their flexibility. The more affluent, living in buildings made of concrete, were less lucky as walls, floors and roofs collapsed (as pictured above). In Mashiki, a town hard hit by the two Japanese earthquakes, dozens of traditional wooden homes collapsed, along with the community’s Buddhist temple and Shinto shrine. But among them stands a more recent house that remains unscathed, rather like a gleaming tooth among otherwise rotten gums. Inside, recounts its relieved elderly owner, her cups and saucers were flung around but the house stood firm.

Last one standing

That solitary house underlines one of the most successful ways to protect against seismic activity. The most important part of Japan’s approach remains its stringent building code, says Naoshi Hirata of the Earthquake Research Institute (ERI) at the University of Tokyo.

For decades Japan has tightened its construction codes—by now the world’s strictest—and supported other innovations in quake-proofing construction methods. All buildings constructed after 1981 had to be sturdy enough to withstand collapse in an earthquake with an intensity of “upper 6” or higher on the scale used by the Japan Meteorological Agency (which measures shaking at individual points whereas magnitude measures the size of an earthquake). The regulations were strengthened again after the quake that hit Kobe in 1995, which had a magnitude of 6.8.

Those building regulations have sharply reduced both the rate of collapsed structures and the risk of fires spreading. When the March 2011 earthquake struck off the Pacific coast of Tohoku it was the ensuing tsunami that wrecked the coastal region, setting off a nuclear meltdown at the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear-power plant. Most newer buildings withstood the shaking, which was somewhat attenuated by the time the seismic waves reached land.

Ecuador introduced stricter seismic regulations of its own after the Haiti earthquake in 2010. But there are problems. Hugo Yepes, a geophysicist at the National Polytechnical University in Quito, complains that builders and developers have been largely ignoring them and that local officials have effectively “legalised” informal new neighbourhoods without insisting on anti-seismic standards. When visiting the area, Rafael Correa, Ecuador’s president, said building standards had to be applied with greater rigour to avoid a similar scale of destruction in the future.



Tremorous timeline: An interactive map of global earthquakes over two decades

Yet, as the scene in Mashiki shows, even the world’s centre of excellence in earthquake technologies can still suffer a lot of damage. Around a fifth of buildings across Japan predate the stricter codes introduced in 1981. It was chiefly such buildings that collapsed in Kumamoto prefecture, many of them in the first quake.

The loss of life will inevitably direct attention towards the deadly consequences of a giant earthquake striking the Tokyo area. Another fearsome scenario is a shock from the Nankai Trough, a large offshore fault. A magnitude 9.1 earthquake and a resulting tsunami could kill 323,000 people in the very worst case scenario, Japanese government scientists said four years ago.

In the mid-1970s experts were also convinced that a large quake would hit part of the Nankai Trough in a region known as the Tokai area, stretching from Nagoya to Shizuoka. There, an elaborate system of seismographs and devices to measure minute swellings and shrinkage of local bedrock are still testament to a belief that reliable earthquake precursors can be found. Some experts even call for levels of wells to be monitored, since tectonic friction is thought to drain water from their depths.

Japan is not the only place to worry about a “Big One”. In Los Angeles, computer simulations of a magnitude 7.8 quake on the southern end of the San Andreas Fault suggest the city centre there would shake for 55 seconds, causing some 2,000 deaths and 50,000 injuries. The Los Angeles blueprint for survival, announced in 2015, seeks to solve what is that city’s greatest vulnerability: a lack of progress in reinforcing buildings. But determining who pays for the work is making just as little progress.

Quake watchers

Better building is not the only focus of activity. Japan has spent billions of yen in the Tokai region and elsewhere trying to forecast when and where quakes will hit, so as to be able to evacuate areas beforehand. The ERI, for example, forecast in early 2012 that a powerful earthquake had a 70% likelihood of striking under Tokyo within four years. (The Ecuadorean government is reportedly funding research by an “earthquake whisperer” who claims to be able to detect quakes at least three days in advance; there have been no published studies to support this remarkable feat.)

Many scientists are sceptical about the prediction business. All of Japan’s recent big earthquakes have occurred in regions other than the Nankai Trough zone or under Tokyo, which are said to be at greatest risk according to the government’s official models of earthquake-hazard areas. Government researchers’ models missed the 2011 Tohoku earthquake despite the fact that quakes and accompanying tsunamis have frequently struck there in earlier centuries. The Japanese government’s hazard map tends to lull people in supposedly lower-risk areas into a false sense of security, says Robert Geller, a professor of geoscience at the University of Tokyo.

The map assigned a relatively low probability to the likelihood of an earthquake on Kyushu. That may be one reason why the first nuclear plant in Japan to start operating since the very last one was shut down in 2013 following the 2011 disaster is located at Sendai in Kagoshima prefecture. This week the nuclear regulator declined to shut down that plant, which is nearly 100 miles away from the earthquakes’ epicentre, despite calls from citizens’ groups to do so. Yet if the system eventually succeeds in predicting just one big earthquake, argues Yukitoshi Fukahata of the disaster-prevention research institute of Kyoto University, the gain would be immense.

A well-functioning part of Japan’s regime is its real-time warning system, which sounds after a quake occurs but before seismic waves arrive at more distant places. It can give seconds or even over a minute for people to react and it too has significantly improved since 2011, scientists say. In the recent quake it meant that the Kyushu railway company was able to stop or slow nine shinkansen high-speed trains just before the ground began shaking (only one empty train was derailed). The limitation of the system is that it gives little or no warning to those directly above an earthquake. At sea, much effort has also gone into building 150 new ocean-floor monitoring stations to detect tsunamis forming.

For now, a minute or so of warning is about the best anyone can expect in an earthquake zone. Designing buildings to be flexible enough to survive the violent side-to-side swaying that a tremor brings is therefore the priority—although, as Ecuador shows, the real difficulty is enforcing construction rules. Living on the Ring of Fire will remain a precarious business.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21697215-big-earthquakes-either-side-world-cause-concern-about-building/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Martial arts

Modern gladiators

New body armour promises to transform fighting sports

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

Time for a blast of cool air

LOOKING somewhat like a stormtrooper from “Star Wars”, Martin “The Wolf” Söderström, a Swedish devotee of kung fu, raps a heavy fighting stick down onto the arm of his opponent, who is clad in similar attire. At the other side of the room a computer quickly determines if the blow would have caused a bruise or a fracture if his adversary had not been so protected. Welcome to a new world of violent martial arts brought to you by advances in materials and microelectronics.

Ordinarily, Mr Söderström would not be able to fight like this. His punches would have to be pulled to avoid causing serious or even fatal injuries. Chunky body protectors and helmets offer fighters more defence from harm, but such gear also slows and restricts their movements. Nor does it make scoring any easier. Would whacking that stick over his opponent’s head, for instance, have broken his skull, or delivered but a glancing blow?

The armoured body suit which Mr Söderström and his opponent are wearing is called the Lorica. It has been developed by Chiron Global, an Australian firm. At just 19 kilos, it is neither too heavy nor cumbersome to prevent even aerial cartwheels, but it is tough enough to render painless a powerful sword strike to the head or the chest, says Mr Söderström.

That protection comes from Kevlar, a tough synthetic material invented almost 50 years ago by DuPont and now extensively employed in protective clothing. In a Lorica, however, it is reinforced with carbon-fibre composites, a lightweight material that is stronger than steel and widely used in aerospace. On top of that are various polymers and other materials, which Chiron is keeping secret.

Some of the areas around the body’s joints are protected only by a dense foam without a rigid shell. This allows mobility for moves like kicks, but it also means that strikes to certain areas of the body are banned and that the edges of weapons must be blunted. The company says its helmet can protect against the concussive injuries that now worry many in contact sports, but that remains to be seen.

It can get hot inside the suits, so fighters use a Lorica for 90-second bouts and then rest while they are cooled by compressed air blasted into a network of silicone tubes contained in the suit. The air passes out through thousands of tiny holes held against the skin by an undergarment.

Virtual casualties

Scoring is done by 52 sensors, which 10,000 times a second measure various forces, including blows, accelerations and vibrations, generated by the impact of hands, feet and weapons. The data are wirelessly transmitted to a computer to calculate the fractures, tissue damage and other injuries which are likely to have been sustained had the fighters been unprotected. Because there is little published information on wounds inflicted by blows from certain edged weapons on different body parts, Chiron’s researchers plan to carry out their own experiments, attacking pig cadavers with weapons such as flails, arrows and ninja stars.

What this all adds up to, reckons Justin Forsell, one of Chiron’s co-founders, is a telegenic new sport. A series of test fights using the system was staged in Wellington, New Zealand, in March. The first official fights, which are being branded as the Unified Weapons Master, will begin later this year in Australia, with competitions expanding to America in 2017.

Nationalistic fervour will be part of the entertainment mix. Martial arts from different cultures, such as Japanese swordsmanship and Chinese staff fighting, will be pitted against each other. Shen “War Demon” Meng, a Beijing fighter who used a particularly ruthless form of kung fu known as “eagle claw” in the Wellington trials, believes the system lends an air of superhero to the martial arts. He also liked the fact there was less need for a referee to have to step in and stop the fight to prevent injury, and that reviewing the detailed fight data afterwards was good for improving his technique.

Less than 24 hours after the first video of the test fight appeared online, an official at America’s Special Operations Command phoned Chiron to ask about obtaining some suits. Four more armies have since made similar requests. The army, it seems, thinks the suits can be used to teach close-quarter combat. The bright lights of television may beckon, but this somewhat brutal Aussie invention seems already to have found another market.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21697212-new-body-armour-promises-transform-fighting-sports-modern-gladiators/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sleeplessness

Neurological night watch

Why a familiar bed provides a good night’s sleep

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

Counting predators, not sheep

SOME good news for road warriors. Everyone knows booking all your accommodation with the same hotel chain earns loyalty points, which can be traded for upgrades, free stays and the occasional bottle of wine. Now a new study shows there could be performance benefits too (so copy this to the accounts department).

That people often experience trouble sleeping in a different bed in unfamiliar surroundings is a phenomenon known to psychologists as the “first night” effect. This is because if a person stays in the same room the following night they tend to sleep more soundly. Yuka Sasaki and her colleagues at Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, set out to investigate the origins of this effect.

Dr Sasaki knew the first-night effect probably has something to do with how humans evolved. The puzzle was what benefit would be gained from it when performance might be impaired the following day. She also knew from previous work conducted on birds and dolphins that these animals put half of their brains to sleep at a time so that they can rest while remaining vigilant enough to avoid predators. This led her to wonder if people might be doing the same thing and suffering from fatigue the next day as a result.

To take a closer look, the team studied 35 young and healthy people as they slept in the alien environment of the university’s Department of Psychological Sciences. The participants each slept in the department for two nights and were carefully monitored each time with neuroimaging techniques that looked at the activity of their brains. Their heart rates, muscle and eye movements were also tracked.

Dr Sasaki found that, as expected, the participants slept less well on their first night in the lab than they did on their second, taking more than twice as long to fall asleep and sleeping less overall. During deep sleep (as opposed to the lighter phases of sleep which are characterised by rapid eye movement), the participants’ brains behaved assymetrically, in a manner reminiscent of that seen in birds and dolphins. More specifically, on the first night only, the left hemispheres of their brains did not sleep nearly as deeply as their right hemispheres did.

Curious if the left hemispheres were indeed remaining awake to process information detected in the surrounding environment, Dr Sasaki re-ran the experiment while presenting the sleeping participants with a mix of regularly timed beeps of the same tone and beeps of a different tone made sporadically during the night. She worked out that, if the left hemisphere was staying alert to keep guard in a strange environment, then it would react to the random beeps by stirring people from sleep and would ignore the regularly timed ones. This is precisely what she found.

Based upon these findings, Dr Sasaki argues in Current Biology that the first-night effect is a mechanism that has evolved to function as something of a neurological nightwatchman: to wake people up when they hear noises when sleeping in an unfamiliar environment, even one with a comfy king-size bed, jacuzzi, deluxe minibar and a distinct lack of predators. Wangle a nice hotel room next time you travel, and you can argue that a similar booking in the next hotel may be the only way to get a good night’s kip.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21697213-why-familiar-bed-provides-good-nights-sleep-neurological-night-watch/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Keeping the skies safe

Drones club

Better technology and tougher enforcement of the rules is needed for the safe operation of drones

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



THE airspace over London is among the most crowded in the world. The soaring popularity of small unmanned drones has added to the congestion. After several close encounters, drone and plane now appear to have collided. Police are investigating a report that on April 17th a British Airways flight from Geneva was hit on its nose cone by a drone as it approached Heathrow airport. Thankfully there was negligible damage. But stricter enforcement of regulations and better technology are required to prevent more serious accidents.

The scale of the problem is unclear. Sales of drones in Britain and many countries are not counted. The vast majority of them are small. Those the size of a large insect are not much to worry about. But drones of up to 25kg are a graver threat. And the sales trend is upward. America’s Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reckons consumer sales could grow from 1.9m in 2016 to as many as 4.3m by 2020.

Close encounters are also on the ascent. Recently the pilot of a Lufthansa aircraft flying at 1,500 metres reported that a drone passed within 60 metres of his plane as it approached Los Angeles International airport. Britain’s Airprox Board, which collects reports of incidents, found 23 near-misses between drones and aircraft between April and October last year. Of the 582 sightings reported between August 2015 and January 2016, the FAA said that over a third were potentially hazardous.

No one is sure how much damage a drone could do to a jet airliner. Steve Landells of the British Airline Pilots Association says that tests are needed to find out. Passenger jets are designed to survive a bird strike but if several are sucked into the engines the consequences can be serious. Drones may be more dangerous. They have metal components, including lithium-ion batteries, which can explode if damaged. Light aircraft and helicopters might be more vulnerable.

In line of sight

Rules and regulations on operating drones are meant to ensure such worries are moot. In Britain and America drones are not supposed to fly near airports, nor go higher than 150 metres or so. They should be kept in sight by their operators at all times; not doing do so is a criminal offence.

Rules alone will not stop accidents. “You cannot legislate stupidity out of the stupid,” observes Andrew Charlton, an aviation consultant. But stricter enforcement would help. In America, the FAA now requires recreational users to register their drones online. So far over 400,000 have done so. Users are then given an identification number for their craft. Failure to register could mean a fine of up to $250,000. Schemes to help identify drone operators are planned in Europe.

Technology can also keep drones out of trouble. Some dronemakers are installing “geo-fencing” software which programs a drone’s GPS to prevent flights near sites such as airports and nuclear-power stations as well as restricting the speed and height that they can reach. Another method is a “virtual tether”, which in effect puts a drone on an invisible leash to prevent it flying too far from its operator. Plenty of governments want geo-fencing as a condition of sale. But it would not stop the use of drones near moving vehicles, such as air ambulances, that might be a target for journalists or ghouls. Developing ways of putting up an emergency cordon is one idea. No-drone zones can also be employed; one was due to be in force over London during Barack Obama’s visit this week.

Crash-avoidance technology is another area of development. A number of groups are working on small low-powered anti-collision systems, some combining sensors with machine-learning algorithms. Ross Allen, a researcher at Stanford University, recently demonstrated a hovering quadcopter avoiding stationary objects at the same time as it dodged a fencer’s foil.

If rules like drone registration, safety features and more public education would help curb irresponsible consumer behaviour, what of operators of larger commercial drones, such as those used for surveying or deliveries? They are already required to register with aviation authorities in many countries, and in some cases demonstrate their competence on training courses. Professional operators also have a sharper incentive to act responsibly.

There are alternatives to thicker rulebooks. NASA, among others, has a project under way to develop techniques for commercial operators to file flight plans and to track their craft. The drones would also be able to communicate with each other and inform other aircraft and air-traffic controllers of their position. The drones would use highly detailed digital maps, like those being developed for autonomous cars. Parimal Kopardekar, manager of NASA’s Safe Autonomous System Operations Project, says the service would also provide weather information, right down to the microclimates in a specific area.

Neither rules nor technology will stop those intent on deliberately causing harm. Terrorists might use drones to deliver bombs: although the payload is small, even a hand grenade dropped into a crowd would have terrifying consequences. Biological weapons carried as aerosols would be a greater concern. Like any other new technology, drones can be used for bad purposes as well as good. But they might also be used to detect and, one day perhaps, capture or shoot down those released by the bad guys.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21697214-better-technology-and-tougher-enforcement-rules-needed-safe/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




Jazz music: Steps to heaven

Gang crime in Central America: Prayer, police and punishment

Nationalism in Russia: The in crowd

Travel writing: The art of looking

Johnson: English becomes Esperanto

Sicily: Land of reinvention





Articles Sections Next

Jazz music

Steps to heaven

How to distinguish good jazz from bad

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



How to Listen to Jazz. By Ted Gioia. Basic Books; 272 pages; $24.99 and £16.99.

JAZZ is not a popular art-form. To its many detractors, it amounts to little more than pretentious noodling, based as it is largely on improvisation. To others, it is simply mystifying. How can an entire genre be made up of playing, again and again, variants of show tunes that were mostly composed in the 1930s and 1940s?

Ted Gioia understands why people find jazz so esoteric. The problem, as he sees it, is that no one has ever bothered to explain what “good” or “bad” jazz really is. Critics hold strong opinions on whether Charlie Parker or John Coltrane is the better saxophonist, but rarely do they explain “what they [are] listening for”. Mr Gioia’s job is to teach jazz-lovers how to assess the music and persuade sceptics to give jazz a go.

Mr Gioia has produced a fascinating book. He takes the reader through the most important ingredients of jazz, explaining, for instance, how “swing” is more than syncopated, finger-tapping rhythm. A bass-player and drummer who sound comfortable in each other’s company is one sure sign of swing. (Listen to Elvin Jones and Jimmy Garrison, playing with Coltrane, for instance.) Unlike amateur outfits that feel the need to overplay, the best groups can swing without playing many notes. In Keith Jarrett’s trio, the pianist goes for long stretches without even using his left hand, but the listener barely notices until it reappears, upon which it makes the music sound even richer.

Most useful to the uninitiated, the book provides tips on what good improvisation really means. Bad players tend to rely heavily on a small number of rhythmic and harmonic patterns in their phrases—licks containing a certain number of notes, for instance, or a tendency to begin or end their phrases at a certain place in the bar. Listen to such an improviser for more than a minute or so, and “even novice listeners will perceive an inescapable monotony,” says Mr Gioia. The best players, including Louis Armstrong and Miles Davis (pictured), never fall into such traps, however.

In his enthusiasm, Mr Gioia’s analysis of improvisation sometimes veers into abstraction. Take his discussion of what he calls “intentionality”, which he says is another crucial element of good soloing. He defines this as “a musical phrase that reveals the total commitment of the improviser”—hardly an illuminating description. Yet read the book within easy access of a music-streaming service or YouTube, and Mr Gioia’s commentary suddenly feels much more useful. A middling trumpeter (say, one in a student band) appears to struggle against the music, and will finish a phrase upon running out of breath. Davis’s phrases on the trumpet, by contrast, have a clear beginning, middle and end. No note is wasted and the accompanists seem to work around him. (For an excellent example of this, see his opening solo in “Spanish Key”, recorded in 1969.)

Mr Gioia also delves into musical theory, in a way that will help both jazz neophytes and experts understand what they are listening to. The best jazz musicians do not worry much about producing clearly defined notes (the do-re-mi system that structures Western classical music). Instead they look to make particular sounds—bending notes and creating unusual timbres—which is a consequence of the heavy African influence on jazz. The emphasis on sound over notes is especially pronounced in Coltrane’s late work.

Alongside the tips for listening, Mr Gioia’s book gives a helpful overview of how jazz has evolved since its beginnings in turn-of-the-century New Orleans. Buddy Bolden, a cornet-player in the Big Easy of whose music there are no recordings, is credited by many with inventing “jass”. Like the rest of the book, the majority of this discussion focuses on long-dead musicians (many of whom met untimely ends thanks to debilitating drug habits). As if to compensate for the book’s backward-looking bias, at the end the author lists 150 contemporary jazzists “who deserve your attention”.

“How to Listen to Jazz” is not a long book, but it emphasises a beautiful point about the genre, a point that applies to no other sort of music. When you see a live performance, you may be watching a 60-year-old musician playing a 100-year-old piece; but what is produced on stage has never been, and will never be, played again. Jazz is undoubtedly struggling, but as an introduction to why its remaining fans are so devoted, Mr Gioia could not have done a better job. Through him, jazz might even find new devotees.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21697207-how-distinguish-good-jazz-bad-steps-heaven/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Gang crime in Central America

Prayer, police and punishment

Why Central America is so violent

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition

Guns, not roses

A History of Violence: Living and Dying in Central America. By Óscar Martínez. Translated by John Washington and Daniela Ugaz. Verso; 257 pages; $24.95 and £14.99.

IF YOU take just one book to Central America on holiday, don’t pick this one. Óscar Martínez, a Salvadorean journalist, has written a punishing account of the lives of the poor in Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador. Melding acuity and anger, he unveils the scary realities of organised crime in the so-called Northern Triangle, and the mostly useless response.

The preface explains the book’s rationale. A collection of 14 separate essays that Mr Martínez wrote about “this terrifying little corner of the world”, “A History of Violence” aims to describe “the lives of people who serve you coffee every morning” (it is aimed at American readers). In so doing it explains why they are prepared to suffer as they do in order to reach America.

Mr Martínez is a brave man. To research his first book, “The Beast”, he rode Mexico’s trains with migrants clinging to the roofs as they headed towards America. Here he interviews inmates in prisons racked with violence, tracks down the “coyotes” who arrange travel for desperate immigrants and spends time with a hitman from the Mara Salvatrucha, El Salvador’s most infamous gang, who says that his kill tally is “about 56”.

The chronicles are all dispiriting in their different ways, either because of the horrors they reveal or because of the insights they give into politicians and police forces that are too corrupt, impoverished or incompetent to respond. Three stand out.

In one, El Salvador’s only working forensic investigator tells the author about his job and about the 805 days—and counting—that he has spent trying to dig to the bottom of a well that is known to contain bodies. In another, Mr Martínez visits an isolated Salvadorean town where a former gang member awaited the trials of those he would testify against. “The state thought it was best to keep their key witness locked up above a septic tank without any food,” Mr Martínez writes. And so, after 15 months, the man escaped. Better to risk death at the hands of his enemies than to stay put.

The saddest story involves a group of families in the Salvadorean capital, San Salvador. They have been forced to leave their homes because gang members, who believe that someone in the block has snitched on them, have threatened to kill every resident. The author rages on behalf of one such leaver: “This man, who squeegees windshields all damn day long on the corner of a street in this baking hot country, has had to empty his house that he furnished and rented with his own sweat because a few lipsticked women threatened a whole condo complex.” A policeman from an anti-gang unit advises residents to pray, and says the police will stay until people feel safe. “Could you leave a policeman to guard every one of our doors for ever?” asks a woman.

The author offers no solutions to these problems, other than to report them. He meets individual investigators and politicians who are doing their best, but they lack the resources and the colleagues needed to make a difference. Given that just two gangs, Barrio 18 and the Mara Salvatrucha, have around 70,000 members between them in El Salvador, the situation is daunting. Mr Martínez deserves credit for bringing it so effectively to life.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21697206-why-central-america-so-violent-prayer-police-and-punishment/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Nationalism in Russia

The in crowd

A fine analysis of what motivates Vladimir Putin’s regime

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia’s New Nationalism. By Charles Clover. Yale University Press; 360 pages; $35 and £25.

NO QUESTION is more contested among Russia-watchers than what really motivates the regime. Is the nationalist bombast simply camouflage, to enable the Kremlin and its cronies to continue looting tens of billions of dollars a year from the Russian people? Is their real aim merely to stay in power, for fear of what would happen to them if they left? Or do they actually believe that Russia exemplifies a new civilisation—free of the decadence and weakness of the West?

Charles Clover’s book is an important contribution to this discussion. A veteran Financial Times correspondent, he started reporting from Ukraine in the 1990s when Alexander Dugin, a hirsute polyglot brainbox who is now the chief theorist of Russian exceptionalism, was a marginal crank. But by 2014, Ukraine—invaded and dismembered—was arguably the biggest victim of the Kremlin’s new ideology, under which Russia’s neighbours are pawns in a geopolitical game.

“Black Wind, White Snow” traces the rise of Eurasianism: the belief (crudely put) that Russia’s national identity is determined by its ethnicity, geography and destiny. It covers the battiest fringes of émigré life in the 1920s, the nationalist subculture of the chaotic Boris Yeltsin years and Eurasianism under Vladimir Putin as a central feature of the Kremlin’s playbook. Russia’s new rulers, ideologically orphaned by the collapse of Soviet communism, have increasingly latched onto the belief. It lends grandeur and dignity to their doings, and allows them to look down on the notionally more successful societies of the West as doomed and decadent.

The book has two main strands. One is an academic history of this peculiar corner of the Russian philosophical landscape, involving tragic figures such as Lev Gumilev, consigned to the Gulag chiefly for the crime of being the son of Anna Akhmatova, a great anti-Stalinist poet. Making sense of the contradictory, whimsical and largely evidence-free doctrines he and others espoused is difficult. In his case and others, Eurasianism is probably best understood as a reaction to trauma, rather than as a serious school of political thought. Mr Clover grapples gamely with the madness of the past, but sometimes lapses into banality, writing lamely of an émigré scholar’s “incredibly creative” period at university in Vienna in the 1920s.

The other strand is an exploration of Russia’s recent political history with particular reference to the role of the KGB and its shadowy legacy, and the overlap with Eurasianist thinking. Mr Clover hints, but does not state explicitly, that a “deep state” of KGB veterans has been behind the most puzzling (he favours “troubling”) events of the past 25 years. The questions include: whether Mikhail Gorbachev really was the victim of the 1991 attempted coup, or actually an accomplice; who egged on the hardliners in the mysterious insurrection in the Russian parliament in 1993; and what is the truth about the apartment-block bombings of 1999, which gave Mr Putin the chance to seem Churchillian (but were probably staged by a criminal working with the security services)?

Mr Clover’s reporting is excellent, but he does not fully succeed in explaining how the ideology and the spookery overlap. Mr Dugin, once a Bohemian intellectual of no significance, is now remarkably well connected—particularly in senior military circles. But he coyly declines to explain to the author who introduced him to his rich and influential friends.

The book ably highlights the contradictions in modern-day Eurasianism. It is “tendentious at best and totally contrived at worst”. But it is believed. It allows Russia’s leaders to detach their country from Western rationalism, with its fussy obsession with truth and logic, and pursue different, mystical goals, creating a “geographical border around a separate truth”.

Non-specialist readers may find parts of Mr Clover’s book heavy going. But they will find other bits gripping. People in and around the Kremlin take Eurasianism seriously. They run the biggest country in the world. They have nuclear weapons. And they believe history is on their side.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21697211-fine-analysis-what-motivates-vladimir-putins-regime-crowd/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Travel writing

The art of looking

A psychiatrist and English scholar on journeying

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



Far and Away: Reporting from the Brink of Change. By Andrew Solomon. Scribner; 592 pages; $30.

ANDREW SOLOMON is an inveterate traveller. In his two most recent books, “The Noonday Demon” and “Far from the Tree”, he journeyed inward, in the first exploring the world of depression, from which he has suffered, in the second considering children who have surprised or disappointed their parents, as he did by being gay. These are both substantial works that required intense, far-reaching research. So it is a surprise to find that all the time he was writing them Mr Solomon was also travelling the world.

The 28 pieces gathered here are the fruits of 25 years of travel to 83 countries and all seven continents. He believes that engaging with different cultures is “the necessary remedy to our perilously frightened times”. So he is never a tourist, but instead aims for total immersion wherever he goes, winning the confidence of the people he meets, forging solid friendships.

Mr Solomon was a timid child, “afraid of the world”, terrified that, as a grown up, he might have to go and fight in Vietnam. It was in part his homosexuality that drove him abroad. In the end, it was England where he mustered the courage to come out. In 1988 a British magazine sent him to the Soviet Union to report on Sotheby’s first sale of contemporary Soviet art. Sotheby’s was offering diplomatic entertainment, singing Gypsies, caviar and champagne. Mr Solomon opted instead to hang out with a band of avant-garde artists who had stuck together through hard times “like the early Christians, or like Freemasons”.

Mr Solomon is drawn to countries that are struggling or being transformed: Afghanistan, Myanmar, South Africa, Cambodia. He is good at the big picture, but he prefers to understand countries from human stories. His piece on Rwanda opens with a masterfully concise exposition of the Hutu-Tutsi conflict and closes with a woman asking Mr Solomon how she can love a daughter born of rape. He has gifts of compassion and close attention that make people keen to confide in him.

The final piece takes the reader to the Great Barrier Reef and a scuba-diving holiday. What should have been an idyll turns into a nightmare when Mr Solomon is nearly drowned. As he drifts in the sea, certain he will die, he thinks achingly of his four children, to whom this book is dedicated. Being a parent, he concludes, is the most thrilling journey of all.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21697209-psychiatrist-and-english-scholar-journeying-art-looking/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

English becomes Esperanto

The institutions of the European Union will still speak (a kind of) English if Britain leaves

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



BRITAIN has never been a typical European Union (EU) member. It is the only country vetoed for membership (by France), and twice, at that. It joined only in 1973, almost two decades after the original six members established the European Economic Community. It is more free-trading, free-marketeering and Atlanticist than the continent. And it is the only country to hold a referendum on leaving, in 1975, not to mention a second one, due in June.

All this makes it anomalous that the institutions of the EU are dominated by the language of its most recalcitrant member. Legally, the 24 official languages of the 28 members have equal status. Gradually, however, English has displaced French as the most common language between two Eurocrats or parliamentarians who do not share a native tongue. Even so, many French-speakers still expect that, in any gathering, it is acceptable to switch to French and expect the room to follow. (Indeed, most people can, partly because the union’s de facto capital, Brussels, is mostly French-speaking.) No other language’s speakers presume this, though German is often called the third working language.

So English is very much first among equals, despite the fact that English voters may favour leaving the EU. (Voters in the other three nations of the United Kingdom are more likely to prefer staying in.) That would leave an odd fact: a union of over 500m dominated by a language spoken officially only in the Republic of Ireland (population 4.6m) and Malta (where it is co-official on an island of 450,000), unless Scotland demands and wins a second referendum on independence from Britain, and rejoins the EU.

But even with the Scots, 10m or so native English-speakers will be a tiny minority in a union of over 500m. An increasing number of the others speak English—in 2012 a report found that 38% of the EU’s citizens speak it as a foreign language. Nearly all of those working at EU institutions in Brussels do. What would happen to English without the English?

A sort of Euro-English, influenced by foreign languages, is already in use. Many Europeans use “control” to mean “monitor” because contrôler has that meaning in French. The same goes for “assist”, meaning to attend (assister in French, asistir in Spanish). In other cases, Euro-English is just a naive but incorrect extension of English grammatical rules: many nouns in English that don’t properly pluralise with a final “s” are merrily used in Euro-English, such as “informations” and “competences”. Euro-English also uses words like “actor”, “axis” or “agent” well beyond their narrow range in native English.

Jeremy Gardner, an official at the European Court of Auditors, has written a guide to “Misused English Words and Expressions in EU Publications”, which attempts to correct many of these quirks of Euro-English. It could be that whatever native-speakers might consider correct, Euro-English, second language or no, is becoming a dialect fluently spoken by a large group of people who understand each other perfectly well. Such is the case of English in India or South Africa, where a small group of native speakers is dwarfed by a far larger number of second-language speakers. One effect may be that this dialect would lose some of the tricky bits of English, such as the future perfect progressive (“We will have been working”) that aren’t strictly necessary.

What about the other European languages? The French would be thrilled to restore their language to its old primacy. This will not happen: the French academician who suggested that French be the union’s sole legal language in 2007 (thanks to its supposedly unmatched precision) was surely pitied as much as he was laughed at. But French’s role as the second language of the EU is assured—some old hands still prefer it as a lingua franca. Despite the economic strength and political confidence of modern Germany, the Germans are not keen on pushing their language on others.

All this makes for an odd result. Britain may be a polarising, unusual EU member, but English has become neutral, utilitarian; it is useful because others understand it. Its association with Britain is already weak and set to weaken if “Brexit” comes to pass. Dreamers have long hoped for a neutral auxiliary language that is common to all. Some have even gone to the trouble of inventing such languages. Who knows? English might one day fulfil the destiny intended for Esperanto.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21697210-institutions-european-union-will-still-speak-kind-english-if-britain/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sicily

Land of reinvention

Charting change in the Mediterranean

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



SICILY fills the mind with vivid images: Al Pacino on a dusty hillside, shotgun over his shoulder, in “The Godfather”, or Burt Lancaster, “The Leopard” himself, pronouncing “Everything must change so that everything can stay the same.” But things have never stayed the same in Sicily, as a new exhibition at the British Museum shows. “Sicily: Culture and Conquest”, one of the legacies of Neil MacGregor, the former director, looks beyond Sicily’s recent tribulations to the many reinventions of an island that has been part of every important civilisation of the Mediterranean.

The journey begins with the vibrant pre-Greek cultures, notably the Phoenicians, who also founded Carthage. Their craftsmanship is evident in a delicate beaten-gold bowl (600BC) decorated with six slender bullocks, identical down to their minuscule ribs. Onwards through Greeks, Romans, Byzantines, Arabs and Normans to the polymathic Hohenstaufen King Frederick II, known as stupor mundi, the wonder of the world, during whose reign (1198-1250) sonnets were first written.

This exhibition focuses almost exclusively on the two periods of the richest material culture, the Greek (700-250BC) and the brief but astoundingly productive Norman (1061-1189AD). The legacies of both are largely architectural, posing a challenge to any curator, but this exhibition does a superb job of evoking Sicilian buildings and the landscape itself. Visitors enter a deep-blue space, with ceiling-high photographs of Etna smoking and the perfect Greek temples at Agrigento and Segesta. Given a context, fragments of statues regain some of their former grandeur.

But it is the Norman period that is the glory of Sicily, and of this show. Roger II (1112-54) ruled a court where Norman, Byzantine and Arab cultures found a unique hybrid expression in art and architecture. Greek marble gives way to the intricately decorated interiors of Arab-Norman palaces, where Byzantine mosaics (pictured) are juxtaposed with carved wooden ceilings. In 2015 nine Arab-Norman buildings in Palermo were designated Sicily’s seventh UNESCO world-heritage site.

On display is a coin that is the earliest example in Europe of recording a year in Arabic numerals. Stamped with the figure of Christ Pantocrator, it is dedicated in Arabic to Roger and dated 533 by the Islamic calendar (1138). There is also the oldest surviving paper document in Europe, an injunction in Arabic and Greek from a Norman Catholic queen to Muslim guards-men, to protect a Greek-rite monastery.

Perhaps the greatest achievement of Roger’s court is an atlas of the world created by an Arab scholar-geographer, Muhammad al-Idrisi. No originals survive, but two of the oldest copies are on show. Sadly, the maps, the greatest empirical project of the age, are poorly displayed. The two pages shown do not convey the significance of the complete work. A quick search online yields a montage of the 70 double-page spreads of the original as a single, astonishingly accurate view of the globe. There was wall-space enough for views of Etna—so why not for this?

The gaps in the narrative reflect the island’s history. Roman Sicily was too pre-occupied with producing grain for the empire (or rebelling against it) to make many beautiful things. The one big Roman exhibit—a thrillingly spiky battering-ram from the decisive naval defeat of Carthage in 241BC—is followed by nothing much until some Byzantine jewellery of 500-700AD. This 1,000-year gap is oddly unexplained, as if the curators, who have chosen their exhibits well, were afraid of overwhelming visitors with information.

The past 600 years that have shaped modern Sicily are also glossed over, so this is not an exhibition of evolution but of transience, of even the greatest cultures and conquerors. Everything changes. But there is continuity too. Ultimately the show demonstrates the creative potential of encounters between cultures. And it keeps one eye on current affairs. Running alongside are events about Sicilian music, cinema and food, as well as a debate on European migration through history. As the Mediterranean struggles to decide how to share its future, understanding its shared history is more important than ever.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21697208-charting-change-mediterranean-land-reinvention/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Phil Sayer: The train now approaching...





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Phil Sayer

The train now approaching...

Phil Sayer, the best-loved voice on England’s railways, died on April 14th, aged 62

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



TRAVELLERS are creatures caught between two worlds. They are neither where they anticipate, nor where they were, but on a featureless white concourse or grey station platform, considering the void. A smartphone will fill that, to a point; but it does not quite smooth the edge of their anxiety and displacement. What they need is existential reassurance that they can, for certain, move towards where they want to go.

Such blessed assurance, at least for passengers on the busiest southern, south-western and central parts of England’s railways, was what Phil Sayer gave in spades. When he announced that the 17.36 for Hampton Court, calling at Vauxhall, Clapham Junction, Earlsfield, Wimbledon, Raynes Park, New Malden, Berrylands, Surbiton, Thames Ditton and Hampton Court, was standing at Platform 6, you knew it could not possibly be anywhere else, or bound for any other place. When he added that this train was formed of four coaches, you knew it would not be five, or three. Such warm, confident tones could not be wrong.

Accordingly, travellers entrusted their lives to him. All across the London Underground, at his behest, they took care to Mind the Gap between the train and the platform—or sometimes, more subtly, between the platform and the train. Thanks to him, they stood clear of the closing doors and did not leave cases or parcels unattended anywhere on the station; for any unattended articles, he had told them, were likely to be removed without warning. The gentle but firm authority in his voice obviated the need to say “Please”.

Few gave a thought to who he was, or where. If not in the clouds, then he was in the cavernous cast-iron murk of the station roof, where pigeons brooded. Those who listened to him daily detected human touches: his succulent enthusiasm for the trolley service of drinks and light refreshments that would be available on this train, as if he was already unwrapping a tuna sandwich; his palpable excitement at the words “London Midland” or “Cross Country”; his interesting hesitation, when announcing the Bournemouth service, between “Brockenhurst” and “Sway”, as though he doubted for a moment whether tiny Sway existed.

The words “We are sorry”, which he said a good deal, prefatory to adverse weather conditions, leaves on the line, staff absences and signal failures, were controversial. Their firmness had a touch of melancholy and defiance. Perhaps, saying them so often, he never meant them at all. Perhaps, sitting snug and smug in an office somewhere, he cared nothing for the ant-like confusion of the crowd below. At Birmingham New Street once a furious passenger, caught out by a late platform alteration, was seen shaking his fist at the tannoy and crying that he had lied.

In fact Mr Sayer was a nice, funny, ordinary chap, brought up in Liverpool and living in Bolton; station cognoscenti, despite his perfect, classless diction, could still detect the northerner in him. The messages of comfort or doom were recorded in a little studio across the hall from his kitchen; and as his apologies were relayed to the southern morning scrum he was generally asleep, or leisurely sipping a large cup of coffee to lubricate his voice. The only difference between his ordinary and working personae was that the working Phil straightened, focused and widened his eyes behind the specs, becoming just slightly more ridiculous, he would say, than his real self; and praying not to trip over “Micheldever”, “digital”, “shortages”, or other well-known traps of the trade.

He was not indifferent to the plight of travellers. Indeed, he was often a champion of the common man. In the 1970s he had worked for a while on a pirate-radio “peace boat” aiming pop songs at the Middle East. Much of his career was spent on local and BBC radio in Manchester, where he cut ribbons at primary schools and played darts in street-corner pubs, absorbing the life and chatter of the place. When not announcing trains, he did radio commercials for new cars, dog shows, fungal-infection creams and everything under the sun. He loved voice-over work, and claimed even to be on friendly terms with the (still secret and much-loathed) woman on the supermarket self-checkouts, with her unexpected items in the bagging area.

A broken-down grill

His railway job gave him great happiness. Down in London one day, he stood as close as he dared to perfect strangers on the Tube and parroted his own announcements, hoping they would recognise him. Disappointingly, they didn’t. For visiting reporters he and his wife Elinor, his business partner and Tube co-instructor (“Please take all your personal belongings with you”), would give a glimpse of the home life many assumed they led:

“What’s for breakfast, darling?”

“We apologise for the late running of your breakfast. This is due to the late running of the children’s breakfast earlier.”

“Oh well, I’ll just have some toast.”

“We regret to announce that the toast service has been cancelled, due to a broken-down grill.”

His death was announced by his wife with the words: “This service terminates here.” He might have added a less finite thought: “All change, please; all change.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21697186-phil-sayer-best-loved-voice-englands-railways-died-april-14th-aged-62-train-now/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Exchange rates against the dollar

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21697216-interactive-indicators/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21697231-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Exchange rates against the dollar

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition



The dollar rose against other currencies in advance of, and immediately after, the Federal Reserve’s interest-rate rise in December. Since the end of January, however, the greenback has headed in the other direction, helped along by the Fed’s signal in March that there would probably be two, rather than four, rate rises this year. Emerging-market currencies have climbed, particularly those of commodity-producing countries with dollar-denominated exports. The yen has also appreciated. That spells trouble for Japan’s exporters and may encourage an expansion of monetary stimulus. Brexit-related uncertainty means that sterling is one of the only big currencies to have depreciated against the dollar this year.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21697232-exchange-rates-against-dollar/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21697233-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21697237-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Apr 23rd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21697238-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Thu, 21 Apr 2016]

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



Hillary Clinton’s plans for the economy: Can she fix it?





Brazil: The great betrayal





Bloodshed in central Africa: Burundian time-bomb





The case against Google: Tie breaker





Saudi Arabia: The new oil order





Letters



On politics, Bruce Springsteen, steel, the American constitution, South Korea, clearing houses, English: Letters to the editor





Briefing



Hillary Clinton: Unloved and unstoppable





United States



New York and after: March of the titans





Psephology: Uptown Trump





The $20 bill: Not going to Jackson





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





Immigration and the Supreme Court: Branching out





The cost of college: Delayed gratification





Cocaine: Nosedive





Lexington: Ben Heard





The Americas



Brazil’s political crisis: The darkest hour





Brazil’s terrible politics: Dilma, out!





Asia



Myanmar-China relations: High mountains, distant emperors





War in Afghanistan: Fresh offence





Kashmir in stasis: Rough sleeping





The Koh-i-Noor diamond: Rock in a hard place





Banyan: Open wounds





China



Ideology: The return of correct thinking





Genetically modified crops: Gene-policy transfer





Communist Party membership: Hammer and shackle





Middle East and Africa



Burundi: Sliding towards anarchy





African hospitality: No room at the inn





Egypt’s prickly president: Permission to speak, sir





Tech startups in Africa: Africa uber alles





Syria: Drifting back to war





Israeli politics: Curtains for Herzog?





Europe



Reunifying Cyprus: You say raki, I say ouzo





Germany sours on Russia: Fool me once





Roundabouts: French revolution





Czech name change: Metamorphosis





German beer laws: Pure swill





Charlemagne: Quantum of silence





Britain



America and Brexit: More special in Europe





Britain in Iraq: The beginning of the end





Queen Elizabeth at 90: Long to reign over us





Brexit brief: The ins and the outs





Scottish languages: To speak in tongues





Brexit and the young: Turning out the teens





Nuclear energy: Is smaller better?





Bagehot: B for Brexit





International



Counterfeiting and piracy: Stamping it out





Counterfeiting and piracy: Internships





Business



Europe v Google: Android attack





Pemex: Turning the tanker





Theranos: Blood sports





Cigarettes: Smoke signals





India’s most colourful tycoon: Hangover





Picking the boss: The outside track





Business in Iran: The over-promised land





Schumpeter: Pay dirt





Finance and economics



Bank of America: The limits of fasting





Buttonwood: The wrong kind of savings





The 1MDB affair: Turning the screw





China’s economy: Romance of the three quarters





Oil markets: Drill will





Blended finance: Trending: blending





Free exchange: Money from heaven





Science and technology



Earthquakes: Preparing for the Big One





Martial arts: Modern gladiators





Sleeplessness: Neurological night watch





Keeping the skies safe: Drones club





Books and arts



Jazz music: Steps to heaven





Gang crime in Central America: Prayer, police and punishment





Nationalism in Russia: The in crowd





Travel writing: The art of looking





Johnson: English becomes Esperanto





Sicily: Land of reinvention





Obituary



Obituary: Phil Sayer: The train now approaching...





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Exchange rates against the dollar





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Markets





