The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



Super Tuesday in America saw a dozen state primary elections in the presidential nominating process. Hillary Clinton reinforced her position as the front-runner in the Democratic race, winning Texas, Georgia, Virginia and Massachusetts. Bernie Sanders took Colorado, Minnesota and two other states, but he remains far behind Mrs Clinton in the delegate count. Donald Trump lengthened his lead in the Republican contest by winning most states on offer. Ted Cruz won his home state of Texas and Marco Rubio chalked up his first win, in Minnesota. But it looks increasingly unlikely that the party establishment will be able to trip Mr Trump. See here, here and here.

David Duke, a former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, backed Mr Trump for president. Never normally lost for words, Mr Trump stopped short of denouncing Mr Duke in a TV interview, prompting another volley of criticisms from Republicans and Democrats. Mr Trump deflected these by saying he hadn’t understood the question. See article.

Clarence Thomas, a Supreme Court justice, broke his decade-long silence on the bench (thought to be a record) and asked questions in a case on gun rights. The audience gasped. Many theories have been proffered for his failure to speak, but the death last month of the loquacious Antonin Scalia, a close ally, may have left Justice Thomas thinking that the time has come for him to stick up for strict constructionism.

More than a slap on the wrist

The UN Security Council adopted tougher-than-expected sanctions on North Korea following its nuclear test and rocket launch earlier this year. They include mandatory inspections of all shipments to the country, a ban on sales of aviation fuel and a halt to exports from the North of iron and coal. But China will need to be the chief enforcer of the sanctions if they are to work. See article.

Chinese internet companies shut down the microblogs of Ren Zhiqiang, a property tycoon. He had used an account with 38m followers to criticise President Xi Jinping’s efforts to tighten Communist Party control over the media. China’s internet regulator accused Mr Ren of publishing “illegal” messages.

A court in the coastal Chinese province of Zhejiang sentenced a Christian pastor, Bao Guohua, to 14 years in prison for corruption and inciting people to disturb social order. His wife was jailed for 12 years. Mr Bao’s refusal to remove a cross from his church’s roof had angered the authorities. A Christian lawyer who had supported churches that erect illegal crosses was shown on local TV apparently confessing to having colluded with foreigners to stir up trouble.

Help is on the way

The European Union announced that it will provide €700m ($760m) in aid to accommodate migrants in countries overwhelmed by the refugee crisis. Most of the money is expected to go to Greece. Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, scolded Austria and other countries for clamping down on refugee arrivals, and vowed not to abandon Greece.

The leader of Spain’s Socialist Party, Pedro Sánchez, failed in his first attempt to form a minority government with the upstart centrist Ciudadanos party. Both the centre-right Popular Party and the far-left Podemos party voted against the proposed coalition in parliament. If Mr Sánchez fails again in a second vote planned for March 4th, the caretaker government will probably call new elections.



Ireland’s governing coalition of the Fine Gael and Labour parties suffered a stinging electoral defeat, dropping from a combined 113 seats to 57. The opposition Fianna Fáil party, which came second with 44 seats, vowed not to join a coalition with Fine Gael, leaving no clear direction for forming a new government. See article.

The EU and America revealed details of their proposed deal for companies to share digital information, which replaces the Safe Harbour agreement that was thrown out by Europe’s courts. Officials said the deal contains measures to protect stricter European privacy guarantees.

Better than nothing

Argentina reached an agreement in principle to pay four of the largest creditors whose refusal to accept earlier debt-restructuring offers precipitated a default by the country in 2014. Argentina is to pay Elliott Management, a hedge fund, and three other holdouts $4.7 billion, 25% less than they are claiming. If the deal goes through, Argentina will be able to resume borrowing on international credit markets. See article.

Police in Colombia arrested Santiago Uribe, the brother of Álvaro Uribe, a former president, for allegedly leading a paramilitary group suspected of murdering criminals and anti-government guerrillas in the 1990s. Santiago Uribe denies the charges; his supporters say his arrest is motivated by politics. Álvaro Uribe, who is now a senator, opposes the government’s plan to end the conflict with the FARC rebels.

The Jamaica Labour Party won the country’s election, defeating the governing People’s National Party. Andrew Holness, Jamaica’s new prime minister, campaigned against the PNP government’s austerity programme and promised to exempt from income tax 72% of the Jamaicans who pay it.

Fingers crossed

A ceasefire in Syria went into effect on February 27th. Despite numerous small violations, it appeared to be holding, allowing a smoother delivery of aid. See article.

In Iran moderates did well in elections to the parliament, inflicting defeats on hardliners despite their attempts to stop the moderates from standing. The parliament has only limited powers, but reformists were nonetheless cheered. See here and here.

Jihadists from al-Shabab killed at least 30 people when they detonated two bombs in the Somali town of Baidoa.

Concerns increased that civil war may break out in Burundi after protests and violence over a decision by Pierre Nkurunziza to run for a third term as president. In the latest escalation of troubles, the government ordered all foreign nationals to give their details to the police.



Robert Mugabe, the president of Zimbabwe and the world’s oldest head of state, celebrated his 92nd birthday with a lavish party and a 92kg cake. Zimbabwe, which is suffering its worst drought in decades, is near economic collapse and unable to pay civil servants.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21693996-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

Volkswagen acknowledged that its former boss, Martin Winterkorn, had been handed a memo in May 2014 that mentioned inconsistencies in emissions from its diesel cars. That was more than a year before the German carmaker admitted to cheating on emissions tests in the United States, though VW says it is not known whether Mr Winterkorn read the memo, as it was included in a batch of “extensive weekend mail”. See article.

Aubrey McClendon, one of the pioneers of America’s shale-gas revolution, died after his car hit a concrete wall in Oklahoma City. A day earlier he had been charged by the Department of Justice with conspiring to fix the price of oil and gas leases between 2007 and 2012, when he was CEO of Chesapeake Energy. He had denied the allegations, insisting he was being “singled out” as the only person in the energy industry to face criminal charges for bidding jointly on leaseholds in the 110 years of the Sherman Act.

Every little step

The People’s Bank of China cut its reserve requirement ratio—the amount, relative to deposits, that banks must keep with the central bank—by half a percentage point. It is the fifth reduction in just over a year. By freeing money for lending, the PBoC hopes to stimulate the slowing economy. Manufacturing activity in China fell in February to its lowest level in years.

The euro zone slipped back into deflation for the first time since September. Consumer prices fell by an annual 0.2% in February; economists had expected the figure to be flat. The European Central Bank will meet on March 10th to weigh more stimulus in order to tackle persistently low inflation.

Sweden’s economy grew by a respectable 1.3% in the fourth quarter of last year compared with the previous three months, and by 4.1% for all of 2015. Consumer spending, investment and exports all rose faster than expected. Sweden has a negative interest rate of -0.5%; a robust economy makes it unlikely that the central bank will cut it further.

A potential bidding war for the London Stock Exchange loomed when ICE, which owns the New York Stock Exchange, said it was considering making an offer. The LSE is already in advanced talks with Deutsche Börse about a merger. One of the LSE’s most attractive assets is its profitable clearing-house business in swaps, bonds and other financial instruments.

Out of Africa

After a century of doing business on the continent, Barclays said it would leave Africa and focus on its core banking activities in Britain and America. The bank is selling assets in part to boost its capital. It also cut its dividend by half to help shore up its balance-sheet. See article.

Apple and the FBI took their tussle over accessing the iPhone of a terrorist to Congress. The hearing produced more heat than light, with Apple defending its decision not to help the agency unlock the device on privacy grounds, and the FBI asking “Are we comfortable with technical design decisions that result in barriers to obtaining evidence of a crime?”

Facebook confronted two legal challenges. Police in Brazil arrested an executive at Facebook because it failed to comply with a court order to turn over messages sent by suspected drug-traffickers through WhatsApp, which is owned by the tech giant. Facebook says it can’t comply as it can’t retain or intercept user messages on the messaging service. In Germany antitrust regulators started an inquiry into whether it abuses its dominance in social networks to collect personal data.

Amazon made its first proper foray into Britain’s supermarket industry when it teamed up with Morrisons to deliver its produce. Britain, with its densely populated towns, has a vibrant online- shopping market; 27% of Britons buy groceries online at least once a month.

Another week, another woeful annual earnings release from a mining company, as Glencore reported a net loss for 2015 of $5 billion. Its debt pile remained high, at $26 billion at the end of the year. But Ivan Glasenberg, Glencore’s chief executive, said that the company had “learnt lessons” from the past and was on track to reduce its debt to $15 billion by 2017.

The parent trap



Disney introduced variable pricing for tickets to its American theme parks. The new system has three pricing bands, with the peak ticket costing about a fifth more than previously. New “value days” will be priced about 5% lower than the old flat rate. Parents with school-age children will feel the market is again working against them, but the changes are similar to those already implemented by other theme parks.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21693979-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21693986-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




The primaries: Battle lines

E-commerce in emerging markets: India online

Iran’s election: Revolt against the reactionaries

Malaysia’s prime minister: The Najib effect

Concussion: Schools and hard knocks





Articles Sections Next

The primaries

Battle lines

The prospect of Trump v Clinton is grim. But look carefully and 2016 offers a faint promise of something better

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



HILLARY CLINTON will be the Democratic nominee; the man most likely to face her in November on the Republican ticket is Donald Trump.

Those are the battle lines after the primaries on Super Tuesday. In many ways this is profoundly gloomy. Mr Trump has said ever more repellent things about immigrants, women and Muslims and declined to condemn white supremacists. But he changes his sales pitch as easily as his socks: in a speech after winning seven out of 11 states, he stopped snarling and tried to sound presidential. It would be unwise to underestimate his ability to feign gravitas and transform himself into an apparent centrist.

The only obstacle between Mr Trump and the Oval Office would be Mrs Clinton. She is a formidable and in some ways admirable candidate, but flawed. She is unloved by bits of her party’s base and subject to an investigation into whether she mishandled classified information.

Small wonder that so many who contemplate American politics today sink into despair. But with a large dose of optimism and continued faith in the good sense of American voters, it is just possible to see November’s election in a more positive light. The vote for the presidency could yet yield the reshaping of the two main parties and a political realignment that leads to a less stagnant and gridlocked government.

Be nice now

This optimistic scenario depends on converting today’s antagonism into a force for change. The primaries have made clear that a large share of American voters are angry: angry with their own side’s representatives, angry with their opponents and angry with the world.

So far, that anger has been channelled into divisiveness. On the right, Mr Trump has exploited the discontent by insulting his way to the front of the pack, stirring up racial resentment as he goes, delighting crowds with a list of proposals that run from the unethical to the unworkable. On parts of the left, the rage is more polite but, particularly where it is aimed at Wall Street, no less deeply felt.

In recent elections partisan fissures have been reinforced by the brutal maths of voter turnout. Polling shows that a majority of Republicans and Democrats believe that the other lot are so depraved as to pose a threat to the nation itself. Because it is hard to persuade people who think like this to switch sides, electoral strategists argue that chasing swing voters is pointless. The easiest extra votes come from the 40% of the electorate who typically stay at home in a presidential poll. Each side therefore concentrates on stirring up people who support it but might not vote. That raises the anger to a new pitch.

If this desperate logic is repeated in a Clinton v Trump race, the contest could have consequences both ugly and far-reaching, particularly for the Republicans. After winning a race fuelled by anger and led by Mr Trump, the party would almost certainly ditch its attachment to free trade and a muscular foreign policy and retreat into isolationism, xenophobia and economic populism. If it survived that shift (a big if), it would by the middle of the century be a white-nationalist party in a country that will be majority non-white. More likely, it would fracture, parts of the Republican coalition spinning off to find a new home elsewhere (see page 36).

For Mrs Clinton, going down the angry route might not split the party, but would almost certainly result in defeat. Democrats tend to fare poorly when their anguish overflows and begins to sound like contempt for America. It is hard to imagine Mrs Clinton credibly playing the political insurgent. She has decades of experience when the angriest voters want a novice. Nobody can out-hate Mr Trump. So it is encouraging that Mrs Clinton celebrated her victories on Super Tuesday by calling for more “love and kindness” in politics.



America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

The opportunity for a better outcome lies in the asymmetry of the risks. Mrs Clinton has the opportunity to put together a coalition of anti-Trump voters broader than the one that carried Barack Obama to victory in 2008 and 2012. Despair over Mr Trump has reached such an intensity among some Republicans that the usual rules about there being no swing voters may no longer apply. If Mrs Clinton were to combine a high turnout on her own side with a sizeable number of Republican abstentions and spoilt ballots and some voters who are prepared to switch from red to blue, then Democrats could not just win the presidency with a landslide, but also wrest back control of the Senate.

To form this coalition for stopping the blond Berlusconi, Mrs Clinton would have to woo moderate, business-minded Republicans, and such folk would in turn have to put the national interest ahead of their tribe’s victory in November. Republicans like to talk about the importance of character (see Lexington); Mr Trump offers a chance to show that means something. Mr Trump often insults other Republicans; they owe him no loyalty. Some prominent Republicans have already begun to attack him, including Mitt Romney, the party’s nominee in 2012. More will have to make that move.

Don’t throw it away

After the election a broad coalition could melt away as fast as it had formed. Democrats could use their advantage to force through what they can without the support of their opponents while they have the chance. They would then be punished in subsequent elections and the federal government would return to its familiar divided self: unable to pass budgets, trim spending on entitlements or find money to repair roads.

Or a President Hillary Clinton might argue for the virtues of democratic compromise, and not claim that she can magically give her core voters everything they want all of the time. If she were able to pursue a different kind of politics, one that seeks to deal with some Republican concerns as well as Democratic ones, she might just hold the new consensus together for longer, reshaping the parties, making the country more governable and burying Mr Trump’s offer of an America turned against itself. This is the distant promise that 2016 holds. As the battle lines are drawn, try to bear it in mind.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693924-prospect-trump-v-clinton-grim-look-carefully-and-2016-offers-faint-promise/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

E-commerce in emerging markets

India online

The battle for India’s e-commerce market is about much more than retailing

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



EVERY second three more Indians experience the internet for the first time. By 2030 more than 1 billion of them will be online. In June last year one in four mobiles used in India was a smartphone, up from one in five just six months earlier. Add in two more facts—India boasts the world’s fastest-growing large economy, and the planet’s biggest population of millennials—and you can see why the likes of Facebook, Uber and Google are falling over themselves to establish footholds there.

No battle for the online future of India is more intense than the one now being waged in e-commerce (see article). Sales are still tiny, at $16 billion last year, but the country is the world’s fastest-growing e-commerce market and is prized by America’s and China’s internet titans. India has become the biggest test of Amazon’s international ambitions. Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s founder, wants it to be his second-largest market, after America, and has backed his plans with billions of dollars of investment. His opponents are platforms like Flipkart and Snapdeal, founded by locals and funded by some of the biggest names in tech, among them Alibaba, China’s e-commerce champion.

As these companies jostle for market share, they are spending feverishly on logistics and discounts to lure consumers online. Capital may dry up for some; in February a Morgan Stanley mutual fund sharply lowered the valuation of its stake in Flipkart. But whoever wins or loses in this frenzied contest, the importance of e-commerce stretches beyond individual firms and into the wider economy. In the West e-commerce companies piggybacked on an existing infrastructure of shops, banks and logistics firms. In India the game being played by the e-commerce pioneers is leapfrog. It could become a model for emerging markets around the world.

Pay as you grow

Indian e-commerce has such potential because it can bring three changes more profound than convenience and keen prices. The first is faster financial development. China already provides one example. Alipay, an arm of Alibaba, overcomes mistrust between buyers and sellers by holding on to customers’ money until they have safely received their goods. Now run by an affiliate called Ant Financial, Alipay has more than 400m accounts that let consumers buy products, pay bills and transfer money. The torrent of information that Alibaba gathered on merchants and consumers was the basis for a lending business.

Something similar is under way in India. Paytm, which provides digital wallets and is itself backed by Ant Financial, has 120m accounts, nearly six times the number of credit cards in India. E-commerce companies are also helping small businesses obtain loans that they would otherwise have struggled to raise. Amazon India rolled out such a programme for its sellers last month. In January Snapdeal announced a partnership to streamline loans from the State Bank of India.

Second, e-commerce firms could help overcome India’s ropy infrastructure and vast geography. Where roads are clogged and infrastructure is decrepit, the rival firms are melding warehouses and local outposts into idiosyncratic distribution networks. About half of Flipkart’s and Snapdeal’s customers are outside India’s biggest cities. Some are still farther afield: Amazon claims to be helping more than 6,000 Indian businesses sell abroad. China again shows what can be done. Alibaba is connecting remote rural areas to the online economy; there are now 780 “Taobao villages”, rural communities in which at least 10% of households are shopping or selling over the internet.

The third big impact of e-commerce in India is on retailing itself. Shopping malls and chain stores account for only about one-tenth of total retail sales. Already, the combined sales of India’s top three e-commerce sites, Flipkart, Snapdeal and Amazon, surpass those of the ten largest offline retailers.

Two-thirds of Indians are below the age of 35. For these young people, armed with smartphones, shopping is likely to be very different from what it was for their parents. Malls and chains will not disappear, but they may never be as prevalent as they are in the West.

That in turn will stimulate the rise of other digital firms. India’s tech scene is thriving. Tiger Global, a Flipkart investor, also backs an Indian online classified business and a messenger app that helps users avoid data costs. SoftBank, which backs Snapdeal, funds a mobile-advertising platform. In 2014 only America, Britain and Israel saw more new tech startups.

Platform boost

Simply to assume that e-commerce will conjure up growth—particularly of the labour-intensive sort that India needs—would be a mistake. The market in China had a very different starting-point, for instance. When the likes of Alibaba got going, it helped that China was already home to many manufacturers looking for new ways to sell excess inventory. India’s manufacturing base is much smaller, especially for electronics, e-commerce’s best-selling category. India is also poorer. A smaller share of its population is online—32% last year, compared with 52% in China. Indians speak more than 20 languages, which complicates marketing. The budget unveiled by Narendra Modi’s government this week includes plans to upgrade 50,000km (30,000 miles) of roads, but India is not about to possess a gleaming motorway network to rival China’s. Mr Modi’s continued failure to install a harmonised goods and services tax blunts the benefits of e-commerce.

Yet in its heft, governance and manufacturing clout, China is also an outlier. India is a better template for the e-commerce battle in other emerging markets. Its logistical woes provide a test of firms’ ingenuity. If they find a way to deliver goods profitably there, they may succeed elsewhere. If they falter, their stumbles will provide lessons. That is all the more likely because India’s e-commerce is so international. Naspers, a Flipkart investor, backs ventures in Nigeria, South Africa and Egypt, among other places. E-commerce in India is a local battle for customers, but it is also a battle for the future.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693925-battle-indias-e-commerce-market-about-much-more-retailing-india-online/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Iran’s election

Revolt against the reactionaries

Voters gave a vigorous thumbs-down to the hardliners. If only voting mattered more in Iran

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



THE conservatives did everything they could to prevent it, abusing the power of the state to disqualify thousands of candidates they judged too prominent, too moderate or both. But the election on February 26th of Iran’s parliament, the Majlis, was a slap in the face to them nonetheless. Though complete results are not yet in, moderates and centrists look likely to control the new chamber (see article). The hardliners, who won handily in 2012, before Western nuclear sanctions began to bite, were pushed back. They call themselves “principlists” because of their stern promotion of premodern values. Iranian voters, it seems, reject their principles.

The election is good news for Iran’s reform-minded president, Hassan Rohani. It demonstrates just how solidly the nation’s voters support the deal he negotiated with world powers to roll back the country’s nuclear-enrichment programme in return for relief from sanctions. The principlists in the old parliament had tried, but failed, to block it.

The poll will also make it easier for Mr Rohani to continue with his economic reforms, which involve opening Iran to more foreign investment and freeing the private sector to compete against inefficient state firms that serve largely to enrich religious and military bigwigs. And it is surely a good omen for his chances of re-election as president next year.

Still, one should not overstate the significance of the vote. The new parliament is a weaker, less reliable ally than Mr Rohani might have hoped. Due to all the disqualifications, the new moderate list is less impressive and less reformist than it could have been. The parliament itself, though not irrelevant, is not a very powerful body. Its decisions have to be vetted by the Council of Guardians—the reactionary grandees who disqualified so many moderates. And over the whole political edifice—parliament, president and all—stands the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who wields vast powers, especially over foreign and security policy.

Even if he wanted to, Mr Rohani could not act as an Iranian Mikhail Gorbachev. Mr Khamenei insists that the nuclear deal has no implications for any other forms of co-operation with the West; and he has set his face against any relaxation of the country’s strict Islamic legal code. Besides, it is not at all clear that Mr Rohani, a member of the old revolutionary elite, is setting out to be anything more than an economic reformer.

Still stirring up trouble

Iranians have lived through this before. The election in 1997 of President Muhammad Khatami, who genuinely sought political reform, was followed by the election of a supportive Majlis. But the mullahs’ stifling grip loosened not at all. So do not expect Iran’s dismal record on human rights to improve. (In one village last year, every adult male was reportedly executed on drugs charges.)

Nor should the West count on a more pliant partner in the Middle East. At the moment, Iran is standing tall in the region. Its support for Bashar al-Assad’s homicidal regime in Syria has been reinforced by Russian bombers. It is the dominant force in Iraq, its mostly Shia neighbour. And it is giving its old Sunni rival, Saudi Arabia, a bloody nose in Yemen.

Having asked them to dismantle Iran’s nuclear programme, Mr Khamenei will need to placate Iran’s hardliners in other ways. Funding for the Revolutionary Guards, including its Quds Force, which operates in several countries, is likely to go up, not down. Iran’s support for Hizbullah, its battle-hardened proxy in Syria and on Israel’s borders, will probably grow. Free from sanctions, Iran is likely to remain prickly, no matter how moderate its parliament appears.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693927-voters-gave-vigorous-thumbs-down-hardliners-if-only-voting-mattered-more-iran-revolt/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Malaysia’s prime minister

The Najib effect

Not only Malaysians should be worried about rotten politics and a divisive prime minister

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



ONE of South-East Asia’s richest and hitherto most stable countries, Malaysia ought to be a beacon. Its constitution is liberal, and its brand of Islam generally tolerant. Its diverse, English-speaking population, combining ethnic Malays, Chinese and Indians, gives it zest and vim. Yet under the prime minister, Najib Razak, the country is regressing at alarming speed. Its politics stinks (see article), its economy is in trouble, and there are worrying signs that the government is not above stirring up ethnic and religious divisions.

For the past year allegations of corruption have swirled around Mr Najib. They centre around hundreds of millions of dollars that made their way into his bank accounts before the most recent general election, in 2013 (see article). Investigators are looking into whether the money is linked to a troubled state investment firm, 1MDB, whose advisory board Mr Najib chairs. He denies wrongdoing. His attorney-general has ruled that the money was a legal donation from an unnamed Saudi royal, and that much of it has been returned.

For Malaysians, the precise nature of what happened is not the main point. Mr Najib presented himself as a liberal out to remake the sleazy system of money politics by which the ruling United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) has held power since independence. He was to open up a crony economy. And he was to do away with repressive colonial-era laws, such as that for sedition.

Now Mr Najib’s credibility is in tatters. Facing inquiries around 1MDB, he has engineered the retirement of a pesky police chief, replaced an attorney-general and promoted members of an inquisitive parliamentary committee into the cabinet, where they can do less harm. Far from loosening colonial laws, the government is wielding the sedition law with new zeal. It is blocking news websites and hounding opponents (the opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim, is in prison on charges of sodomy). Even yellow T-shirts have been outlawed since citizens protesting against corruption took to wearing them. The more Mr Najib cracks down, the more he alienates those who were once inclined to support him.

Foreign investors and others should be worried. The government is floundering in its responses to a sharp slowdown in the economy and to a falling currency. Cheap oil has hurt Malaysia, but its wretched politics will hold it back more in the long run. The government is now using dog-whistle politics to appeal to its ethnic-Malay, Muslim base, and is refusing to distance itself sufficiently from Islamists seeking the introduction of harsh sharia punishments. Pro-government bigots in the street have told ethnic-Chinese Malaysians to “go back to China”. This is dangerous. Malaysia has seen race riots before, and could see them again. Nearby Singapore, with its different mix of the same ethnic groups, should also be alarmed.

1 Massive Development Balls-up

Malaysia’s problems run deep. UMNO is out of ideas and seems incapable of rejuvenating itself. The fractured, rudderless opposition does not have the winning combination to overcome UMNO’s gerrymandering and harassment. And the next election is anyway still two years away. Restoring confidence will be tricky. But for as long as Malaysia is governed in the style of Mr Najib, ordinary Malaysians will suffer and their country will be deprived of the standing that it surely deserves in the world.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693923-not-only-malaysians-should-be-worried-about-rotten-politics-and-divisive-prime-minister/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Concussion

Schools and hard knocks

Children need protection from high-impact sports such as rugby and American football

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



IMAGINE being asked to take part in an activity that gives you somewhere between a 1-in-5 and 1-in-20 chance of a serious head injury over a four-month period. That could lead to weeks of impaired mental performance and headaches, and, especially if the blows are repeated, the danger of longer-term mental-health problems. Now imagine that your child is the one taking that risk.

Such are the dangers associated with playing American football. The risks of concussion are higher still in rugby, one of the world’s fastest-growing sports. These concerns have already prompted some changes. Rugby has introduced “head-injury assessment” rules, enabling players who have suspected concussions to be substituted temporarily so that they can be checked by medical staff. All 50 of America’s states have adopted “return to play” laws that require medical clearance before younger athletes who have sustained a concussion can take to the field again.

Such measures are welcome, but they sidestep the real issue: is it safe to play a game whose rules require people to slam into each other? As understanding grows of what happens in the brain when collisions take place (see article), the answer seems certain to be “no”.

Adults are able to consent to taking risks of this sort, even if they are not yet fully understood. That does not relieve sports authorities of their duty of care to players—one reason why American-football coaches at Ivy League universities have just agreed to get rid of “full contact” training sessions during the playing season. But liberal principles argue against the most drastic interventions. Boxing; barbarically dangerous though it is, should not be banned, nor should other sports.

Children are a different case, not simply because they cannot give informed consent but also because their brains are more susceptible to long-term damage. Researchers at the University of Illinois found that children who had sustained a single sports-related concussion still had impaired brain function two years later.

Some measures to protect children from harm are already in place. Some states in America have introduced rules for American football to restrict full-contact sessions in high schools: incidents of concussion have fallen as a result. Although the risks of brain injury in association football are lower, US Soccer, the governing body for the sport in America, has banned headers for children aged ten and under, and restricted them for 11- to 13-year-olds.

More should be done. No child should be obliged to play full-contact American football, rugby or ice hockey in schools. And for those who do take to the field or rink, schools should do more to reduce the risks—from recording and monitoring injuries systematically and requiring that children train with players their own size rather than their age, to insisting on non-contact forms of play. Rugby has most to do, particularly given plans to raise the number of child players. This week doctors and academics rightly called for a ban on tackling in rugby games played in British and Irish schools.

Not tackling it head-on

None of this is popular. Critics contend that all sports are dangerous. They argue for the benefits of exercise and say that the nanny state is out of control. But other sports do not involve deliberate impact and are just as energetic. And ensuring the safety of children hardly counts as excessive intervention.

Critics raise another, cultural, objection: that the spirit of games like rugby and American football is in danger of being lost. There is something to that. But an activity that rests on exposing children to long-term neurological damage needs a better defence.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693926-children-need-protection-high-impact-sports-such-rugby-and-american-football-schools-and/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




Cannabis, freedom of press, US politics, diversity, Brexit, language, Cornwall: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

Cannabis, freedom of press, US politics, diversity, Brexit, language, Cornwall

Letters to the editor

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



High ho silver lining

I was disappointed by “The right way to do drugs” (February 13th). It didn’t go far enough in calling for cannabis to be legalised. There is no lethal dose of cannabis, though there are lethal doses of the government-approved alternatives to cannabis. Getting users off deadly alcohol, say, and towards cannabis will save lives. Marijuana should be as cheap and as accessible as possible. Taxing and restricting it will not fix the problem. There is a functional black market and it is not going to end just because the government “sort of” legalised pot.

DAN KING

Sacramento, California

In my experience a cost calculation drives the preference among occasional users for higher THC content in cannabis. Only one or two tokes are required to give occasional users the desired high, so a little weed goes a lot further. It follows that, to the extent there is price sensitivity, higher prices and taxes would have the perverse effect of pushing your 80% of occasional users towards inhaling more smoke.

The calculus for the 20% who are heavy users is different. There is an intensity factor. Even though heavy users may be high for longer, they are not nearly as high as the occasional user. They do indeed prefer higher THC content, just to achieve any effect at all. So in their case higher prices and taxes would encourage the continuation of a black market.

PETER CONROY

Ottawa, Canada





Japanese television

“Anchors away” (February 20th) submitted that “it is no coincidence” that the three anchors who left their TV programmes in Japan “are robust critics of the government”, implying the government had intervened in their leaving. However, Yoshihide Suga, the chief cabinet secretary, clearly stated at a press conference on February 9th that “freedom of the press and editorial rights must be guaranteed.” The government of Japan has been and will remain fully committed to freedom of expression and freedom of the press. The descriptions in your article have no ground.

YASUHISA KAWAMURA

Press secretary

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan

Tokyo





Small but mighty

Lexington noted that if no presidential candidate gets 270 electoral-college votes, the contest is decided by the House of Representatives, which will be Republican-held (February 20th). However, in such a circumstance each state gets only one vote in the House, regardless of how many representatives are elected from that state. Presumably, Texas would vote Republican and California would vote Democrat. But numerous smaller states would have an equal weight with the more populous ones.

RYAN SCHAAP

Thousand Oaks, California





Mix it up

It is true: diversity undermines trust (Schumpeter, February 13th). But this may be its greatest gift. When ethnically different others are present, people tend to remain cautious, scrutinise information and reach better decisions. Our research, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, showed that ethnically diverse markets are significantly less likely to bubble compared with homogenous ones. The results held for North America and South-East Asia, notwithstanding the differences in culture, history and ethnic composition.

In homogenous markets, we reason, trust in other people’s reasonableness can cause erroneous beliefs to spread more readily. Diversity makes you better precisely because it makes you less trusting.

PROFESSOR SHEEN LEVINE

The University of Texas, Dallas





Divide and choose?

I read Bagehot’s fascinating article on the divergent views of the European Union from people in Cambridge and Peterborough (February 20th). This divergence has little to do with nativism or nationalism or even class. It is a pertinent fact that because of its role as a centre for agriculture, food processing, packaging and logistics, Peterborough has borne a heavy burden in respect of unskilled immigration from the EU: more than 30,000 new migrants from 2004 to 2011. This puts huge pressure on public services, and has arguably kept wages low and entrenched welfare dependency among many indigenous and low-skilled workers.

Business, and the Treasury, have reaped the economic benefit of this large-scale migration, but local taxpayers have footed the bill and seen the pressures consequent in this unprecedented demographic change. Local people can’t have helped noticing, and are canny enough to understand the role of the EU Free Movement Directive.

People in Peterborough have seen the cost of unrestricted immigration and, as a result, are more conscious than most of the benefits or otherwise of Britain’s membership of the EU. Is it any wonder that they are more sceptical?

STEWART JACKSON

Member of Parliament for Peterborough

I am not sure about Bagehot’s “educational-cultural divide” over Europe. The Brexit referendum has not come about because of an outcry across the land by ordinary folk or because public opinion has been consistently against EU membership, or because people are calling for an immediate exit. We are having a referendum because of a battle within the educational and political elite. It is symptomatic of the division within the Tory Party, not within the country, yet at least.

However, with “in” campaigners like Jeremy Corbyn ranting something along the lines of “Workers of the EU, unite!”, the divisions could get very real, very soon.

LUKE CARR

London





Double entendres

Johnson, ruminating on the secret meaning of “feisty” (February 13th) would have done well to have provided a whiff, as it were, of etymology. In Mark Forsyth’s marvellous book, “The Etymologicon”, and largely corroborated by the Oxford English Dictionary, feisty, in the sense of “spirited”, is derived from “fist” or “feist”, meaning a small dog. This in turn comes from the phrase “a fisting hound”, where “to fist” means to fart.

VENKAT ANANTHARAM

Berkeley, California





Catching the wave

As a resident of next-door Devon I read your article about Cornwall’s post-industrial economy with great interest (“Winter sun”, February 20th). In addition to the demographic, political and infrastructural factors which you identify, advances in affordable wetsuit technology have also played an important role in tourism. As a result, anyone can spend as much time in the sea as they want the whole year round. The effect has been revolutionary, as local surfers know only too well.

ANTHONY KING

Exeter, Devon



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21693902-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Online retailing in India: The great race





Articles Sections Next

Online retailing in India

The great race

In the next 15 years, India will see more people come online than any other country. E-commerce firms are in a frenzied battle for their custom

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS a quiet morning on the outskirts of Mumbai, the air still mild. Dusty streets are dappled with sunlight, a stray dog rummages through some rubbish, the shutters are lifted on a few tiny shops. A man pushes a cart bearing a pyramid of oranges. And a delivery boy named Anil is already racing along his route on a motor bike borrowed from his uncle, his delivery backpack as large as he is. He has been up for hours, planning his route and carefully filling his bag with the packages to be dropped off first stacked near the top.

Anil enters a block of flats, squeezes his backpack into a narrow lift and delivers a shirt to a 21-year-old taxi driver. In a neighbouring tower he hands a smartphone case to a 16-year-old who uses several apps to do the shopping for his family. A short ride away, a 78-year-old grandmother is a particularly pleased customer—with help from her grandson, she has bought some clay pickling jars that she couldn’t find elsewhere and some high-quality saris at a knock-down price. For Anil, it is gruelling work. But he is betting that e-commerce in India has nowhere to go but up, and he wants to ride up with it.

In the next 15 years India will see more people come online than any other country. Last year e-commerce sales were about $16 billion; by 2020, according to Morgan Stanley, a bank, the online retail market could be more than seven times larger. Such sales are expected to grow faster in India than in any other market. This has attracted a flood of investment in e-commerce firms, the impact of which may go far beyond just displacing offline retail.

India’s small businesses have limited access to loans; most of its consumers do not have credit cards, or for that matter credit. The e-commerce companies are investing in logistics, helping merchants borrow and giving consumers new tools to pay for goods. Amit Agarwal, who runs Amazon.in, holds out the hope that “We could actually be a catalyst to transform India: how India buys, how India sells, and even transform lives.”

The jewel in the crown

Amazon wants to make India its second-biggest market, after America. For the time being, though, with just 12% of the market, it lags behind the home-grown successes, Flipkart (45%) and Snapdeal (26%). All three, as well as some smaller competitors, are spending at a blistering rate. As global markets dip and Silicon Valley unicorns stumble, the international funding that makes this possible may dry up. Doubts about the sustainability of the companies’ present plans were underlined when, on February 26th, one of Morgan Stanley’s mutual funds marked down the value of its stake in Flipkart by 27%. If the prospect of changing India a billion deliveries at a time is a beguiling one, it is not for the faint-hearted.

India’s visionaries keep their spirits up by remembering the example of China. Chinese e-commerce grew by nearly 600% between 2010 and 2014, making the country the biggest e-commerce market in the world today. It managed this largely through the growth of indigenous companies: mighty Amazon merely nips at the heels of home-grown giants Alibaba and JD.com; eBay has all but left the stage. And in the process China’s top e-commerce firms came to offer an astonishing range of services.

Alibaba, founded by Jack Ma in 1999 and now valued at $184 billion, provides the best illustration. To calm anxieties about buying online Alibaba created Alipay, which holds a shopper’s payment in escrow until he receives his order. The tool has evolved into a financial-services company, Ant Financial, which last year serviced more than 400m Alipay accounts and made over 2m loans to small businesses and entrepreneurs. To provide Chinese consumers with access to foreign goods the firm’s services include not just online listings but marketing, shipping and help with customs.

Alibaba is now building service centres in remote areas where shoppers can order, pick up and sell goods, as well as pay their bills. It is a further step in its attempts not merely to benefit from the growth in Chinese consumption, but to shape and accelerate it. The degree to which it has succeeded suggests that the earlier an e-commerce company arrives in a country’s development, the wider its role might be.

India is in many ways a tougher market for e-commerce than China. Its population is poorer and its infrastructure worse. But its prospects look remarkable. Income per person, which in 2014 was $1,570, could be twice that by 2025. Two-thirds of Indians are younger than 35, and their phones give a huge number of them access to the internet. In December 2014 smartphones accounted for one in five Indian mobiles, according to Goldman Sachs. Just six months later, they accounted for one in four (see chart 1). Morgan Stanley expects internet penetration to rise from 32% in 2015 to 59% in 2020. By 2030, India is projected to be a one-billion-person digital market.



The prospect of a second market growing to a near-Chinese size attracts those who made a packet the first time round. Bob van Dijk, the chief executive of Naspers, a South African firm that backed JD.com and Tencent, China’s largest social-media company, says he looks for countries with big populations, rising smartphone use and few retail chains. India, where malls, supermarkets and branded chains, or what analysts call “organised retail”, account for just 10% or so of the total market, fits the bill perfectly.

The middlemen

Naspers owns a 17% stake in Flipkart; other JD.com investors, including Tiger Global Management, in New York, and DST Global, a Russian fund, have also backed the company. Japan’s SoftBank, a big investor in Alibaba, has backed Snapdeal since 2013, and Alibaba itself followed suit last August. Meanwhile Alibaba’s Ant Financial owns a 20% stake in India’s Paytm, which began as a mobile-wallet company and now competes with Snapdeal and Flipkart as an online marketplace. The three firms have a combined valuation of almost $25 billion.

In contrast to those investors trying to recapitulate their Chinese success, Amazon is seeking to make up for its failure. Reduced last year to the ignominy of having to open a shop on Alibaba’s Tmall site, Jeff Bezos is determined that this time, with more experience and in a more open market, things will be different.

When Flipkart was founded, in 2007, Amazon was obviously its model. The company began as a bookseller; the two engineers who started it, Sachin Bansal and Binny Bansal (not related), had worked for Amazon. Mr Bezos, though, is of the opinion that if anyone if going to be the Amazon of India, it should be Amazon. In 2014, shortly after Flipkart announced a $1 billion round of funding, Mr Bezos donned Indian clothes in Bangalore, hopped aboard a rainbow-coloured truck and handed Mr Agarwal a $2 billion cheque. A firm which earned over $100 billion in 2015 and has shareholders content to see more or less nothing by way of profits can afford such largesse.

Neither Flipkart, Amazon, nor any of the other big competitors are following the retail strategy that led to Amazon’s success in the West. Indian regulations bar foreign-backed e-commerce firms from owning inventory, and so acting as a straightforward retailer is not an option. As a result India’s top e-commerce companies look much more like Alibaba. Flipkart has become a marketplace where sellers offer everything from mobile phones to washing machines to handbags. Snapdeal, Amazon and Paytm run marketplaces too. The firms compete feverishly on price, offering discounts that chomp away their own margins. In the long term, they must differentiate themselves by honing services for sellers and shoppers alike, and offering a better, broader range of products to more Indians than would have them otherwise.

The first step to that goal is to boost the number of sellers on the company’s platform—it is the sellers, after all, who pay commissions and shipping fees. So companies offer a range of services to lure businesses to their sites. Flipkart’s programmes range from teaching sellers how to manage peak sales during diwali to advising fashion brands on trends and production. In February Amazon announced a travelling studio-on-wheels, offering training, photography and other services to help shop-owners come online.

But the most important help they offer is in easing access to credit. Small businesses, given their scarce financial statements and limited credit history, have long had trouble obtaining loans from India’s banks. They often rely on expensive loans from neighbours or family. The e-commerce companies have strong incentives to make them better offers—and because they have access to online-sales data they are in a privileged position from which to help lenders judge credit risk.

Take Sumit Agarwal (no relation to Amazon’s Mr Agarwal), a young entrepreneur who started an online shoe business in 2011. In his warehouse in New Delhi workers pack and scan shipments among towers of shoeboxes. The early days were uncertain; his family’s reaction when the firm started, he says, was “What the hell is this guy doing?” Now it is easier for such entrepreneurs to find the capital with which to grow. When Mr Agarwal logs into his seller’s account on Amazon.in his screen offers a column of short-term loans, their rates calculated using data from his transactions. Other e-commerce firms have similar schemes. In January Snapdeal announced that the State Bank of India would approve loans of up to $37,000 instantly if it liked the look of the data that Snapdeal provided on the borrower.

Once a site has sellers, the second challenge is to help consumers buy their wares. Anil carries a clunky credit-card reader with him on his rounds, but most people pay cash. The e-commerce sites want to change that. Paytm lets customers add money to a digital wallet that can then be used to shop online, top up a mobile phone, lend money to a friend, pay a bill or use a service such as an Uber taxi. It has 120m digital-wallet accounts, nearly six times India’s number of credit cards. Snapdeal bought its own mobile payments company in April. Amazon purchased an online-payments service in February.

A fine balance

If a consumer does buy a product, the next task is delivering it. Delivery itself is nothing new. Indians have long been able to have a delivery boy from the local kirana—the cornershops that dominate Indian retail—bring them a stick of butter. But being able to deliver on a larger scale is a challenge. The country’s mail service, India Post, is ill-equipped to wait while a shopper tries on a kurta and ponders returning it. So newcomers are building networks. But India’s traffic is hellish and its addresses vague.

A startup named Delhivery has hired more than 15,000 staff, from developers to executives poached from Facebook and posh consultancies. Its headquarters in Gurgaon are so packed that engineers spill onto an outdoor porch, tapping their keyboards furiously. Delhivery, which works with a number of e-commerce firms, is using machine learning to subdivide India’s postcodes, the better to map idiosyncratic descriptions. “We’ll know the house with the yellow door next to the temple,” says Sandeep Barasia, the managing director. The company moves goods to 700 or so small distribution centres overnight to avoid congested main roads during business hours. Thousands of delivery boys then dash to and from the distribution centres throughout the day, bearing more than 20 kilos on their bikes.

E-commerce companies are devising their own solutions, too. Some investments, such as warehouses, are straightforward. Others are less so. Flipkart last year began using Mumbai’s famous network of dabbawallas, or lunch-delivery men, to drop off packages when they picked up customers’ lunch tins. Amazon has a pilot programme that lets customers order groceries online and have them delivered from the nearest kirana.

Together, e-commerce firms say, these experiments could create a new truly national marketplace. Neelkanth Mishra of Credit Suisse, a bank, points out that road construction, electrification and mobile phones have stoked big increases in rural wages, and thus demand for goods (see chart 2). Flipkart says that about half its sales come from outside India’s big cities. Snapdeal claims more than 60%. It recently launched seven regional-language versions of its website.



As they build out their markets the firms trumpet their assistance to small businesses. “Some of the big sellers on Amazon only had a shop in a corner of Bangalore; they were happy selling to five kilometres around each shop,” declares Amazon’s Mr Agarwal. “Now they are shipping orders to Kashmir and eastern India.” Amazon is helping more than 6,000 Indian businesses export, as well. Snapdeal’s Kunal Bahl is equally expansive: “Our ambition is to be a great social, economic and geographic equaliser for the small businesses of India as they scale up.”

All these bold plans are clouded by two obstinate facts. First, spending on discounts, marketing campaigns and new hires means none of the companies has yet made money. Visit any firm’s lobby and you will meet herds of job applicants. Delivery boys like Anil are in hot demand—a top performer in his branch, he earns about 14,000 rupees ($200) each month.



Amazon is, predictably, outspending its competitors. Last year its sales were two-thirds the size of its losses. Mr Agarwal is not bothered by a lack of profit. “The priority is growth,” he explains. Ankit Nagori, Flipkart’s chief business officer, says that the most important metrics for his company are not margins but the number of new customers, how often they shop, how much they buy and the speed of delivery. “If you solve for these four things,” he contends, “then the top line and bottom line will fall in place.”

A billion deliveries more

The second problem is regulatory. Forbidding foreign-backed firms from owning inventory has costs. Companies have limited control over the quality of products on their sites, points out Morgan Stanley’s Parag Gupta, and they can do little to streamline the country’s fragmented supply chain. Flipkart has become a tangle of interlinked entities, including a holding company in Singapore, in an attempt to obey India’s rules while maximising profits.

India’s government may nonetheless come under protectionist pressure. Traditional retailers allege that the online marketplaces flout rules against foreign direct investment. Facebook’s recently scuttled plan to offer Indians free internet services, including its own, sparked a furore over the risks of “digital colonialism”.

Offline retailers are watching all this intently. Kiranas are relatively protected, thanks to meagre tax bills and limited carrying costs (they store little). Big shops and malls are another story (see chart 3). “What is remarkable for me is that in a very short time, e-commerce has become half of what the organised market is,” says Abheek Singhi of the Boston Consulting Group. “Two years down the line, three years down the line, the e-commerce market could be larger.”



Big foreign retailers—such as Ikea, a Swedish furniture company, which after years of kerfuffle may finally be opening an Indian store—cannot sell directly online. Matters are simpler for Indian retailers, but their course remains cloudy. Reliance Industries, a conglomerate with over 1m square metres of shop floor, is planning its own e-commerce venture. Future Group, which pioneered hypermarkets in the country, is outfitting small shop-owners and entrepreneurs with digital catalogues so that consumers can order Future Group products in places where there will never be a store. However the firm has scaled back some of its more ambitious plans for e-commerce. “The more sales you do, the more money you lose,” muses Kishore Biyani, Future Group’s founder. “You need to have continuous funding and someone to back you.”

For the time being, the big companies in the sector are having those needs met. “You have at least three, potentially four large players with deep enough pockets,” says Mr Singhi. “It’s going to play out at a very high cost.” Companies like Alibaba and Amazon see that cost as worth paying in part because, just as they applied what they learned in China to India, so they will use their Indian experience in the next markets they move into. Alibaba, not content to back Paytm and Snapdeal, is also courting Indian businesses directly. In December it said it would help Indian firms with financing and logistics so they might use Alibaba’s platforms to export to China and beyond. Eventually, Mr Ma likes to say, any consumer should be able to buy from any seller, anywhere in the world. The more of those purchases go through one of his firms, the better.

And everywhere these giants go, home-grown entrepreneurs will be hoping that their local acumen will give them an edge and looking for overseas investors to back them. Many of them will fail: India does not yet offer an example of how to make a profit, and it may be a long time before it does. But as long as some of these efforts survive, they will serve to speed progress, and innovation, in developing markets. As Amazon’s Mr Agarwal says, “If millions of small, medium enterprises out there, manufacturers and retailers, can...sell their product anywhere in the world—that’s transformational.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21693921-next-15-years-india-will-see-more-people-come-online-any-other-country-e-commerce/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




Super Tuesday: Goodbye, Rubio Tuesday

Abortion: Back in court

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

The primaries: The party declines

Lexington: The big schmooze





Articles Sections Next

Super Tuesday

Goodbye, Rubio Tuesday

Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton win seven states apiece. The Republican and Democratic nominations are theirs to lose

Mar 5th 2016 | CULPEPER COUNTY, VA | From the print edition

The unifier

TWO of the most loathed politicians in America won big on March 1st in the electoral smorgasbord that is Super Tuesday. Hillary Clinton won seven of the eleven states holding Democratic primaries or caucuses, including Massachusetts, Virginia and a clutch of other Southern states, such as Arkansas, Georgia and Tennessee. Donald Trump also won seven of eleven, carving a trail from Vermont to Arkansas that has caused yet more apoplexy among the Republican top brass. Though it is not yet certain that Mrs Clinton and Mr Trump will fight it out for the presidency in November, it is probable.

The symmetry between the despised front-runners is alarming. Mrs Clinton is mistrusted by 60% of Americans, a legacy of years of scandals and Republican slander. It is possible, though unlikely, that the Democratic front-runner could yet be indicted by the FBI over her allegedly slapdash handling of classified information while secretary of state. Mr Trump, more extremely, is disliked by 60% of Americans, especially non-whites, a contempt he has earned by pandering to white Americans’ ugliest prejudices.

When announcing his candidacy last year, he described Mexican immigrants as rapists. In the run-up to Super Tuesday, American media were dominated by a furore over his initial refusal to condemn the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), whose former Grand Wizard, David Duke, supports him. A Trump rally in Virginia on February 29th was mobbed by a line of hand-holding black activists, who were herded out by Secret-Service officers and a jeering white crowd. One of the officers manhandled a photographer for Time magazine. With Mrs Clinton and Mr Trump as the nominees, America, which is as repulsed by political mudslinging as it is ghoulishly drawn to it, can expect an extraordinarily ill-tempered and divisive election in November.



Mrs Clinton’s dominance on Super Tuesday, despite four victories for her rival, Bernie Sanders, in his own state of Vermont, in Oklahoma, Colorado and Minnesota, was based on her crushing lead among non-whites. This had been expected. Mrs Clinton trounced Mr Sanders in South Carolina on February 27th by winning over 85% of the black voters who make up over half the state’s Democratic electorate. That was a bigger share than Barack Obama had won in 2008, when campaigning to become America’s first black president. It indicated that Mrs Clinton’s vaunted “Southern firewall” against Mr Sanders was intact. It is the berm that has stopped the Bern.

Across the Super Tuesday states, Mrs Clinton won 83% of blacks and 67% of Hispanics. She also did better than previously with white women, winning 57% of their votes. “I’m very emotional because today I’m going to vote for a woman, which I find empowering,” said one, Laney Parrot, a teacher entering a polling station in Fredericksburg, Virginia. Mr Sanders’s victories, though impressive for a candidate who launched his campaign last year in front of a few friends, were in smaller states and mostly by smaller margins.

They were also exclusively in states where blacks, who deliver around a quarter of the Democratic vote, represent less than 10% of the population. That is a guarantee of failure, as Mr Sanders tacitly acknowledged in a speech delivered on friendly Vermont soil. Effecting a political revolution had always been his main aim, the septuagenarian senator said; winning the nomination was a lesser concern. Absent an unlikely collapse, Mrs Clinton has the Democratic nomination in the bag. She leads Mr Sanders by around 200 delegates, excluding her massive lead among super-delegates, the Democratic officers whose votes will count at the party’s convention in July. Given that the Democratic delegates are shared out in proportion to the votes won in primaries and caucuses, this leaves Mr Sanders’s needing an improbable run of thumping majorities to catch up.

Mr Trump’s wins were based on a now-familiar double whammy: a crowded Republican field, in which his more conventional rivals took bites out of each other’s vote, combined with his knack of tapping the anti-establishment rage evident across the Republican coalition. This looks likely to produce one of the most disliked and unpropitious candidacies in American political history. At polling stations in northern and western Virginia, conservative country, your correspondent was told by many that they had voted “for the lesser evil”, “not for you know who,” that they “knew who they hadn’t voted for.”

Yet about one in three said they had voted for Mr Trump: “Because politicians are liars”, and he isn’t one; “because he’s a businessman,” and that’s what the country needs to get straightened out; “because he’s funding his own campaign”, and his rivals are on the take. “Because there’s no political mumbo jumbo with him and he’s going to stop everybody, Syria, Iraq, you name it, treating us like a doormat,” said Eileen, a teacher, working herself into a fury on a sunny afternoon in Culpeper County, one of the prettiest, most law-abiding, luckiest places on Earth. She also reckoned Mr Trump was the best man to beat the Democrats, of whom she said she’d never met one she liked; though her daughter, Melissa, standing smiling besides her, had just voted for Mr Sanders.

Mr Trump won Virginia, an important swing state in general elections, with 35% of the vote. Exit polls suggested a staggering 54% of Republican voters in the state were unhappy with the prospect of having him as their nominee—a pattern repeated in every state he won. Altogether he won about 40% of the available 595 delegates, who were also divvied up on a proportional basis. This gives him 319 delegates in all, which represents a less decisive lead than Mrs Clinton’s, but a strong one. It is above the level Nate Silver, a revered pundit, had predicted Mr Trump would need to be on track to win an outright majority of Republican delegates ahead of the party’s convention.

His main rivals, the senators Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, are well below their comparable benchmarks, with 226 and 110 delegates. Yet both did just well enough on Super Tuesday to justify staying in the contest—which should ensure that both Mr Trump’s big advantages endure through a run of delegate-rich primaries, including in Florida, Illinois and Ohio on March 15th, where the winner will take all.



Mr Cruz won his state of Texas and neighbouring Oklahoma, which was probably better than he had expected. But it was much less than the Southern sweep his strategy of appealing to evangelicals and the very conservative was designed to deliver. In his victory speech, delivered at the Redneck Country Club (where else?) in Houston, Mr Cruz derided Mr Trump as a “Washington dealmaker, profane and vulgar,” and appealed to his party’s patricians, who mostly despise both men, to back him as the likeliest anti-Trump candidate. There are signs that some see sense in that. Lindsey Graham, a veteran senator and failed presidential candidate who had previously described a choice between Mr Cruz and Mr Trump as akin to one between being poisoned or shot, suggested it might be time to choose poison. Mr Cruz received another fillip on March 2nd, when Ben Carson, a former neurosurgeon with a Christian following, who has long been cluttering the Republican field, suggested he was about to quit. Yet with the Bible-belt having largely voted, the going could get tougher for Mr Cruz.

That is why, for those Republicans who do not wish to gift their party to a protectionist rabble-rouser, Mr Rubio’s Super Tuesday results were so shattering. Mr Rubio’s advisers had suggested he could win four states. He won only Minnesota, whose experience of Jesse Ventura, a professional wrestler who was the state’s governor for four years until 2003, was cited by many as a reason not to pick Mr Trump, a former WrestleMania star himself.

In the days beforehand, the senator from Florida took Mr Trump apart in a televised debate, then ridiculed him on the campaign as a con artist, who quite possibly wet his trousers and whose fondness for fake tan promised to “make America orange again”. It made Mr Rubio look talented and immature, which are the two things unenthusiatic Republicans thought they knew about him already. Mr Trump countered by pulling in a couple of heavyweight endorsements—including from Chris Christie, the governor of New Jersey and former Republican candidate—which made Mr Rubio look even more juvenile. “He could be a good president one day, but now he’s copying Trump,” said Chuck Mullens, a plumber in Culpeper County, as he left the polling station without voting, having disliked everyone on the ballot.



America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

Mr Rubio’s path to the nomination now looks vanishingly tight. If he fails to win Florida, where he is trailing Mr Trump by 20 percentage points, he is toast. Much the same is true for John Kasich, the governor of Ohio and fourth somewhat-serious Republican candidate. He has not won a state, though he ran Mr Trump close in Vermont; he must win Ohio, where he is also trailing Mr Trump, to survive. He is meanwhile damaging Mr Rubio’s dwindling prospects. Had he stepped down before Super Tuesday and his votes gone to Mr Rubio, as most would have, the Floridian would have won Virginia and Vermont.

That would have made him look more credible. It would not have prevented Mr Trump being the big winner on a day in which his appeal stretched from hard-upSoutherners to well-heeled New England moderates, via the Washington D.C. commuter belt of northern Virginia—another place Mr Rubio had hoped to flourish.

That is why a belated effort by members of the Republican elite, who will now launch a flurry of attack ads against Mr Trump, appears so pathetic. They are trying to save their party from a man who is having great success by identifying them as its biggest problem. In a victory speech delivered in the opulent setting of his seaside pile in Florida (advertised on its website as “the greatest mansion ever built”), Mr Trump tried slightly to allay his party’s concerns. Describing himself as a “unifier”, he said he expected to get along famously with Paul Ryan, the Republican Speaker of the House of Representatives, who had criticised his soft-peddling on the KKK. “And if I don’t,” Mr Trump added, “He’s going to have to pay a big price.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693933-donald-trump-and-hillary-clinton-win-seven-states-apiece-republican-and-democratic/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Abortion

Back in court

The justices ponder messing with Texas

Mar 5th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition

Roe’s foes

IN THEIR four-decade fight against Roe v Wade, the Supreme Court ruling of 1973 that recognised a right to abortion, pro-lifers have taken several tacks. One is to curtail the period during which women may end their pregnancies. Another is to ban particularly grisly-sounding techniques like “partial-birth” abortion. Recently, opponents of Roe have been waging a regulatory war of attrition that makes abortion harder and harder to obtain. On March 2nd, a Supreme Court diminished by the loss of Antonin Scalia, the conservative justice who died in February, asked whether a law of 2013 that, in effect, shuts down more than three-quarters of the 40-odd abortion clinics in Texas runs foul of a 1992 precedent prohibiting states from unduly imposing on a woman’s right to choose.

Under the law, abortion providers in Texas must have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital and clinics must be expensively fitted out as “ambulatory surgical centres”. Legislators pitch the requirements as a boon to maternal health; detractors decry them as onerous, unwarranted changes that often leave women with nowhere to turn.

Scott Keller, the Texas solicitor-general, insisted that legislators had women’s best interests at heart. But he faced a barrage of resistance from the court’s energised liberal jurists. The first salvo came from Ruth Bader Ginsburg, 83 this month. She jumped on Mr Keller’s suggestion that the new law left 25% of Texas women more than 100 miles from the nearest abortion clinic, “not including El Paso, where the Santa Teresa, New Mexico facility” is just a few minutes’ drive away. Justice Ginsburg noted that New Mexico law does not require surgical standards or admitting privileges. Doesn’t Texas say that “we need these things […] to protect our women”? Mr Keller repeated that women in El Paso often use the facility to obtain abortions.

Justice Stephen Breyer probed the law’s justification. “Go back in time to the period before the new law was passed,” he said. “Where in the record will I find evidence of women who had complications” stemming from their abortions and “could not get to a hospital” under the previous regime but would have made it to a hospital under the new law? Mr Keller looked defeated. He grew meeker still when pressed by the three female justices to explain why Texas fretted so about abortion, one of the safest medical procedures, while failing to insist on surgical facilities for far riskier ones, like colonoscopies.

Despite the fun the liberal justices had with Mr Keller, Texas may not lose Whole Woman’s Health v Hellerstedt when a ruling arrives in June. It would take five justices to overturn the decision upholding the Texas law, and Anthony Kennedy did not seem keen to be the decisive vote. Though he noted that the law served to “increase the number of surgical procedures as opposed to medical procedures, and that this may not be medically wise”, he wondered whether the plaintiffs had presented enough evidence that fewer clinics led to a crisis of abortion supply.

A 4-4 split would let the Texas law stand, and allow other states in the Fifth Circuit to swipe at abortion access in similar ways (as Louisiana is already doing). But it would not bind the rest of the country. As the US solicitor-general, Donald Verrilli, neatly summed it up before the justices, the question boils down to whether the right to abortion “really only exists in theory” or “in fact, going forward”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693930-justices-ponder-messing-texas-back-court/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The campaigns

Heard on the trail

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



Dark ages

“Hope and change, not so much. More like hate and castrate.”

David Plouffe, Barack Obama’s campaign manager in 2008, predicts a brutal general election. New York Times

Love, actually

“Boyfriend prefers Trump. I’m single now.”

Sign at a Rubio rally in Oklahoma City

Lest we forget

“Can somebody attack me, please?”

Ben Carson pleads for attention during the Republican debate in Houston. He didn’t get it. The debate transcript sometimes read “Unintelligible yelling”

True Grit

“Ted Cruz is not my favourite by any means…But we may be in a position where we have to rally around Ted Cruz as the only way to stop Donald Trump. And I’m not so sure that would work.”

Lindsey Graham does not like his options. CBS

Potty humour

“Then he asked for a full length mirror. I don’t know why, because the podium only comes up to here…maybe to make sure his pants weren’t wet.”

Marco Rubio improves the rhetoric

Bored already

“Get on the plane and go home. It’s over there.”

An open mic catches Mr Trump dismissing Chris Christie

How to make friends

“[The party] ain’t promising him shit! Trust me on that one.”

Michael Steele, former RNC chairman, explains why Ted Cruz won’t drop out of the race. Bloomberg

Upside of a downside

“He is the only man…that stood in front of [the] Jewish community and told them, ‘I don’t want your money’.”

Louis Farrakhan, leader of the Nation of Islam, finds a reason to back Trump.

Humpty Dumpty...

“I’m not going to pay for that fucking wall.”

Vicente Fox, ex-president of Mexico.

…had a great fall...

“Things are negotiable...I’ll make the wall two feet shorter, or something.”

Mr Trump offers a conciliatory hand.

and couldn’t be put together again

“Funny enough, he is bringing us business.”

Trump piñatas are selling briskly in New Mexico. Associated Press



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693932-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The primaries

The party declines

American politics looks so strange right now partly because both Republicans and Democrats are a mess

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



POLITICAL parties are never monoliths. As those inside them are ceaselessly aware, they are fractious and fractured. And yet, especially in two-party democracies, they endure. A mixture of delivering the goods their voters desire, dividing spoils between internal factions and adapting to external change allows them to overcome their centrifugal pressures. They even manage, much of the time, to look more or less coherent while doing so. For most of the 20th century most Americans knew, more or less, what their two parties stood for.

These times, though, are out of step. Though political scientists proved slow to pick up on it (see article), America’s parties are more fragmented than usual. The state of the Republicans is particularly parlous. But the contradictions among Democrats, though less obvious, also run deep.

Donald Trump’s run for the presidency has prospered despite lacking all the things parties usually provide for a front-runner: not least strategists and policies, money. It is hardly surprising that the Republican Party failed to see Mr Trump coming. What is odder, and much more culpable, is its failure to address the mismatch between its grassroots supporters and its policy agenda into which Mr Trump has tapped so effectively. In its subsequent disarray, the party has come to resemble a newspaper that has just discovered that its readers no longer need it to mediate between themselves and the world.



The Republican Party arrived in the 21st century as an alliance of small-state, low-tax, pro-business voters with religiously inspired social conservatives and national-security hawks. It enjoyed a disproportionate popularity among white voters, the result of its successful recruitment of southern whites who disliked the innovations of the civil-rights era and, under Ronald Reagan, of blue-collar workers across the country. This mixture of interest groups had proved pretty successful: it held the White House for 28 of the 40 years from 1969 to 2008. During this time the pro-business lot were the senior partners in the arrangement, not least because they paid for the party’s election campaigns.

This is the first primary season in 50 years where that has not held true. The Koch brothers, who have built the wealthiest network of political donors in America with the aim of electing Republicans who will cut regulation and taxes, disapprove of Mr Trump. They have said they will not fund his campaign; and yet he thrives.

Faultlines exposed

Mr Trump’s ascendancy cannot merely be ascribed to his wealth—though that certainly helps, by allowing him to appeal directly to the concerns of the base rather than those of his donors. He has exposed faultlines within the different camps, as well as between them. Even before his rise, some pro-business Republicans were beginning to despair of the party, the congressional wing of which seemed to enjoy nothing more than shutting down the federal government and playing chicken with the debt ceiling. After the financial crisis, when a Republican-led administration bailed out several large financial institutions, denunciations of crony capitalism became a Republican theme as much as a Democratic one. Mr Trump has deepened the divide on the business wing. In December the head of the national chamber of commerce said he viewed Mr Trump’s candidacy as a form of entertainment.

He has also spilt the social conservatives. A libertine history and the look of a roué gone to seed would not in themselves preclude the support of evangelical Christians, who are, after all, keen on repentance. But Mr Trump is not very religious and does not go out of his way to seem so; his adoption of pro-life positions seems insincere. Christian Post, the country’s most popular evangelical news website, recently ran an editorial with the headline, “Donald Trump is a scam. Evangelical voters should back away.” Hitherto powerful socially conservative organisations such as the Family Leader have endorsed Ted Cruz, a Texas senator, instead. But such exhortations have had little effect: Mr Trump has won comfortably with self-described evangelicals in most states.

The reason evangelicals vote for Mr Trump has little to do with faith or specifics of policy. It is more a question of attitude. A study by the RAND Corporation, a think-tank, has found that the most reliable way to tell whether a Republican voter was going to support Mr Trump was whether he agreed with the statement: “People like me don’t have any say about what government does.” Trump voters feel voiceless, and whatever attributes Mr Trump lacks, he has a voice. He lends it to them, to express their grievances and their aspirations for greatness, and they love it.

It is also a voice that says things which other politicians do not, such as that Mexican immigrants are likely to be drug-dealers and rapists. Such untruths fit into a broader, if largely tacit, racism that has made Mr Trump popular not only with the Ku Klux Klan, but also with the considerably larger number of whites who harbour some racial resentment. Geographically, his support correlates with the frequency of racial epithets in Google searches.



America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

The weakest of the three Republican factions, the defence hawks, might even prefer a President Hillary Clinton to a President Trump. Mr Trump’s constant refrain about American troops always losing, his tendency towards isolationism, his insulting of prominent veterans such as John McCain, his attacks on George W. Bush as commander-in-chief and, most of all, his apparent enthusiasm for soldiers committing acts that would have them court-martialled, are a recipe for these Republican voters to the Democratic camp.

Again, though, part of Mr Trump’s appeal reflects what at least some Republicans like about hawkishness; its association with authority. The Republican Party has spent the past half-century opposing the might of the federal government in every arena other than foreign policy. It now faces the prospect of going into the election led by someone who, surveys suggest, draws his most ardent support from those who would like a more authoritarian president in the White House. At that point it would be hard to say what, if anything, the party stands for.

A battle of generations

Mr Trump’s ability to blow Republican cracks asunder is unprecedented. But it has been helped by a long-standing unwillingness to face and fix those contradictions. For years the party has concentrated instead on opposing Barack Obama’s policies and, indeed, his legitimacy. With Mr Obama on the way out, that is moot now.

He has, however, helped Democrats to know what they must jointly do. As Republicans long to tear down achievements they associate with Mr Obama, Democrats want to protect and uphold them. This has tended to keep the members of the party’s own coalition in agreement. Yet the ties between the voting blocs that favour Democrats—Hispanics, blacks, those with postgraduate degrees, single women, the non-religious, union members and millennials—are subject to change. The primaries have also revealed a powerful urge among activists to move the party leftward.

Democrats fare exceptionally well with non-whites: in 2012 one in four of those who voted for Mr Obama were in this category, compared with one in ten of those who voted for Mitt Romney. But the interests of blacks do not always align with those of Hispanics. Fearing more competition for low-wage jobs, the congressional black caucus, allied with the unions, was partly responsible for defeating a push for immigration reform under George W. Bush. The party has found ways round this clash, presenting immigration reform as a question of civil rights; when Mr Obama meets caucus members, immigration reform tends to be omitted in a mutual show of good manners. But the division remains.

The current crop of primaries has also made it clear that Democrats are divided along generational lines. Bernie Sanders has thrashed Mrs Clinton in every contest among voters whose formative political experiences were the Iraq war (which she supported) and the financial crisis (blamed on her Wall Street supporters). For those born before the Reagan years, by contrast, the fact that Mr Sanders honeymooned in the Soviet Union disqualifies him from consideration. Older Democrats remember the party’s move to the centre in the 1990s as pragmatic, correct and fruitful; younger ones consider it a betrayal.



When its members actually turn out to vote, the Democratic coalition is still formidable. Non-whites make up an ever-increasing share of the electorate. Polling by Gallup shows that the number of Americans who describe themselves as liberal has increased over the past 20 years, while those who call themselves conservative has held steady (see chart.) Self-declared moderates lean Democratic. But often—especially in non-presidential election years—the coalition can’t be bothered.

This has led to a party unable to refresh itself. Were Mrs Clinton (68) to win the nomination and then fall under a bus or an indictment, the names often mentioned as possible replacements are John Kerry (72) and Joe Biden (73). During Mr Obama’s presidency Democrats have lost 900 seats in state legislatures, 11 governors, 69 seats in the House and 13 senators. This helps to explain why Mrs Clinton has had no young pretender to voice the opposition to her from within the party. Mr Obama relied on his own apparatus, separate from the party, in his two presidential campaigns. Mrs Clinton has vowed to rebuild the party if she wins. But that supposes that its constituent interest groups continue to see the Democratic Party as the best way to get what they want. Once the presidential election is over, they may find apathy more attractive again—not least because, now that it has acted on heath-care reform and (to an extent) on climate change, the party has been remarkably poor at setting out new worlds to conquer.

There is nothing immutable about the way the two parties currently line up. Republicans used to be the big-government progressive party, formed in opposition to slavery and pushing to remodel the South after the civil war; they have also been the small-government party, not only now, but in opposition to the New Deal in the 1930s. Democrats were once the small-government party, opposing those who wanted a more powerful federal government and defending the interests of white southerners against Washington; now they are famous as the big-government party, pushing federal anti-poverty programmes in the 20th century and government involvement in health care in the 21st.

Furniture-moving

This election could see the furniture rearranged again. Some Republicans wonder if a Trump candidacy might redraw the electoral map, winning over blue-collar whites who don’t normally vote in rustbelt swing states like Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan or Wisconsin. If he loses, the party might still conclude that it needs to pay more attention to the economic anxieties of those who feel left behind.

For their part Democrats are counting on Mr Trump to energise members of the coalition that voted twice for President Barack Obama, and to put in play moderate Republicans, notably women, who can expect to be bombarded with Democratic messages about the billionaire’s misogyny. If Mrs Clinton marshals a broad anti-Trump coalition that peels off some habitual Republican voters and combines it with high turnout among traditional Democratic supporters, she will have an opportunity to create a new centrist coalition that may long outlast her.

Nobody yet knows whether what is happening in 2016 is an anomaly caused by the one-off political persona Mr Trump has created, or if it is tracing the outline of the future. Whatever the parties look like after November 8th, though, Mr Trump’s success to date has already changed the system, in part by proving that voters value ideological consistency (and rhetorical restraint) much less than the political classes assumed. That could be liberating, if it allows elected representatives to stray from the party line. It could be damaging if the only lines they can stray towards are brutally populist ones.

Parties exist to distil a complex set of questions into a binary choice; it is impossible to imagine a big democracy staying healthy without them. Yet in 2020, with Mr Trump in mind, the strongest candidates may start from the assumption that they do not need their parties much at all.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21694006-american-politics-looks-so-strange-right-now-partly-because-both-republicans-and-democrats/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

The big schmooze

Donald Trump poses a character test for Republicans

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



IN EUROPEAN politics a useful distinction is sometimes drawn between the “clean right”, a group which can include pretty flinty conservatives, and the “dirty right”, meaning those who cross the bounds of democratic decency, whether with race-baiting, threats of political violence or snarling challenges to the rule of law. That distinction has proved powerful in its day. In the French presidential elections of 2002, the main parties of left and right united behind an unprincipled machine politician, Jacques Chirac, to defeat his opponent, Jean-Marie Le Pen, a brutish demagogue. Parisians fondly remember the posters that popped up, urging: “Vote for the crook, not the fascist”.

Donald Trump, front-runner for the Republican presidential nomination, is of the dirty right. He showed that when he called for a blanket ban on Muslims entering America, and advocated both the use of torture and the punitive killing of terrorists’ families, a war crime. He whips up crowds by lamenting that he cannot punch protesters in the face. He accuses the Mexican government of sending rapists to America, and promises to round up and deport 11m migrants who are in the country without papers (though, like Caesar weighing lives in the Coliseum, as president he would let “good ones” back in). In a television interview on February 28th he declined three times to disavow statements of support from a veteran leader of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), murmuring that he needed to “research” that white-supremacist group. Bringing history full-circle, the ageing Mr Le Pen sent word from France that, if American, he would vote Trump.

After months of near-silence, many conservative grandees suggested that Mr Trump had crossed a line. Mitt Romney, the Republican presidential nominee in 2012, called his KKK response “disgusting” and “disqualifying”. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a rival presidential contender, offered a rebuke that blended principle with calculation: Mr Trump’s equivocation was not just “wrong”, he explained, “it makes him unelectable”.

Yet nobody is reviving the spirit of France in 2002, when parties united to keep a bad man out of power. At the time of writing a single Republican senator, Ben Sasse of Nebraska, has declared that if Mr Trump is his party’s nominee, he will back an independent conservative. Many more Republicans have said, queasily, that they will back whoever the party nominates. Others are not even that squeamish. On February 26th Governor Chris Christie of New Jersey endorsed Mr Trump, calling him the strongest candidate against Hillary Clinton. During his own, ill-fated presidential run, Mr Christie called the tycoon’s proposed Muslim ban “ridiculous”. Now he is “proud” to back him. Members of Congress have begun to endorse Mr Trump, and their numbers will grow.

There is a temptingly simple explanation for this embrace of Mr Trump: that the Republican Party is a consciously racist project, from top to bottom. The backlash against Mr Trump’s half-dalliance with the KKK suggests something more complicated. History matters, for one thing. Nothing scars modern Europe as deeply as memories of fascism, Nazism and collaboration with the Holocaust: many nerves jangle when strutting authoritarians question the loyalties of religious minorities or suggest that undesirable outsiders should be rounded up. In America, nothing casts a darker shadow than slavery and racial segregation, so that overt anti-black racism is uniquely taboo. When Mr Trump seemed to test that taboo, lots of Republicans were sincerely horrified. Even Mr Trump knows he went too far: he now says he misheard questions about the KKK and spurns their support.

Dismayingly, attacks on Muslims and Mexicans do not set Republican nerves a-jangle to the same extent. In the 2015 American Values Survey, a large poll, 76% of Republicans said that Islam is at odds with American values. Many grassroots conservatives would call a Muslim entry ban an act of self-defence against terrorism, not bigotry. As for immigrants, 80% of Trump voters told the same survey that they are a “burden” rather than a source of strength for the country, by taking jobs, housing and health care.

At the same time, an unhappy America is more divided than ever along partisan lines. Many Republican politicians think of Mrs Clinton as actively wicked. They see a patriotic duty to keep her out of the White House, not least because the next president will choose at least one Supreme Court justice, after the death of Antonin Scalia. Some hope that Mr Trump may prove malleable. Others suspect that his views will doom their party, but don’t know how to win without his voters.

Pandering as contempt

There is one more explanation for all the bigwigs and pundits rationalising Trump-support, while considering themselves good people who deplore racism. Mr Trump’s critics, they contend, show snobbish contempt for the tycoon’s voters—notably older, often less-educated whites who feel left behind by wrenching social and economic changes. One congressman backing Mr Trump, Tom Marino of Pennsylvania, uses a term much in vogue just now, calling Trump voters “the unprotected”. It comforts Trump-endorsers to think they are standing up for underdogs, but they are letting themselves off too easily. Other Republicans seeking the presidency endlessly promise to protect anxious Americans, with everything from air strikes on Islamic State to curbs on work visas. Mr Trump stands out for the savagery with which he vows to frighten, punish and hurt those who he says are doing America down. That’s not protection, but vengeance.

Conservative grandees preparing to back Mr Trump are arguably the worst snobs of all. For they know that he is making promises to his supporters that are both nasty and impossible to keep. Like every tribune of the dirty right, Mr Trump thinks his voters are dupes: that is why he panders and lies to them without a qualm. If Republican bigwigs have shame or sense enough, there is still time—just—to disown him.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693928-donald-trump-poses-character-test-republicans-big-schmooze/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Argentina’s debt: At last

Canadian foreign policy: Trudeaumania 2

The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act: Border babies v the IRS

Bello: An Olympic oasis





Articles Sections Next

Argentina’s debt

At last

A deal with holdout bondholders is expensive, but worth it

Mar 5th 2016 | BUENOS AIRES | From the print edition

FOR more than a decade Elliott Management, the hedge fund led by Paul Singer, was the pantomime villain in Argentina’s dispute with its bondholders. Rather than accepting a big write-down of debt on which the country had defaulted, as other creditors did in 2005 and 2010, Elliott, along with several other “holdouts”, pursued full payment through the New York courts. That led to a fresh default in 2014.

Now the drama is entering its final act. On February 29th Daniel Pollack, the court-appointed mediator, announced that Argentina had reached an agreement in principle with four of the largest creditors, led by Elliott. Argentina’s payment of $4.65 billion will be 25% less than they were demanding. Even so, it is a big pay-off for investors who bought the debt at a fraction of its face value. With this agreement, Argentina has settled with creditors who hold 85% of the disputed debt.

It is a coup for Mauricio Macri, Argentina’s recently elected president (pictured), and will help end the country’s long isolation from the international credit markets. Together with other steps Mr Macri has taken since assuming office in December, including relaxing exchange controls and removing taxes on some exports, the credit deal helps restore normality to an economy that had been distorted by populist controls during 12 years of rule by his two Peronist predecessors, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and her late husband, Néstor Kirchner. Addressing Congress, which began its new session on March 1st, Mr Macri blamed his predecessors for Argentina’s weak economy and high inflation. Isolation from credit markets, he declared, had cost the country $100 billion and 2m jobs.

Argentina’s negotiators paved the way back by reaching deals with smaller groups of holdouts. On February 2nd Argentina agreed to pay a group of Italian bondholders $1.35 billion; two weeks later it settled for $1.1 billion with two of the six largest holdouts, Montreux Partners and EM Ltd. But Mr Singer’s Elliott Management led the most intransigent group; an agreement with them is the real prize.

Thomas Griesa, the judge overseeing the case, had contributed greatly to Argentina’s predicament in 2012 when he ruled that the country could not pay bondholders who had agreed to a restructuring, or issue new debt, unless it settled with the holdouts. That precipitated Argentina’s default. On February 19th this year the judge in effect switched sides, saying that Mr Macri’s election had “changed everything”. He said he would lift the injunction barring Argentina from paying other creditors from March 1st under certain conditions. That was a severe blow to the holdouts, who had used the injunction to press Argentina for full payment. “The message to non-settling plaintiffs, many of whom have had no opportunity to negotiate with anyone, is unmistakable: settle by February 29th, or else,” wrote their lawyers.

The deal is not quite sealed. The injunction will not be lifted until Argentina repeals two laws that block agreements with the holdouts. The Ley Cerrojo (Padlock Law), enacted in 2005 during the first round of debt restructuring, was intended to prevent Argentina from offering holdouts a better deal than that accepted by holders of restructured bonds. The Ley de Pago Soberano (Sovereign Payment Law) of 2014 was a failed attempt to circumvent Mr Griesa’s injunction by re-routing payments to bondholders who had accepted a deal through Argentina or France.

Opening the lock

The government is confident that it can secure the votes in Congress to repeal the laws. In early February, 13 deputies from the Front for Victory (FPV), Ms Fernández’s party, broke away to form a more moderate “Justicialist Bloc”. The move deprived the FPV of its position as the largest grouping in the lower house. The defectors have said they are willing to work with the new government to repeal the laws. In the upper house the government plans to enlist the support of Peronist governors, who are also keen to tap international credit markets. They are likely to persuade the senators over whom they have influence to support the repeal of the legislation.

Once the laws have been scrapped, the government hopes to raise up to $15 billion through a bond issue, which it will use to pay the creditors. Some analysts doubt that the market can absorb such a large sum. But Argentina’s finance secretary, Luis Caputo, is bullish. “All the banks we’ve spoken with are confident that we can raise the money we need in the market,” he said.

The government then plans to return to the market in an effort to finance its budget deficit, which was a daunting 5.8% of GDP last year. Under Ms Fernández’s administration the central bank financed the deficit by printing money, pushing up inflation. The bond issue will help the central bank to end that harmful practice, but the relief from high inflation will not come immediately. Propelled by the devaluation of the peso, the annual inflation rate, already high, has risen to around 30%; the government had hoped inflation this year would be 20-25%. It is trying to persuade trade unions not to demand excessive wage rises, which would drive inflation even higher. The unions are unwilling to make sacrifices, however. On February 25th teachers extracted an agreement from the government for a 30% salary increase; other unions are demanding pay rises at least as big.

Mr Macri has so far taken a cautious approach to bringing down the budget deficit. Energy subsidies have been cut, but the president is reluctant to slash other spending, which would further rile Argentines already angry about inflation and, he fears, would weaken growth and employment. But until the government brings the deficit substantially down, the central bank will struggle to regain credibility. A return to the bond markets is not enough.

Nevertheless, the debt deal should boost the government’s confidence. It has until April 14th to repeal the legislation and pay Elliott and its fellow litigators. It must also settle with the holders of the remaining 15% of the debt. But the exhausted negotiators are allowing themselves a moment of satisfaction. “It seemed like a thousand years to me,” Mr Pollack said of the seemingly interminable talks. Mr Macri hopes not to take up much more of his time.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21693786-agreement-victory-countrys-new-president-argentina-reaches-deal-its/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Canadian foreign policy

Trudeaumania 2

Can the new prime minister parlay his celebrity into influence?

Mar 5th 2016 | OTTAWA | From the print edition



SINCE leading his Liberal Party back to power in Canada last October, Justin Trudeau has been profiled in such glossy magazines as Vanity Fair and Vogue; Hello’s photo spread featured his wife and children. On March 10th he will sit down with Barack Obama at a state dinner in the White House, the first for a Canadian leader in 19 years. “I can’t think of a Canadian politician who has attracted as much attention in the United States,” says Laura Dawson of the Canada Institute at the Woodrow Wilson Centre in Washington.

Mr Trudeau owes his celebrity to more than glamour. He succeeds Stephen Harper, a prickly Conservative, who in ten years as prime minister conducted an ideologically charged foreign policy at odds with Canada’s multilateralist traditions. His relationship with the United States, by far Canada’s most important, was tense. Mr Trudeau replaces a scowl with a smile. He personally greeted some of the 25,000 Syrian refugees Canada agreed to admit. Such gestures have helped bring back to life the Trudeaumania inspired by the prime minister’s father, Pierre Trudeau, a dashing Canadian leader of the 1960s, 70s and 80s. “But how,” Ms Dawson wonders, “do we translate celebrity into influence?”

Mr Trudeau’s answer: by returning to Canada’s diplomatic traditions. It is the world’s tenth-largest economy; as a military power, it counts for less. It has historically sought to increase its modest clout by working through international bodies such as the UN and the Commonwealth. Mr Harper spurned them as talking shops for despotic regimes. He refused to support a global accord on climate change (or introduce a credible policy in Canada).

Co-operation is back in, says Stéphane Dion, the new foreign minister. His “mandate letter” from Mr Trudeau directs him to resume working through the UN. Mr Trudeau signed the global climate agreement reached in Paris in December. He was due to meet Canada’s 13 provincial and territorial leaders on March 3rd to talk about a national climate strategy and may announce a climate initiative with Mr Obama.

The prime minister intends to re-establish diplomatic relations with Iran and to revive Canada’s relationship with Mexico, its partner, along with the United States, in the North American Free-Trade Agreement. He promised to lift visa restrictions on Mexicans, imposed in 2009 to stem an influx of asylum-seekers and an irritant ever since.

He is not rolling back all Mr Harper’s policies. Canada is likely to ratify the free-trade agreement with the European Union, which Mr Harper negotiated. It may also join the Trans-Pacific Partnership among a dozen Asian and American countries. “We should not change everything,” said Mr Dion in a recent speech.

If Mr Trudeau just gets along with Mr Obama, that will be a significant change. The two sporty leaders have engaged in pre-prandial raillery about which country’s ice-hockey teams are better. Mr Obama has taken with equanimity Mr Trudeau’s decision to withdraw Canada’s six fighter planes from the United States-led fight against Islamic State; Canada is increasing humanitarian aid and the number of troops advising Iraqi Kurds instead. The Keystone XL pipeline to carry crude from Alberta to the southern United States, greatly desired by Mr Harper but vetoed by Mr Obama, is unlikely to figure much in the dinner-table conversation.

That leaves trade and tax. The United States is the market for three-quarters of Canada’s goods exports and the source of two-thirds of its imports, but commerce could flow more freely than it does. The “beyond the border” agenda is supposed to accomplish that but has hit a snag: a disagreement over what law will apply to United States officials stationed in Canada to pre-clear goods for import. A row over Canadian softwood lumber, which the United States says is subsidised, could get worse. Canada objects to a United States law that obliges its banks to hand over information about accounts held by expatriates (see article).

But the main threat to Canadian-American relations will not come from anything the two leaders feasting in the White House might do. It comes from the loud-mouthed property mogul who aspires to be the building’s next occupant.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21693988-can-new-prime-minister-parlay-his-celebrity-influence-trudeaumania-2/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act

Border babies v the IRS

Americans in Canada fight back against the taxman

Mar 5th 2016 | OTTAWA | From the print edition

WHEN Barack Obama vowed in 2009 to pursue tax cheats abroad, he probably was not thinking of people like Ginny Hillis. Born in Detroit to Canadian parents, the retired lawyer has lived in Canada since she was six. Like many transplanted Americans, she ignored an American law that since 1913 has obliged citizens to file tax returns regardless of where they live.

With the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), enacted in 2010, that became harder. It demanded that foreign banks report to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) details of accounts held by Americans abroad. Banks that fail to comply are subject to a 30% tax on payments they receive from the United States. Some 7m Americans outside the country (1m of them in Canada), along with an unknown number of “US persons”, are now caught in FATCA’s net.

Unlike most, Ms Hillis is fighting back through the courts. She and Gwen Deegan, an artist who has lived in Canada since she was five, filed a suit claiming that the Canadian government’s co-operation with FATCA violates a tax treaty and constitutional protections against discrimination. In September a judge denied the first claim. The second, that Canada is discriminating against citizens on the basis of their place of birth, may rest on stronger arguments.

Among the reluctant dual-taxpayers are Americans who dodged the draft during the Vietnam war, academics who went north in 1950-70 and border babies, born in the United States because that is where the nearest hospital was. Half a million “snowbirds”, pensioners who winter in the American South, risk liability for tax. Their biggest gripe: proceeds from the sale of a family home, untaxed in Canada, could be subject to capital-gains tax in the United States. A record 4,279 Americans worldwide renounced their United States citizenship last year.

If Ms Hillis and Ms Deegan win in court, Canada’s government will face an awkward choice between complying with the decision and exposing Canadian banks to huge penalties. The Alliance for the Defence of Canadian Sovereignty, which is paying the women’s legal expenses, has harvested donations from China, Vatican City and beyond. If FATCA falls Ms Hillis would still owe American tax. The real problem is the extraterritorial demands of the IRS.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21693982-americans-canada-fight-back-against-taxman-border-babies-v-irs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

An Olympic oasis

Zika will not be much of a threat to the Rio games

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



BACK in 2009 when the Olympic games were awarded to Rio de Janeiro, the stars seemed to be aligned. Brazil was prospering, thanks to strong global demand for its oil, iron ore, soya beans and other commodities. Federal, state and city governments were working well together as close political allies. Now cariocas (as inhabitants of Rio de Janeiro are known) might well feel that fate has forsaken them.

The country is suffering its worst recession since the 1930s. The federal government is paralysed by a corruption scandal. The unpopular president, Dilma Rousseff, faces possible impeachment for allegedly breaking budget rules. The collapse of the oil price has hit Rio de Janeiro state, the centre of the oil industry, especially hard, forcing it to slash its budgets.

Yet the city of Rio resembles an oasis in Brazil’s political and economic desert. Thanks partly to the games and to booming revenue from tourism, the money is still flowing. Eduardo Paes, the city’s mayor since 2009, seized control of venue construction and many transport projects. While stadium-building for the 2014 football World Cup in Brazil was marked by scandal and last-minute rush, the Olympics are on track with five months to go. At the Olympic Park, the venues are all but ready. When Bello visited a fortnight ago a hose was filling the pool at the aquatic centre; at the multipurpose Arena Carioca, a taekwondo contest was about to start.

There are three worries. The state government has failed to clean up the polluted waters of Guanabara Bay, the venue for yachting. Mr Paes retorts that races will be held at the bay’s mouth, where the water is clean, and that two dummy runs went well. Then there is the new metro line being built by the state government to link Ipanema and Barra de Tijuca, the site of the Olympic Park. A recent leaked memo from the mayor’s office fretted that it wouldn’t be ready in time. The state government insists it will be; it says 90% of the work is already done. School holidays have been moved back to coincide with the Olympics; traffic may be more of a problem for the Paralympics in September.

The biggest concern is Zika. Since the disease was detected in 2015, 1.5m Brazilians may have caught it. Usually it just involves a few days of mild fever and aches. But it has been linked to microcephaly (brain damage) in the babies of a small minority of women who caught it while pregnant. And a tiny number of Zika sufferers develop Guillain-Barré syndrome, a creeping (though normally reversible) paralysis.

Zika is hard to test for. Most of Brazil’s 641 confirmed cases of microcephaly are in the poor north-east. But Aedes aegypti, the mosquito that is the main vector, is also responsible for dengue, which Rio has suffered since 1977. The insects breed in stagnant water.

Across the country, the government has stepped up efforts to control the mosquito. In Gardênia Azul, a favela near the Olympic Park, a team of health agents does house-to-house visits. Geraldo Marques, a mosquito-control specialist, checks that empty beer bottles are dry and covered; he drizzles insecticide into a drain. “The saucers under plants are the greatest villain,” he says.

The problem, says Rubem César Fernandes of Viva Rio, a big NGO which, among other things, runs health clinics for the city government, is that many urban spaces are beyond public control. “The population knows what to do, but they don’t have the discipline to do it every week. It’s a cultural thing.” It doesn’t help that a third of dwellings in the Rio area lack a proper sewerage connection.

Mr Paes stresses that the games will take place in the dry season; cases of dengue normally drop in August and September. Part of the worry about Zika is that so much about it is unknown, and therefore scary. Though pregnant women and their sexual partners will need to seek medical advice, for the mass of sports fans the virus should not be a worry.

There is already much to celebrate about the Rio Olympics, though with their city turned into an obstacle course of road works for the new metro and bus lanes, cariocas may not yet feel like cheering. There has been no obvious waste or corruption. The city has used the games as a catalyst for a wider transformation. Mr Paes tore down an elevated motorway that scarred the old port, burying it in a tunnel. The port area now hosts new museums and public spaces; next month a tramway will open there. Apart from better public transport, the Olympics may bequeath an overdue revival of Rio’s decayed and crime-ridden historic centre. If urban renewal were a sport, that would win a gold medal.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21693983-zika-will-not-be-much-threat-rio-games-olympic-oasis/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Malaysia’s scandals: The art of survival

Malaysia’s 1MDB affair: Follow the money, if you can

Sanctions on North Korea: Big bother

Confronting intolerance in Pakistan: A game of dare

Banyan: The last refuge





Articles Sections Next

Malaysia’s scandals

The art of survival

As Najib Razak digs in, disillusion among Malaysians grows

Mar 5th 2016 | KUALA LUMPUR | From the print edition



ONLY standing room is left at the civic hall in Petaling Jaya in the western suburbs of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia’s capital. Inside 1,000-odd middle-class Malaysians have gathered to consider the fallout from a corruption scandal that has buffeted the country since July. “The whole world is laughing at us,” says a retiree watching from the back rows.

At the heart of the scandal are hundreds of millions of dollars that for unclear reasons entered bank accounts belonging to the prime minister, Najib Razak (see article). You might think such a revelation would unseat Mr Najib and spell ruin for his United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), which has held power since independence. Instead, Mr Najib appears to have strengthened his grip, by purging critics within the cabinet and police. On February 29th the grand old man of Malaysian politics, Mahathir Mohamad, stormed out of the party in disgust. Dr Mahathir was prime minister for 22 years until 2003 and was once a fan of Mr Najib. No more.

Across the country, dissidents are feeling nervous. Last year at least 15 people, mostly dissenters in politics and civil society, were charged under a noxious colonial-era sedition law that Mr Najib had once promised to repeal. In late February authorities blocked one of Malaysia’s most popular news websites hours after it reported that not all Malaysia’s graft-busters are convinced that the prime minister has committed no crime. A new anti-terror law entitles the prime minister to nominate broad “security zones” in which police powers may be extended—a handy tool for crushing protests, critics say. The attorney-general is mulling stiffer sentences, including caning, for people who leak government secrets.

It has all appalled many urban and professional Malaysians. It has also made stars of the government’s most vocal critics. At the forum in Petaling Jaya, fans seeking selfies crowd around Tony Pua, an opposition MP whom police have banned from leaving the country; at dinner afterwards people at neighbouring tables insist on paying for his meal.

Malaysia is “essentially two countries”, says Ben Suffian, a pollster. Outrage is widespread in the cities, with growing numbers of young, liberal ethnic-Malays as well as most of the ethnic-Chinese and ethnic-Indian minorities who make up about a third the population. It is rarer in UMNO’s rural heartlands, where apathy is rife and where the party is trusted to defend racial laws designed to give the ethnic-Malay majority a leg-up.

Over the decades this rural voter base has helped keep UMNO in power. Indeed party leaders have been more concerned to protect themselves from challenges from within UMNO. Loyalty is prized over ability, while patronage and convoluted party rules discourage upstarts. Mr Najib has been playing the system more ruthlessly than many imagined. Recent sackings of subordinates have sent a signal about who is boss.

It is surely a relief to UMNO that Malaysia’s opposition has mostly bungled its chance to make hay from the affair. It had formed a loose coalition of three parties, reliant on an unlikely peace between two of them, a secular ethnic-Chinese outfit and a devout Malay-Muslim one. The opposition won the popular vote in a general election in 2013 but fell short of the number of seats required to take power because of gerrymandered constituencies. Yet rather than regroup and build momentum for the election that is due by 2018, it has been consumed by bickering. When tens of thousands of Malaysians rallied last August to demand Mr Najib’s resignation, they did so not under the banner of any political party but at the request of Bersih, an unaligned group that has long campaigned for clean politics and electoral reform.

Rock solid, or rocky?

Some people assert that Mr Najib’s hold may be shakier than it appears. Even in the countryside, worries about the economy have made the prime minister unpopular. Low oil prices have damaged Petronas, the state oil firm, slashing the amount of money the government can pour into development projects. A new sales tax has increased prices for many everyday items, while a slump in Malaysia’s currency, the ringgit, which has fallen by more than a fifth in the past 18 months, has put many imports out of reach. It all helps make some poorer Malays more susceptible to populists painting ethnic-Chinese and ethnic-Indian Malaysians as rent-seeking interlopers. But a new suspicion is growing among ordinary Malaysians that goings-on in Kuala Lumpur are affecting their own pocket books.

As for the party, rivals whom Mr Najib has vanquished may yet bounce back. Dr Mahathir, who has long called for Mr Najib to step down, is scheduled to attend an unusual forum of grandees and politicos from across the political spectrum who are meeting in private later this month to discuss alternatives to Mr Najib. Wan Saiful Wan Jan, of the Institute for Democracy and Economic Affairs in Kuala Lumpur, says that some UMNO bigwigs are backing the prime minister through gritted teeth. He says that a time may come when they say that enough is enough, especially when the party starts considering its strategy for the next election. Perhaps Mr Najib may risk calling a snap election before then, both to pre-empt conspiracy and to catch out the opposition before it can patch up its differences.

For Malaysia’s rattled liberals, all this seems theoretical. Last year they watched plans evaporate for a parliamentary vote of no-confidence. They are doubtful that the current corruption scandal will ever unseat Mr Najib.

Back at the civic hall in Petaling Jaya, the mood darkens as the evening wears on. Microphones passed around the floor reveal frustration and anger. One person insists that the opposition draw up a list of government officials who should face trial if the opposition takes power. A second, shaking with rage, frets that the opposition has “no chance” of winning the next poll. This is no time to give up hope, Ambiga Sreenevasan, a prominent lawyer, tells the crowd. Once the crisis is over, she says, “we must make sure this never happens to our country again.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693966-najib-razak-digs-disillusion-among-malaysians-grows-art-survival/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Malaysia’s 1MDB affair

Follow the money, if you can

Investigators in several countries are trying to get to the bottom of Malaysia’s growing corruption scandal

Mar 5th 2016 | KUALA LUMPUR | From the print edition



IT WAS a striking move from a country better known for hiding iffy foreign wealth than for exposing it. Frustrated by a lack of co-operation from Malaysian counterparts, Switzerland’s attorney-general declared in late January that there were “serious indications” that $4 billion had gone astray from Malaysian state concerns, some of it into accounts held by current or former Malaysian and Middle Eastern officials. The announcement fuelled an already combustible scandal that has transfixed Malaysians, battered their prime minister, Najib Razak, and could yet ensnare banks around the world.

The allegations of misappropriation centre on a Malaysian state investment fund, from which it is suspected that large sums were siphoned by businessmen and officials with links to Mr Najib. It is thought that some of this was used to help his party win an election in 2013; some was spent on buying assets at questionable prices; and some of the remainder was moved to offshore shell companies and bank accounts. All those suspected of involvement, including Mr Najib, deny wrongdoing. None has been charged with a crime.

The affair spans the globe. Caught up in it are not only Malaysian officials and moneymen but also several big banks and perhaps Saudi royalty. The money trail leads from Malaysia to Singapore and elsewhere in Asia, Abu Dhabi, Switzerland, the Caribbean and New York. Authorities are investigating in Switzerland, America, Singapore, Hong Kong and the United Arab Emirates. They face a daunting challenge in piecing together such a complex case, a task made harder by operators’ widespread use of opaque offshore vehicles.

The story’s institutional protagonist is 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB). It was originally a regional development fund for Terengganu, an oil-rich Malaysian state, but in 2009 the country’s finance ministry took it over and rebranded it. Mr Najib heads the ministry, as well as being prime minister. The plan was for the fund to suck in investment through tie-ups with foreign firms. Mr Najib chairs 1MDB’s board of advisers.

1MDB got most of its financing by raising debt. A series of bond issues pushed its borrowings up to $11 billion. By 2014 questions were multiplying about its financial health, spurred by the fact that it had had three audit firms in five years. A flurry of investigations in the media drew on leaked documents. 1MDB denies wrongdoing.

Malaysian investigators concluded that deposits into a bank account held in Mr Najib’s name came through banks and companies linked to 1MDB. They found that a firm that was once part of 1MDB and is now controlled by the finance ministry, SRC International, paid $13m into the account in 2014-15. The attorney-general, Mohamed Apandi Ali, has said that there is no evidence that Mr Najib was aware of the payment. (We all overlook items on our bank statements.)

More eye-catching was an earlier payment into Mr Najib’s account, of $681m, from a shell company. This was made only weeks before the general election in 2013, which Mr Najib won narrowly. Some say it was linked to 1MDB. The official explanation is that it was a legal donation from an unnamed member of the Saudi royal family. Mr Najib has denied ever taking public money for personal gain. 1MDB says it has not paid any funds into the prime minister’s personal accounts.

On March 1st the Wall Street Journal reported that investigators in two countries, whom it didn’t identify, believe that more than $1 billion in total flowed into Mr Najib’s personal accounts, much of it originating from 1MDB. These investigators, it is alleged, reckon that the payments were, in part, routed through a company linked to—or made to look as if it was linked to—a venture involving 1MDB and Middle Eastern interests.

1MDB had various dealings with an Abu Dhabi-based sovereign fund called IPIC which guaranteed some of 1MDB’s bonds. The dealings included a tie-up with Aabar Investments PJS, an IPIC subsidiary. 1MDB transferred more than $1 billion to what appeared to be a division of Aabar. Yet investigations allegedly suggest the money in fact went to a firm based in the British Virgin Islands (BVI) with an almost identical name to the Abu Dhabi concern.

This transaction seems not to have been recorded on the books of Aabar’s parent, IPIC. (1MDB says it stands by its own accounts, which show the payment.) The suspicion is that financial sleight-of-hand may have been used to pass off the transfers as legitimate payments between corporate partners. Investigators believe much of this money ended up in Mr Najib’s accounts after being routed through a second company in the BVI, according to sources cited by the Wall Street Journal.

IPIC is reported to be looking into what happened to the money paid out by 1MDB but not booked as coming into the Abu Dhabi fund. Aabar denies wrongdoing.

Also in the spotlight is a joint venture between 1MDB and PetroSaudi, an oil firm. 1MDB injected $1 billion into the venture. Two-thirds of this was moved to a Seychelles-based firm shortly afterwards, according to a draft report by Malaysia’s auditor-general. 1MDB later sold its interest in the venture, using some of the $2.3 billion raised to invest in a Cayman-based vehicle. 1MDB then reportedly sacked its auditor, KPMG, after the firm expressed concern over the identity and financial standing of the vehicle’s owners. 1MDB asserts that all the Cayman money is accounted for. PetroSaudi has denied doing anything wrong.

Investigators are also looking into who drove 1MDB’s complex transactions. Assuming it is genuine, correspondence obtained by Sarawak Report, an investigative website, appears to show that a key figure in the fund’s dealings with PetroSaudi was a Malaysian financier, Low Taek Jho, a family friend of Mr Najib. Mr Low reportedly also helped direct some election spending for Mr Najib’s ruling coalition, Barisan Nasional. 1MDB and Mr Low have insisted he merely advised the fund, unpaid. He denies wrongdoing.

Banks, too, face awkward questions. Several global banks handled large payments that are under scrutiny, among them arms of JPMorgan Chase and Royal Bank of Scotland. One question is whether there were grounds for the banks to suspect that any of the transactions were questionable—or whether especially rigorous checks on public officials and other “politically exposed persons”, or PEPs, were called for and carried out.

The role played by Goldman Sachs is also notable. The investment bank led 1MDB’s main bond issues, earning unusually high fees on them (Goldman has said this is because it temporarily held the risk on its own balance-sheet). Goldman’s chairman for South-East Asia, Tim Leissner, grew close to Malaysia’s elite. Last year Goldman put him on leave and now says he has left the firm.

Mr Najib’s response to the scandal has been to swipe at his critics. Muhyiddin Yassin, a deputy prime minister who wanted investigations stepped up, was sacked from the cabinet last year, and the attorney-general was replaced—supposedly on health grounds, though Sarawak Report has published documents appearing to show that charges were about to be brought against Mr Najib.

On February 27th Mr Muhyiddin called for the prime minister to resign, saying the outgoing attorney-general had shown him “proof” that Mr Najib acted criminally in connection with 1MDB. The government said this was part of a “politically motivated conspiracy” to topple Mr Najib.

The new attorney-general, Mr Apandi, has moved swiftly to exonerate Mr Najib, closing a probe into the $681m “donation” and asserting that it had nothing to do with 1MDB. The government says that most of the money was sent back to the donor after the election. Why, some ask, was so much of the payment returned if it was legal?

Not all Malaysia’s institutions have been supine. Last year the central bank urged the attorney-general to begin a criminal prosecution of 1MDB managers after concluding that the fund had moved $1.8 billion overseas based on inaccurate disclosures. This money was supposed to go to the PetroSaudi joint venture and related loans. Instead, much of it went elsewhere and is unaccounted for, according to the auditor-general’s draft report. (The final report was supposed to be released last December, but has twice been delayed.) The central bank requested a review of the finding by Mr Apandi that 1MDB did not commit any offences. This was rejected.



Malaysia’s anti-corruption commission, an independent agency, investigated the payments into Mr Najib’s account and handed its findings to Mr Apandi late last year. He returned them to the commission in January, requesting more information. The commission has denied reports, based on unauthorised briefings, that it recommended charging Mr Najib.

It was the haste with which Mr Apandi ruled out criminality that prompted the sharper tone from the Swiss authorities, who are investigating suspected bribery, corruption, misconduct in public office and money-laundering linked to 1MDB. They appear to be unimpressed with the blanket exoneration, though they say Mr Najib is not a suspect.

Through a brass plate, darkly

Singapore is also investigating suspected money-laundering and says it has frozen a “large number” of bank accounts. The case is a test of the city-state’s resolve in dealing with financial crime. Like Hong Kong, it has seen big inflows of wealth in recent years, including money of dubious provenance from Switzerland.

But the sleuths face many hurdles. The corporate secrecy offered by offshore centres makes the task of penetrating structures used to move money slow and difficult. The OECD and others have begun to try to lift this shroud, but transparency reforms are at an early stage.

Then there is the complex and clunky international system of “mutual legal assistance”, or MLA, under which countries ask each other for help in investigations. Piecing together the jigsaw is all the harder if the country at the centre of the probe is unhelpful. Malaysia has said it will assist the Swiss, but that looks unlikely. Indeed, it is using blocking tactics, for instance by telling Switzerland to file its MLA request through Malaysia’s foreign ministry. That is unusual: such requests would more typically go through the justice ministry, which is viewed abroad as less political.

Malaysian officials reacted angrily to Switzerland’s announcement about misappropriation, accusing it of spreading “misinformation”. When the Swiss and Malaysian attorneys-general met last year, the Malaysians are believed to have said they would arrange for those caught up in the affair to provide testimony in depositions, but this has not happened. Without Malaysian help, it will be hard for foreign sleuths to complete their probes. For now, though, they seem determined to keep digging, causing anxiety in the Malaysian capital, parts of the Middle East, and some of the world’s largest financial centres.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693970-investigators-several-countries-are-trying-get-bottom-malaysias-growing-corruption/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sanctions on North Korea

Big bother

Despite tough-looking new sanctions, punishing the gangster state will remain fiendishly difficult. All eyes are on China

Mar 5th 2016 | SEOUL | From the print edition



ON MARCH 2nd the UN agreed to the most sweeping sanctions it has yet imposed on North Korea in response to the country’s nuclear and missile tests of the past decade. The measures include inspections of all goods going to or coming from the country; a total embargo on all arms sales to it; and a ban on exports from it of coal, iron and other minerals. They were approved by all 15 members of its Security Council including Russia, after it delayed a vote to negotiate small changes to the text, and China, which opposes its ally’s nuclear programme but has been reluctant to punish it seriously.

Hopes have been raised before that consensus at the UN might force North Korea to abandon its efforts. “Swift and tough” was how America described a resolution passed by the UN after North Korea’s inaugural atomic test in 2006. Yet despite further such resolutions, the North’s bomb-building programme chugs along. Few expect it to give it up soon. But a toughening of China’s stance—assuming it implements the sanctions rigorously—may give North Korea pause. China is by far the country’s biggest trading partner. Most of the trade covered by the sanctions goes through China.

The resolution was the product of nearly two months of delicate negotiation between America and China that began after North Korea’s fourth nuclear test on January 6th. That was followed on February 7th by a long-range missile test (in the guise of a rocket sending a satellite into space), after which South Korea and America agreed to begin formal talks about the possibility of installing an American missile-defence system in the South. That prospect may have helped to stiffen China’s resolve: it fears the kit might threaten its own nuclear arsenal. China may hope that America might now abandon its missile-defence ideas. But it has also made clear that UN sanctions are “not an end in themselves”. China recently called for peace talks between the Koreas. It will hope that the sanctions will encourage North Korea to resume discussions on dismantling its nuclear programme, and not simply choke the North Korean economy.

Chinese enforcement of previous sanctions applied by the UN on North Korea has been poor. Those now being imposed would involve considerably more disruption for China. It receives most of North Korea’s exports of minerals, including coal, gold, titanium and iron ore; in 2014 they made up half of the North’s $2.8 billion worth of sales to the country, according to South Korean figures. Rüdiger Frank of the University of Vienna thinks inspections of goods crossing the border will scare away trading partners and increase transaction costs for all North Korean trade, even the legal sort. But Chinese officials may balk at having to examine every truck. It is possible that they may simply put on a show of doing so. John Delury of Yonsei University in Seoul says that if China thought economic pressure was useful, it would already be applying it unilaterally.

The sanctions include a more explicit ban on the sale of luxury goods, with which the regime pampers its senior officials: no more snowmobiles or fancy watches. But perhaps the most potent provisions of the UN resolution are those that require, and no longer simply encourage, countries to sniff out suspicious North Korean activity. They must expel North Korean diplomats found to be engaging in criminality and shut down North Korean banks if there is evidence they are helping the nuclear programme.

Money trees

But the sanctions do not target China’s vital oil supplies to the North. And North Korea may find ways of mitigating their effects. It has been tapping new sources of cash, such as by sending more workers abroad to earn hard currency at logging camps in Russia and on construction sites in the Middle East—activities that are also not covered by the latest resolution. If the new sanctions deter some traders, others may fill the gap, especially Chinese middlemen attracted by high commissions for riskier dealings on behalf of North Korean state trading companies. North Korea has a thriving black market in everything from computers to fine cognac, oiled by corrupt Chinese customs officials along its 1,400km (870-mile) border with China. The sanctions regime is likely to increase that illegal trade, not crush it.

North Korean coal shipments, by their size, should be easier to track. Yet a large loophole remains that allows exports for “livelihood purposes”. Kim Byung-yeon of Seoul National University says certifying end-use would be wholly impractical. Proceeds from coal exports and most other trading activities typically remain in China in the form of credit. These are pools of ready cash for North Korean elites to draw on for their trade. And North Korea has proven adept at skirting sanctions by setting up front companies and shuffling ownership—shifting control of a trading company from a blacklisted government agency to one that is not, for example.

Recent reports by a UN panel have found that North Korea routinely renames firms hit by sanctions and registers its cargo ships under foreign flags (among them, Cambodia, Kiribati and Sierra Leone). States that neglect to enforce sanctions are not penalised. Since the previous resolution in 2013, more than 150 of the UN’s 193 member states have failed to submit required reports on their implementation of those sanctions; last year, four of them were members of the Security Council.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693965-despite-tough-looking-new-sanctions-punishing-gangster-state-will-remain-fiendishly-difficult/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Confronting intolerance in Pakistan

A game of dare

A new boldness in challenging religious extremism

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

Mumtaz Qadri was no saint

PEOPLE from many walks of life poured onto the streets of Rawalpindi near Islambad, Pakistan’s capital, on March 1st to honour a convicted murderer. Among the 100,000 or so mourners who crammed into Liaquat Park and surrounding streets were lawyers wearing the black suits of their profession, labourers bused in from around the country and even the odd expatriate businessman who had flown in for the occasion. The crowd was full of fury, directed at the government of Nawaz Sharif, the prime minister, for the hanging the day before of Mumtaz Qadri. A former police bodyguard, he had assassinated his boss, Salman Taseer, the governor of Punjab province, in 2011.

Taseer was a liberal-minded businessman turned politician who had earned the hatred of religious hardliners by lobbying for a presidential pardon for a poor Christian woman. She had been sentenced to death under Pakistan’s infamous blasphemy law that bans disrespect towards the Prophet and other “holy personages”. It was, Taseer said, a “black law”. It is often invoked against religious minorities on the flimsiest of grounds; evidence can rarely be challenged in court for fear of repeating the alleged blasphemy.

For killing Taseer, clerics declared Mr Qadri a ghazi or warrior. A mosque in Islamabad was named after him. Support for him among the 500,000-strong armed forces was so strong that the army chief at the time told foreign ambassadors that he was unable to issue a condemnation.

This week the government was careful to manage the backlash. It ordered broadcasters to downplay news of Mr Qadri’s execution and imposed a news blackout on his funeral. No leading politician dared comment.

Given the strength of support for Mr Qadri, it was not obvious that the government would dare to execute him. His legal team had exhausted all options. In a bold ruling in October the Supreme Court not only roundly rejected the team’s arguments; it also asserted that the blasphemy law was not beyond criticism since it was man-made. Even so, Mr Sharif’s party, the Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz), or PML (N), could have sat indefinitely on Mr Qadri’s request for a presidential pardon, so ducking the risk of enraging its religiously conservative base.

That it did not do so is evidence of a growing readiness to stand up to intolerance and extremism. It follows a firestorm of terror attacks from the late-2000s onwards, culminating in the Pakistani Taliban’s assault on a school in Peshawar in December 2014 that killed more than 130 children. That event galvanised public opinion like nothing before. Since then the army, which in the past has used rabble-rousing Islamists to bash domestic and foreign opponents, has also turned its efforts to curbing extremism.

Politics no longer favours the hardliners, who tend to flourish during periods of military rule. Religious parties win few seats in a parliament dominated by the PML (N), while hardliners are divided over ideology. Mr Qadri’s sympathisers come from the usually non-violent Barelvi movement, Sunnis heavily influenced by Sufism. Barelvis are locked in competition for adherents with the Deobandi movement, to which the Taliban and most other militant groups belong. With their puritanical outlook and belief in going back to the basics of early Islam, Deobandis are deeply critical of Barelvi enthusiasm for such traditions as worshipping at the shrines of local Sufi saints. Barelvis have largely cheered the crackdown on militant groups, which has targeted Deobandi mullahs and seminaries. A leading Deobandi cleric, Mohammad Khan Sherani, backed the execution of Mr Qadri.

Mr Sharif cuts a strikingly more liberal figure than during his last stint in power, in the 1990s. Then he attempted to introduce sharia (Islamic law) and have himself declared “commander of the faithful”. Recently his government has pushed for Hindus, who make up 2% of the country’s population of 182m, to be allowed legally to register their marriages for the first time. On February 24th Punjab, which is controlled by PML (N), passed a law to protect women from violence (a move which a constitutionally empowered body of mullahs quickly declared to be un-Islamic). Mr Sharif has also thrown his support behind an Oscar-winning documentary critical of the widespread sanctioning of “honour killings” of women. He has vowed to change the law.

Much more remains to be done, including reining in a notorious mullah, Abdul Aziz, who has praised the Pakistani Taliban and promotes sectarian hatred from right under the government’s nose in Islamabad’s Red Mosque. And there are still no signs of a crackdown on army-backed jihadists who restrict their activities to Afghanistan and India.

The blasphemy law also needs to be reformed or, even better, scrapped. But that is unlikely, given how many men may be ready to emulate Mr Qadri. Those who got close enough to Mr Qadri’s garlanded corpse this week reported a face with the beatific glow of a martyr.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693962-new-boldness-challenging-religious-extremism-game-dare/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

The last refuge

The government of Narendra Modi seeks to define Indian patriotism, and to own it

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



THE annual budget which India’s finance minister, Arun Jaitley, presented on February 29th would normally have been the big political event of the week. That is not how proceedings in Parliament in the ensuing days made it appear. Both chambers were disrupted by angry exchanges over issues close to the hearts of the more extreme Hindu-nationalist wing of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Yet again, an ugly strain of BJP politics is distracting attention from what was supposed to be the party’s central agenda in power: ensuring rapid economic growth.

The party’s own members provoked some of the most heated spats. This week two MPs from the BJP, including a junior minister, Ram Shankar Katheria, attended a rally in Agra, near Delhi, to commemorate a Hindu activist allegedly killed by Muslims. Inflammatory speeches at the rally called Muslims “demons” and warned them of a “final battle”. The two BJP men also spoke, leading to opposition calls for the minister’s resignation. But he was unapologetic, saying that, although he had called on Hindus to unite for their own safety, and for the culprits to be executed, he himself had not named any community.

The opposition has also been attacking the minister of human resources, Smriti Irani, over her response to two recent incidents at universities. One was the suicide of a scholar at the University of Hyderabad, Rohith Vemula, who left a note that prompted national soul-searching about the discrimination he had suffered because of the “fatal accident” of his birth as a Dalit or “untouchable”, a Hindu at the bottom of the caste hierarchy. The second is the arrest for sedition of students at Jawaharlal Nehru University in Delhi, including the head of the student union, Kanhaiya Kumar. Their alleged crime had been to shout “anti-national” slogans at a protest marking the anniversary of the execution of Afzal Guru, a terrorist from Indian-ruled Kashmir.

The BJP has blown the incident up into one of national pride and patriotism—especially after opposition politicians came out in defence of the students. Demonstrations for and against the students have taken place in several cities. On February 27th Srinagar, the biggest city in the Kashmir valley, was paralysed by a strike in support of the students and of a Kashmiri professor also charged with sedition over an Afzal Guru commemoration.

A BJP politician decried the scruffy looks and licentiousness of left-leaning students at JNU, claiming that 2,000 bottles of booze and 3,000 used condoms are found on the campus each day. Since it only has about 7,000 students, that represents quite a feat, and the claim was greeted with derision. But other features of the case prompted justifiable outrage. It emerged that two of the seven videos incriminating the students had been doctored. Mr Kumar was badly beaten up in court by “patriotic” lawyers, who have as yet faced no serious consequences.

The damage to India’s image is painful. Faith in the police and other institutions has been undermined. Vigilante violence has seemed to win official backing. Street protests have proliferated; on March 2nd the police in Delhi used water cannon against protesters outside Parliament. This is not the outward-looking, investor-friendly image India hopes to project. And it threatens its liberal traditions of free speech. It is not just India-hating traitors who think that the trial of Afzal Guru was unfair and that his execution was used for political ends by the previous administration, led by the Congress party. The BJP’s definition of “sedition” precludes almost any debate on the future of Kashmir—a source of tension within India and with Pakistan since independence.

All of this looks like bad news for India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi. Yet, beyond tweeting in support of a fiery speech by Ms Irani, his embattled human-resources minister, he has had little to say on the Rohith Vemula suicide and JNU furore. This follows a pattern: he rarely speaks out in ways that might alienate the BJP’s hardliners. He needs them, as his most loyal foot soldiers in looming state elections, including one in West Bengal in May; and Mr Modi is probably already thinking about the next general election, due by 2019. With that in mind, and following failure in an election in the big state of Bihar last November, he and his advisers may calculate that whipping up a chorus of angry Indian nationalism serves them better than talking about touchy issues such as caste—and better than promoting narrow “Hindu” causes such as protecting cows from beef-eating Muslims and Christians.

It also suits Mr Modi’s style, cultivated in his years as chief minister of the state of Gujarat, to portray himself as an outsider. He complains of plots by the press, NGOs, foreign meddlers and political pundits to destabilise his government. Despite leading India’s first single-party majority government in many years, he still governs as if he is waging an opposition campaign, with big rallies, catchy slogans and a sense of victimhood.

Hopes that Mr Modi would implement radical economic policies were clearly misplaced. He campaigned in 2014 less as a reformer than as a man who got things done. But ruling India has proved much harder than running Gujarat, and he is constrained by the lack of a majority in Parliament’s upper house. So the optimism of his election campaign, when he sought to represent the aspirational new urban middle classes, has been dented.

Mother tricolour

For all that India is the world’s fastest-growing big economy, to many Indians that is not how it feels. It is not creating enough jobs for its swelling workforce. The fresh spending in this week’s budget was aimed not at the middle classes but at the poor in the countryside, the voters whom Congress has long wooed. Last October Arun Shourie, a writer and minister in a former BJP administration, mocked Mr Modi’s government as “Congress plus a cow”. This week’s budget and political battles suggest things have moved on. It has become Congress plus a flag.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693919-his-bjp-government-seeks-define-indian-nationalism-and-own-it-mr-modis-party-finds-last/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Politics: Loyal to the core

Hong Kong and the mainland: Fear-jerker





Articles Sections Next

Politics

Loyal to the core

Legislators will soon meet to discuss a new five-year economic plan. But China’s leaders are more worried about their own jobs

Mar 5th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



WITH all the pomp, pageantry and protest-deterring security, which are traditional at such affairs, the annual session of China’s rubber-stamp legislature, the National People’s Congress (NPC), will open on March 5th. Its agenda includes an unusually weighty topic: the discussion (and inevitable approval) of a plan for the country’s economic development in the next five years—the Communist Party’s recipe, in effect, for ensuring that the world’s second-largest economy does not stall. But many of the officials at the meeting will be worrying about a more pressing matter: their jobs.

The biggest reshuffle in five years of leadership posts at every level of the Communist Party is getting under way. Hundreds of thousands of party bosses and their colleagues will be replaced, in everything from township party committees to state-owned enterprises. These changes will affect a series of other appointments: party leaders at every level are sometimes given concurrent titles such as mayor, CEO, or, in the case of Xi Jinping, whose main job is as the party’s general secretary, the largely honorific role of president.

The drawn-out process will culminate late in 2017 with sweeping changes at the very top of the party. This will involve the retirement of five of the seven current members of the Politburo’s Standing Committee. The only members of that body who are almost certain to keep their jobs are Mr Xi and the prime minister, Li Keqiang. Six out of the 18 ordinary members of the Politburo are also due to retire.

For Mr Xi these changes both high and low will be vital to the success of his policies for the rest of the time he has in power. When he took over in 2012, Mr Xi inherited a party bureaucracy stuffed at the highest levels with appointees of his two immediate predecessors as party chief (Hu Jintao, and before him, Jiang Zemin), and at the lower levels by officials used to running their localities in a manner suited to Mr Hu’s priorities. With the upcoming reshuffle, Mr Xi has an opportunity to stack the party hierarchy with his own loyalists. No wonder, then, that foreign dignitaries find Chinese leaders distracted.

As much as the five-year plan, the five-yearly cycle of job uncertainty and related tension has determined the working rhythm of China’s bureaucracy since the 1980s, when a two-term limit was imposed on most leadership positions. Da huanjie, or “big changeovers” of personnel, occur in the build-up to, and right after, each of the party’s five-yearly congresses, the next of which (the 19th) will take place late in 2017 (not to be confused with the NPC, which is not concerned with party affairs).

Mr Xi took over immediately after the 18th congress. By party convention, he too is subject to a two-term limit. That makes the 19th congress crucial for the consolidation of his power. It was Mr Hu (with help from a retired but ever-solicitous Mr Jiang) who supervised preparations for the 18th congress. So the build-up to the 19th will be Mr Xi’s first opportunity to make his mark on the appointment of so many officials. It will also be his last such opportunity before he prepares to retire at the 20th congress in 2022, assuming that is his plan.

Mr Xi will only concern himself with the most important job changes; it is the party’s all-powerful and highly secretive Organisation Department that will decide on most of them, based on his guidelines. These, it would appear, suggest that candidates must be unswervingly loyal to Mr Xi. In recent weeks, several provincial party chiefs have hailed Mr Xi as the “core” of the party leadership, a term that had long been abandoned in favour of language that suggested a more collective style of rule. Mr Xi, it appears, has no scruples about being seen as the pre-eminent strongman.

Who’s up?

During the NPC, which normally convenes for about ten days, foreign journalists will have a rare opportunity to see the provincial party bosses who are likely to get jobs in the Politburo after the 19th congress (media are given access to many of the meetings at which delegates, grouped by province, parrot the party line). But it is still far from clear which of them, if any, are being groomed by Mr Xi to replace him and Mr Li after the congress in 2022. At this point ten years ago, there was already speculation that Mr Xi and Mr Li—both then provincial chiefs—were front-runners.

Today the field looks more open. The party boss of Guangdong province, Hu Chunhua, and that of Chongqing, Sun Zhengcai, are possibles. But they may be handicapped by their lack of strong connections with Mr Xi. Others include Chen Miner, the party chief of Guizhou province who once worked closely with Mr Xi, and various officials in the central leadership including Ding Xuexiang of the Central Committee’s General Office and Zhong Shaojun of the party’s Central Military Commission (which Mr Xi heads).

Unlike a decade ago, there are rumours that Mr Xi may be thinking of flouting convention and staying on after 2022. If this is so, it has not resulted in any less scrambling for top positions. The confusion this contest has caused among subordinates, says Chongyi Feng of the University of Technology in Sydney, Australia, is slowing down implementation of the market-oriented reforms that Mr Xi has promised. So too is Mr Xi’s campaign against corruption; officials fearful of being accused of graft by rivals prefer to keep their heads down rather than get involved in projects involving large amounts of money. Minxin Pei of Claremont McKenna College in America describes a Chinese bureaucracy “paralysed by fear”. The Organisation Department is looking out for anyone who is at risk of daibing, or “carrying sickness”, meaning transferring a habit of corruption from one job to another.

One attribute that may help candidates for promotion is being well-versed in the Communist canon. In recent days, official presses have been rolling out copies of an obscure Maoist text: “Work Method of Party Committees”, first published in 1949. Mr Xi has ordered officials to study the tract, which includes an instruction that party bosses must (metaphorically) “learn to play the piano”. This, Mao explains, means they should attend to everything just as a pianist uses all ten fingers. They should not “give all [their] attention to a few problems, to the exclusion of others”. Mr Xi himself, with pressing economic matters to attend to as well as the reshuffle, should perhaps take note.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21693948-legislators-will-soon-meet-discuss-new-five-year-economic-plan-chinas-leaders-are-more/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Hong Kong and the mainland

Fear-jerker

A film abhorrent to the Communist Party has proved a hit in the territory

Mar 5th 2016 | HONG KONG | From the print edition

Hong Kong’s future will be excellent in parts

“THE reason why Hong Kong does not have democracy is because no one has died yet,” says a student in the former British colony who thinks it worth shedding blood to win freedom. Fellow supporters of the territory’s independence from China rampage through the streets; a protester self-immolates outside the British consulate. The government in Beijing sends tanks to crush the revolt.

Such a calamity is unlikely in 2016. But could it happen in Hong Kong within the next decade? That is the question posed by “Ten Years”, a popular local film that has infuriated mainland officials.

When China took Hong Kong back from Britain in 1997, it agreed to give it a “high degree of autonomy” for 50 years. Each of the film’s five vignettes portrays a dystopia in which China, explicitly or covertly, has taken control much sooner. Released on December 17th in just one cinema, the film went on to play to packed theatres across the territory until its run ended in February. In some cinemas it outsold “Star Wars”, another film about a big, repressive state. On March 10th the film’s overseas premiere will take place in Japan.

“Ten Years” has appealed to those concerned about China’s efforts to stifle the development of democracy in the territory and to restrict freedom of speech. Anxieties have been fuelled recently by the disappearance of five men who sold gossipy books about China’s leaders.

At the end of February a Hong Kong-based television channel aired interviews with the men. It said four of them were in custody on the mainland for illegally selling books there. One of them, Lee Bo, said he was helping the mainland police as a witness. Mr Lee’s case has aroused particular interest because he disappeared from Hong Kong itself; the others were visiting the mainland or Thailand when they went missing. In the interview, Mr Lee denied he had been kidnapped by Chinese agents and said he remained “free” on the mainland. But suspicions persist that China has been putting pressure on him to stop publishing scurrilous works.

Such worries have encouraged the recent rise of a “localist” movement, whose followers emphasise Hong Kong’s separateness from the mainland. On February 8th young localists clashed with police in the city’s worst violence since the 1960s. In a by-election for the legislature on February 28th, a localist candidate charged by police with taking part in the riot took 15% of the vote. “Ten Years” refers to the movement in its depiction of Sam (played by Liu Kai-Chi, pictured), a fictional shopkeeper who is attacked by pro-Communist fanatics for calling his eggs “local”.

China has made its displeasure clear. A newspaper in Beijing called the film “ideological poison”. Mainland broadcasters have dropped plans to air the Hong Kong Film Awards on April 3rd, the territory’s equivalent of the Oscars (“Ten Years” has been nominated for best picture).

Hong Kong’s financial secretary, John Tsang, has been trying a more conciliatory approach to localist sentiment. In his budget speech on February 24th, he described films made in the Cantonese dialect (“Ten Years” is one such, though he did not mention it) as a “key component of the local culture”. He announced a doubling to HK$500,000 ($64,300) of the government’s subsidy for each Cantonese film promoted on the mainland, where films use the Mandarin dialect. Not everyone was impressed. One of the directors of “Ten Years” said the government would support only films that could pass China’s strict censorship laws. “Ten Years” would stand no chance.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21693949-film-abhorrent-communist-party-has-proved-hit-territory-fear-jerker/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Iran: Mr Rohani’s complicated victory

Syria’s fragile truce: Too many holes to last

Lebanon: When elephants battle

Egyptian television hosts: Sisi’s foaming mouthpieces

Electricity in Nigeria: Powerless

Film-making in Uganda: Lights, camera, no budget

African migration: To the land of good hope





Articles Sections Next

Iran

Mr Rohani’s complicated victory

A boost for reform, but a long way still to go

Mar 5th 2016 | TEHRAN | From the print edition



THE clerics disqualified the candidates, but they could not disqualify the people. So long were the queues outside many polling stations that Iran’s election commission postponed closing five times. Secular Iranians with pink hairdos stood in line waiting to vote against the mullahs. When a self-important hardline politician tried to queue-jump, they booed him to the back of the line.

In Jamaran, the Tehran district where Ayatollah Khomeini once berated western Satans, citizens cheered the architects of Iran’s overtures to the West as they came to vote. Muhammad Zarif, the foreign minister who negotiated the nuclear deal, got polite applause. A former president, Muhammad Khatami, who is perhaps Iran’s most popular politician despite being banned from state media, won a hero’s cheer.

By contrast, the turnout in south Tehran, a poorer, more conservative place, seemed dismal. Voters queued for hours in the north, but registered their ballots in the south within minutes. Organisers in the mosques which doubled as polling stations tried to rally their flock. They pinned posters in their porticos mocking America’s president, Barack Obama, and played nationalist songs over loudspeakers.

The Council of Guardians, a body packed with the Supreme Leader’s followers, had done its best to rig the results in advance. They had banned most reformist candidates for the Majlis, or parliament, and for a body of Shia clerics, the Assembly of Experts, who select the Supreme Leader. But the reformists outsmarted them. They compiled lists of those who remained, and when they had run out of their own candidates, filled them with the most innocuous of their rivals. They cut deals with pragmatic conservatives, like parliament’s speaker, Ali Larijani, whose deputy appeared on Tehran’s reformist list.

The upshot was a “List of Hope”, that was reformist in parts. Sometimes voters had a choice only between hardline and moderate conservatives. Many candidates appeared on both the List of Hope and the hardliners’ list. “We didn’t know half the people on the list, and the half we did know we didn’t like,” said a Tehran businessman. “But if you want change in the Middle East, you have two choices—reform what you can, or follow Syria.”

In the capital the List of Hope won all 30 parliamentary seats and all but one of the 16 Assembly of Experts seats. Ayatollah Hashemi Rafsanjani, who has openly questioned the system of a single Supreme Leader, came first; Hassan Rohani, the president, third. Eight of the 30 were women. The reformist list won majorities in other cities including Isfahan, which hardliners had swept in 2012. In the Assembly of Experts, out went harshly pious hardline icons including Ayatollah Muhammad Yazdi, the current head of the body, and Muhammad Taghi Mesbah Yazdi, the Revolution’s chief surviving theorist. It was, as President Rohani put it, a demonstration of people power. “They said in a loud voice: ‘We want interactions with the world, not confrontation.”’

Given the overlap between the lists, the results are not quite so clear-cut. On a rough assessment of the 216 seats that were decided (69 have been pushed to a run-off round in late spring and five are reserved for minorities), the conservatives won just under half, far worse than their tally at the previous election in 2012. The reformists got almost 40%, up from about 10%. So independents, including Mr Larijani, will hold the balance of power.

That should give Mr Rohani more room for manoeuvre to push through the laws he needs to open Iran for foreign investment and claw back some of the assets Iran’s big conglomerates, controlled by clerics and Revolutionary Guards, amassed when Iran was cut off from the world. Most independents will depend on his budget if they want to bring roads and other goodies to their provinces.

Democracy’s messy

But parliament will also be a chaotic place. Having culled each other’s upper tiers, both parliamentary factions look rudderless. Mr Rohani, a consummate centrist, must decide whether to concentrate on the economy, as the Supreme Leader wants, or to pursue social change, as his supporters want. He has yet to keep his promise to release political dissidents incarcerated after the 2009 elections.

The situation with the new Council of Experts is equally murky, but crucial. It will hold office until 2024. Since Mr Khamenei is 76, it may well have to choose his successor as Supreme Leader. It, too, has shifted in a more moderate direction, which could presage a battle of critical importance to Iran’s future if the time should come for it to perform its task.



In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal

The conservative establishment is far more powerful than the president. The Supreme Leader can veto laws. Judges and Revolutionary Guards do his bidding. Isolation has served the hardliners well, allowing them to muscle into sectors, particularly oil, previously filled by foreigners. While Mr Zarif, Mr Rohani’s foreign minister, was meeting his American counterpart, the hardliners tested a ballistic missile to spoil the mood. Conservative goons have arrested western journalists and businessmen, presumably to undermine Mr Rohani’s diplomacy towards the West. The day Britain reopened its visa section in Tehran they put up a billboard of the Queen in a nearby square, showing her with the snout of a camel.

But they are a little less rigid than they used to be. Nudged by the Supreme Leader, who prefers to hide behind his president, even some of the hardest-liners approved last summer’s nuclear deal, and many, like Mr Larijani, have tacked to the centre. Muatalifa, a conservative faction, holds senior posts in Mr Rohani’s own staff. The morality police have stopped barging into people’s homes and offices quite so often.

The difference between the two electoral lists is muddier than it appears. Conservatives may denounce their opponents as western stooges; reformists may mutter that the conservatives are the Shia equivalent of Islamic State. But in reality hardline and softer clerics intermarry, shift positions, and hedge their bets to keep power, says an Ayatollah in Qom who was once Ayatollah Khomeini’s Guardian Councillor, and is now one of the Supreme Leader’s turbulent priests. The views of voters count for far less than they should in Iran, but they do count for something.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693937-boost-reform-long-way-still-go-mr-rohaniu2019s-complicated/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Syria’s fragile truce

Too many holes to last

The “cessation of hostilities” has brought some relief, but means different things to different people

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS a brave attempt to generate diplomatic momentum. Four days into the American and Russian sponsored “cessation of hostilities” agreement that came into force on February 27th, Staffan de Mistura, the UN special envoy to Syria, said he was expecting the warring parties to return to the negotiating table in Geneva on March 9th. Mr de Mistura had pencilled in an earlier date for the resumption of peace talks, which were suspended before they could begin a month ago when the Syrian opposition walked out. But he hopes that by allowing a couple of extra days “for the ceasefire to better settle down”, the chances of success will be greater.

Mr de Mistura’s use of the expression “ceasefire” is itself an indication of hopes likely to be dashed. A cessation of hostilities is more an orchestrated lull in the fighting than a formal ceasefire. Thus far, however, the agreement, although partial and fragile, is holding better than many expected. The intensity of the fighting has dwindled more than during previous attempts. America’s State Department said it had not heard of any “significant” violations of the agreement, though that depends on what is meant by significant. The Syrian Network for Human Rights, a British-based NGO, reported nearly 80 breaches (including the possible use of poison gas) in the first few days, resulting in 13 civilian deaths.

On the same fairly positive note, Bashar al-Assad’s government has allowed deliveries of humanitarian aid to besieged communities, including some in rebel-controlled areas. The UN was aiming to have reached 150,000 people by the end of the first week. It reckons that there are at least 450,000 people trapped in towns and villages across the country. Mr Assad told a German television station on March 1st that his government would “do our part so that the whole thing works”.

Some scepticism is warranted. The agreement excludes both Islamic State (IS) and Jabhat al-Nusra (JAN), al-Qaeda’s Syrian branch. It labels them terrorist groups. As such both can be targeted, either by the regime with its Russian and Iranian backers, or by the American-led anti-IS coalition. But JAN, in particular, operates alongside more mainstream rebel groups supported by America and its allies.

There are thus many potential flashpoints where the regime can say it is attacking designated terrorists, but is actually going after groups supposedly protected by the agreement. In largely rebel-held Idlib province, the Western-backed Free Syrian Army (FSA), Ahrar-al-Sham (a powerful Salafi outfit) and JAN all share control. It is doubtful whether either Russian or Syrian aircraft, equipped only with “dumb” bombs, can target one group without hitting others. The regime also says that JAN and IS are operating in Ghouta and Daraya, suburbs of Damascus that it has long wanted to wrest back. Rebels say this is untrue.



An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts

The biggest test case seems certain to be Aleppo. Russian air strikes in recent weeks have made it possible for regime forces, augmented by the Iranian Revolutionary Guards and various Iranian-backed proxy militias, to come close to a complete encirclement of pre-war Syria’s biggest city. The Russians insist that Aleppo’s defenders are dominated by JAN. FSA sources say that JAN has fewer than 1,000 fighters in Aleppo, a small fraction of the groups in the city that are affiliated to it.

An all-out attack on Aleppo can probably be ruled out. The regime does not have enough troops to fight street by street against well-prepared locals—the kind of battle that causes heavy casualties. Nor is Russia able to deploy enough precision-guided munitions to make air power count for much in such a densely packed city. The Institute for the Study of War, a think-tank in Washington, DC predicts that the regime and its allies will instead pursue a slow “siege-and-starve” campaign to wear down the city’s defenders without getting so many of their own men killed.

As part of the plan to isolate Aleppo, the regime is depending on Kurdish YPG fighters and Russian air strikes to cut off all the northern supply routes from Turkey. That is another reason to fear that the cessation of hostilities will be short-lived. The Kurds have said they will abide by that agreement unless attacked. But Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, says that it has no bearing on his country’s military campaign to prevent the Kurds from controlling Syria’s northern border, which he sees as a threat to Turkey’s own security.

For now, a pause in the fighting, even if confined only to some areas, suits almost everyone. But the chances are slim that an agreement so rickety will last long enough to provide a platform for serious peace talks in Geneva.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693940-cessation-hostilities-has-brought-some-relief-means-different-things/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lebanon

When elephants battle

Saudi Arabia and Iran squabble over Lebanon. The little guy gets hurt

Mar 5th 2016 | BEIRUT | From the print edition



AS SAUDI ARABIA and Iran jostle for power in the Middle East, Lebanon has managed to maintain an uncomfortable balance between the two. Saudi Arabia has long been chummy with Lebanon’s Sunni politicians and some of its Christians. Iran supports the Lebanese Shia, not least through Hizbullah, a militia-cum-political party. It has also snuggled up to some Lebanese Christian groups. Nonetheless, an uneasy calm prevailed between Lebanon and the two regional powers. Apparently no longer.

On February 19th Saudi Arabia said it had suspended $4 billion in funding for the French and Americans to train and equip the Lebanese army and security forces. Ostensibly the kingdom objects to Hizbullah, and therefore Iran’s influence, which they see as exemplified by Lebanon’s failure to condemn an attack in January on the Saudi embassy in Tehran. Saudi Arabia then warned its citizens against travelling to the tiny country, and accused Hizbullah of smuggling drugs into the kingdom and sending mercenaries to Yemen and Syria. On March 2nd the six-member Gulf Co-operation Council designated Hizbullah a terrorist organisation.

Hizbullah and Iran are certainly amassing power in the Middle East, often in unsavoury ways. They have propped up Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s blood-spattered despot, and provided men and weapons to help Iraq fight Islamic State. They are also thought to be helping Yemen’s rebel Houthis. But although in Lebanon Hizbullah has been blocking the nomination of a new president, it has done little new to ignite Saudi anger there. The move probably has more to do with a bolder—and often clumsy—foreign policy under King Salman and his favoured son, Muhammad. Their fear of Iran has bordered on panic, not least since Iran concluded a nuclear deal with America and other powers.

Saudi Arabia’s moves against Lebanon seem amateurish. Even if the Lebanese parties wanted to, they could do little to diminish the role of Hizbullah, which acts as a state within the state and also dominates the government. “Saudi Arabia sometimes acts with bombast and violence that makes it look like the Donald Trump of the Arab world,” says Rami Khouri of the American University of Beirut.

The result is likely to be that the Saudis lose influence in Lebanon, possibly to Iran. The squabble risks destabilising a divided nation that is already buckling under the weight of Syrian refugees. Lebanon’s politicians, divided by their attitudes to Saudi Arabia and Iran, among many other things, are already trading accusations. Hizbullah and the Future Movement, the main Sunni party led by Saad Hariri, the son of a revered former prime minister, may call off their regular meetings.

This probably makes Lebanon less secure. It is facing threats from the war next door in Syria and from terrorists inspired by it at home. Signalling its concern, the UN has called on other countries to make up the $4 billion. Many Lebanese fear that if the row escalates, the economy will suffer. They worry that the Gulf will kick out Lebanese residents, who send home hefty remittances. Saudis and other Gulf spenders may well ignore the travel warnings and still spend their money on holidays in freewheeling Beirut, but far fewer have come since the carnage started in Syria.

The squall looks unlikely to blow over. Hassan Nasrallah, Hizbullah’s leader, piled on the rhetoric against the Al Sauds on March 1st, accusing them of crimes and massacres. Hussein Shobokshi, a Saudi columnist, does not think the kingdom will back down. “Any rise in Iran’s role will hurt the Lebanese more than us,” he says.

Hizbullah has even suggested that Saudi Arabia has cut the cash because it is going bankrupt as a result of low oil prices. Loth to miss an opportunity, Iran has offered to make up the money. The Iranians’ aim may be nothing more than to tweak royal Saudi noses; they can barely afford such a sum.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693898-little-guy-gets-hurt-saudi-arabia-and-iran-squabble-over-lebanon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Egyptian television hosts

Sisi’s foaming mouthpieces

The absurdity of Egyptian talk shows

Mar 5th 2016 | CAIRO | From the print edition

“THAT precision! Look at that car! Wait for the missile to come down! No one gets away.” Ahmed Moussa, an Egyptian television host, sounded like a kid playing a video game when he showed “satellite imagery” of Russia striking Islamic State in Syria last autumn. Perhaps that is because Mr Moussa was, in fact, showing clips from a video game. “We aren’t making anything up,” said Mr Moussa, as he made it all up.

Mr Moussa’s programme, called “Ala mas’uliyati” (“My Responsibility”), epitomises the absurdity of Egypt’s popular talk shows. In February a host called Khairy Ramadan was suspended after a guest claimed that women in Upper Egypt are generally unfaithful. Another host, Reham Saeed, was sentenced to six months in prison for airing the private photos of a sexual-harassment victim (whom she also blamed for the attack).

Most hosts not only support the government, but take direction from it. “I would say anything the military tells me to say out of duty and respect for the institution,” Mr Moussa told the Guardian. Others mix conspiracy and sycophancy, as when Amr Adeeb worried that “[foreign] intelligence officers who are trying to ruin our country” might kill Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, the president.

Mr Sisi says back him or stay mum—but some have not. Egypt has locked up more journalists than any country save China. Media outlets that supported the Muslim Brotherhood have been closed down. Most network heads are anyway disposed to self-censor. Nearly all support the regime, which protects their business interests. So critics such as Bassem Youssef, the former host of a satirical news programme, have been taken off the air.

Egypt is “the target of many conspiracies”, claims Mr Sisi. Hosts detail the plots. In October Tamer Amin interviewed Hossam Sweilam, a former deputy defence minister, who claimed that America was behind the uprising in 2011 and now controls Egypt’s weather. Lyrics from an obscure American hip-hop group were cited as proof. The conspirators vary, but often include America, Iran and Israel, sometimes (oddly) working together. Mr Moussa says he would like to see Barack Obama “impaled”.

Though their ranting is often nonsensical, talk-show hosts sway opinion in Egypt, where over a quarter of people are illiterate. Fortunately, some hosts have stiffened their spines of late, criticising the government for a poor economy, among other things. The recent murder of a young Italian student prompted a few to ask, obliquely, whether the state was involved, as evidence suggests. Perhaps sensing a shift, Mr Sisi has warned Egyptians, “Don’t listen to anyone but me. I am dead serious.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693939-absurdity-egyptian-talk-shows-sisis-foaming-mouthpieces/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Electricity in Nigeria

Powerless

Nigeria has about as much electricity as Edinburgh. That is a problem

Mar 5th 2016 | LAGOS | From the print edition



OUT in the farthest reaches of Lagos, a bumpy boat ride across the city’s dividing lagoon, Egbin power plant is trying to light up one of the world’s darkest nations. Six turbines growl in its huge belly, watched over by mechanics in a futuristic control room. They say the place is barely recognisable since privatisation in 2013. Output has rocketed since Sahara Group, a Nigerian energy conglomerate, took over. When running at full steam, Egbin generates almost a quarter of the whole country’s electricity.

That is not a particularly stretching target. Of Nigeria’s many daily headaches, power is perhaps the worst. After years in which state-owned power plants decayed, the government changed course by selling power stations and the distribution grids that carry power to homes and businesses. This bold stroke was meant to turn the lights on, and indeed it has encouraged investors to put millions of dollars into upgrading the battered system. Yet the supply of power has failed to respond as hoped in the two years since privatisation. At the moment the country’s big stations produce a pitiful 2,800MW, which is about as much as is used by Edinburgh. Only just over half of Nigerians have access to electricity, and it is still harder for businesses to hook up to the grid than almost anywhere else.

One reason why privatisation has failed to improve Nigeria’s power supply is that the process itself was flawed from the start. Even as companies were bidding to buy power stations or distribution companies, striking staff prevented them from looking at what they were buying. Once the deals were done they found they had bought rundown equipment and companies whose books had been systematically cooked. More important, though, was that many could not get the gas they needed to power their plants. Government meddling held down gas prices, which meant that many producers would simply flare it off (while extracting oil) instead of bothering to sell it at a deep loss. Moreover, the pipes meant to carry the flammable stuff are rusting and regularly vandalised by thugs demanding money to protect them.

The privatisation process was also incomplete and left the transmission grid (which carries electricity from power stations to the local distribution grids) in the hands of the state. It has not invested much, so huge amounts of power fizzle out on its dilapidated lines. Even if power plants could generate more electricity, the grid would not be able to handle it. At Egbin a handful of people employed by the state-owned transmission network sit watching YouTube clips as their private-sector colleagues beaver away.

Power plants are also owed colossal sums by the agencies that act as middlemen between generation companies and the distributors. Egbin alone is some $225m out of pocket. The intermediaries, in turn, blame distributors, saying they have not been collecting cash from their customers. As for the distributors, they say that the tariffs they are allowed to charge are too low to cover their costs and that, in any case, Nigerians do not pay their bills. Depressingly, the biggest offender is the government, whose various departments and agencies owe almost $300m. “It’s difficult for anyone to go to a military barracks and order them to pay—except if you’ve written your will,” says one insider.

More than a year ago the Central Bank of Nigeria organised a $1 billion loan to plug the gap and avoid a wave of insolvencies among power generators, but only a fraction has been disbursed. Since then a falling currency and shortages of foreign exchange have made it harder for private power producers to service debts denominated in dollars, a currency many chose because it offered lower interest rates than borrowing in naira. Finding cash (and hard currency in particular) to buy gas, maintain machinery and pay technical partners is a growing strain. Dallas Peavey, Egbin’s chief executive, reckons that without repayment or preferential access to foreign currency he can keep the country’s biggest power station running for just another four weeks.

Still, there are glimmers of hope. In recent years the government has raised the price of gas, and supplies are growing more reliable. Distribution companies are installing new meters, which are harder to fiddle. Unpaid public electricity bills are being chased up. Most crucially, tariffs were increased in February by as much as 45%. It did not go down at all well with locals. But if Nigerians can be convinced to pay their bills, it ought to get some cash flowing through the system. That would be a start.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693971-nigeria-has-about-much-electricity-edinburgh-problem-powerless/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Film-making in Uganda

Lights, camera, no budget

Taking “shoestring” to extremes

Mar 5th 2016 | KAMPALA | From the print edition

Warner Bros watch out!

A PIXELLATED helicopter destroys skyscrapers in Kampala. A shoot-out ensues, with cut-and-paste explosions and blood splats. The special effects in “Who Killed Captain Alex?”, a Ugandan action comedy, resemble a 1990s video game. But what do you expect for a budget of less than $200?

Isaac Nabwana has written, directed and edited more than 47 films since 2008, featuring everything from flesh-eating zombies to kung-fu kids. His set is the dusty yard outside his home in Wakaliga, a slum that sometimes has month-long power cuts. (Inevitably, the area is now called “Wakaliwood”.) The actors make their own costumes. A local samosa seller, Dauda Bisaso, forges guns and camera tripods from scrap metal. (He has also played villains in 11 of Mr Nabwana’s films.) Make-up artists used to splash on cow blood to simulate wounds. But then someone caught tetanus and they switched to red food colouring.

Filmgoers in the slums like lots of violence. They also enjoy live commentary from a “ video joker”, who usually stands in the cinema keeping the tension high. On the soundtrack of “Who Killed Captain Alex?” , VJ Emmie plays the same role. “Action is coming, I promise you,” he assures viewers.

Established Kampala distributors once refused to take Luganda-language films featuring unknown actors. Now they clamour to sell Mr Nabwana’s oeuvre. His sales team hawk DVDs door-to-door for 1,500-2,000 shillings (45-60 American cents), keeping 50% of the proceeds. But they have stiff competition: you can buy a DVD with four American or Nigerian films on it for 1,000 shillings.

There is also a window of just five to six days in which to maximise sales before pirates copy the work. Harriet Nabwana, Mr Nabwana’s wife and accountant, estimates that 20,000 legitimate copies of a film are usually sold in that crucial first week and around 60,000 in the first month. They still lose money, though. Blank DVDs cost 600 shillings each. Copying equipment, electricity and transport are pricey, too. All the actors have day jobs; Mr Nabwana, a former brickmaker, films music videos. He complains that the police are ignorant or careless of anti-piracy laws.

Wakaliwood has been on a steadier footing since raising more than $13,000 on Kickstarter a year ago. The trailer for “Who Killed Captain Alex?” has been watched more than 2.5m times on YouTube. Mr Nabwana can now afford hard drives to back up his films, and a scrap-metal helicopter is taking shape in his yard. His dream is to buy land for a studio to teach the next generation of Ugandan film-makers. Mr Bisaso’s dream is “to be Bruce Willis in Uganda”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693938-taking-shoestring-extremes-lights-camera-no-budget/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

African migration

To the land of good hope

African migrants head south as well as north

Mar 5th 2016 | JOHANNESBURG | From the print edition

Long walk to the detention centre

SOME African migrants forge across the Mediterranean in flimsy boats. Others take a somewhat less risky (and cheaper) journey, heading for the bright lights of South Africa. Unemployment may be a shocking 34% south of the Limpopo river, but there are still plenty of opportunities for those who are prepared to work hard.

Many migrants follow in the footsteps of their compatriots. Malawians and Mozambicans are often found tending lush suburban gardens. Somalis run tiny convenience stores, known as spaza shops, in black townships. Johannesburg’s “Little Addis” bustles with Ethiopian traders and the sound of Amharic. Congolese and Cameroonian vendors hawk cassava and plantains in Yeoville, another Johannesburg neighbourhood. Zimbabweans, who are typically better educated than their South African peers, can be found totting up company accounts, working as mining engineers or, failing that, waiting on tables. For many Africans, South Africa seems a stable, functional, prosperous place. It is also a potential stepping stone to the rest of the world.

Getting there is not easy. Many do it in stages, finding work along the way. Some are arrested and locked up. On South Africa’s border with Zimbabwe migrants must ford crocodile-infested rivers. Happily, the main fence is so tattered that you can simply walk through it. At many posts, border guards demand bribes.

Some of the greatest dangers for migrants arise after they arrive. Last year seven people were reportedly killed in a spate of anti-foreigner violence, though the real number is probably much higher since most attacks never make the news. Thousands of immigrants fled their homes and businesses. Among them was Salat Abdullahi, 20, who moved from Somalia to Soweto to run a spaza shop with his older brother. They ran away when xenophobic locals looted and destroyed it. “We came here with nothing, and made a business,” Mr Abdullahi said. “They don’t like that.”

After the violence against migrants came a crackdown on the victims: more than 15,000 immigrants were arrested and deported in a government sweep. Many were held in a detention centre notorious for overcrowding, corruption and abuse.

Xenophobia has spread since 1994, when the fall of apartheid led to an inflow of black migrants from across the continent. The South African government has discouraged immigration, despite a shortage of home-grown skills, by tightening border controls and laws. It sees foreigners as competing with locals for scarce jobs rather than as boosting the economy with their talent and entrepreneurial nous. Despite a widespread perception among South Africans that their country is packed with immigrants, the latest census found just 2.2m of them, or less than 5% of the population (though people in the country illegally probably don’t confess this to census officers, so the true figure is higher). In Johannesburg, the most cosmopolitan of South African cities, 13% of the population was born abroad.

Many of those who come seek asylum: the South African government lets refugees work and even obtain some public services while their papers are being processed. Between 2008 and 2012 South Africa received 778,000 asylum applications, in a system that is slow and riddled with corruption. Despite the well-documented hostility and harassment, foreigners are still more likely to be employed than South Africans. Often they work in the informal sector, or do jobs that locals are not willing to take. Enterprising migrants rent shops from South Africans and thereby create jobs. Johannesburg, built on gold mines and migrant labour, is becoming a truly international city. But local elections this year could be the catalyst for more foreigner-bashing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693972-african-migrants-head-south-well-north-land-good-hope/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




France’s labour reforms: Working nine to four

The Irish election: Fragged

Refugees in Greece: Rising tide

Regulating EU pesticides: Fog of uncertainty

Charlemagne: The end of Heile Welt





Articles Sections Next

France’s labour reforms

Working nine to four

The Socialists are torn over a move to dismantle the 35-hour week

Mar 5th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



IN THE eyes of many foreigners, two numbers encapsulate French economic policy over the past decade or so: 75 and 35. The first refers to the top income-tax rate of 75%, promised by François Hollande to seduce the left when he was the Socialist presidential candidate in 2012. The second is the 35-hour maximum working week, devised by a Socialist government in 2000 and later retained by the centre-right. Each has been a totem of French social preferences. Yet, to the consternation of some of his voters, Mr Hollande applied the 75% tax rate for only two years, and then binned it. Now he has drawn up plans that could, in effect, demolish the 35-hour week, too.

Mr Hollande’s government is reviewing a draft labour law that would remove a series of constraints French firms face, both when trying to adapt working time to shifting business cycles and when deciding whether to hire staff. In particular, it devolves to firms the right to negotiate longer hours and overtime rates with their own trade unions, rather than having to follow rules dictated by national industry-wide deals. The 35-hour cap would remain in force, but it would become more of a trigger for overtime pay than a rigid constraint on hours worked. These could reach 46 hours a week, for a maximum of 16 weeks. Firms would also have greater freedom to shorten working hours and reduce pay, which can currently be done only in times of “serious economic difficulty”. Emmanuel Macron, the economy minister, has called such measures the “de facto” end of the 35-hour week.

At the same time, the law would lower existing high barriers to laying off workers. These discourage firms from creating permanent jobs, and leave huge numbers of “outsiders”, particularly young people, temping. For one thing, it would cap awards for unfair dismissal, which are made by labour tribunals. Laid-off French workers bring such cases frequently; they can take years and cost anything from €2,500 to €310,000 ($2,700 to $337,000) by one estimate.



The underlying principle, laid out in government-commissioned reports over the past six months, is simple and radical. The country’s ponderous labour code, currently longer than the Bible, should limit itself to basic protection of workers, and leave bosses and unions within firms to hammer out finer details. This is based on the belief that French employees—only 8% of whom belong to a union—are more pragmatic and flexible than the national union leaders in Paris who supposedly negotiate on their behalf. At a car factory making Smart vehicles in eastern France, for instance, a recent deal to work 39 hours a week was approved by most employees, yet blocked by the firm’s unions. Under the new law, if no deal can be reached with a company’s unions, employees may vote in a binding internal referendum.

The draft law does not deal with all the rigidities of the French labour code. Nonetheless, “it’s the most important piece of labour-market legislation for 15 years,” says Ludovic Subran, chief economist at Eurler Hermes, a credit-insurance firm. It is the closest France has got to the reformist Jobs Act rammed through in Italy by Matteo Renzi’s government. And it could be the legacy that Manuel Valls, the ambitious centre-left prime minister, seeks as he and Mr Macron try to steer the Socialists in a more market-friendly direction.

The great difficulty is political. For much of the left, the 35-hour week remains not only a badge of progress but the mark of a preference: for shorter hours, more holidays and higher productivity—even at the price of fewer jobs. French productivity per hour remains far higher than Britain’s and even a touch above Germany’s (though yearly hours worked in France are lower, and the unemployment rate twice as high). In fact, the French already work more than 35 hours a week on average, partly because so many employees get extra holidays to compensate. White-collar employees at EDF, an energy firm, average 39 working hours a week, but until recently got 23 extra days off each year on top of the statutory five weeks’ holiday. (A hard-won deal has reduced this to a mere 16.) Managing so much absence has become an art. “Employees prefer to work less, earn less and have more time,” says Pierre Vauterin, who runs a firm that makes ball bearings on the outskirts of Paris.

Challenging this doctrine is becoming a stinging headache. Already, Mr Valls has postponed the presentation of his draft law to the cabinet, thanks to an uproar within his own party and the threat of street protests by unions and students. In a barbed article in Le Monde, Martine Aubry, mayor of Lille and architect of the 35-hour week, accused him of selling out socialist ideals. “Who could imagine”, she asked, “that making redundancies easier…will encourage employment?” Mr Hollande is enfeebled. Even France’s more moderate unionists are wary. If Mr Valls waters down the draft, his reformist credentials will be damaged. If he pushes ahead, he could find himself with a choice between unmanageable unrest—or resignation.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693985-socialists-are-torn-over-move-dismantle-35-hour-week-working-nine-four/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Irish election

Fragged

European-style political fragmentation comes to Ireland

Mar 5th 2016 | DUBLIN AND COUNTY MEATH | From the print edition



WHEN polling stations closed on February 26th, Fine Gael and Labour, the two parties that have governed Ireland since 2011, were hoping for a surprise result like the one Britain’s Conservatives achieved last May. They had come to power with the largest majority in Irish history, but five years of austerity had drained their support. Instead, the result was worse than expected: the political fragmentation seen in recent elections across Europe hit both parties hard.

Fine Gael, a centre-right party whose leader Enda Kenny has been taoiseach (prime minister) since 2011, lost nearly a third of its vote. Labour, its centre-left partner, suffered worse still, losing two-thirds. The polls had predicted Labour’s rout, but for Fine Gael the shock was greater. Its gaffe-prone campaign was clearly not up to scratch: at one point Mr Kenny managed to insult some of his own constituents as champion “whingers”. Fine Gael relied on broadcast messages aimed at all voters. This proved less effective than the Conservatives’ campaign last year, which targeted swing voters with tailored messages.

More tellingly, Fine Gael’s slogan, “Let’s keep the recovery going”, which it borrowed from the Conservatives, failed to resonate. As in recent elections in Portugal and Spain, the emphasis on economic competence fell flat with voters, says Dan O’Brien of the Institute of International and European Affairs, a Dublin think-tank. Although Ireland recorded GDP growth of nearly 7% in 2015, one exit poll found that only 26% of voters felt better off than a year ago. The country’s GDP figures include profits of multinational firms headquartered for tax reasons in Ireland, but much of that money never reaches the Irish. GNP, which excludes income earned by foreigners, has been flat in real terms since the end of 2014.



The opposition exploited the feeling that many were being left out of the recovery. Fianna Fail, the populist centrist party that dominated Irish politics before the financial crisis, gained 24 seats. Sinn Fein, a hard-left nationalist party with strong working-class support, gained seats too, though not as many as it had hoped. Smaller left-leaning parties such as the AAA-PBP and a wide range of independents also did well, gaining a record 30% of the vote.

Because the anti-government vote was split between so many parties, Fine Gael still has the most seats. As in Spain, it is thus unclear who will form the government. Although Fine Gael and Fianna Fail together have a majority of 30, a grand coalition would be difficult. Both parties’ activists are tribal, and have been since their split during the civil war of the early 1920s. Besides, Fianna Fail fears it would lose support if it became Fine Gael’s junior coalition partner, just as the (Irish) Labour party has since 2011. Both have also ruled out any coalition involving Sinn Fein, which they see as fiscally irresponsible and tainted by links to violence and the IRA in Northern Ireland.

Fianna Fail says it does not want to leave Sinn Fein as the only official opposition party either. That appears to leave one solution: some sort of temporary deal between Fine Gael and Fianna Fail, with another election called after the budget later this year.

The political uncertainty comes at a bad time. Slowing growth will limit what Ireland can do without breaching its EU deficit targets. And political fragmentation threatens a return to the politics of giveaways, when Ireland should instead be running a surplus to prepare for the next downturn, says Colm McCarthy of University College Dublin. Euro membership puts Irish policymakers under pressure to show much greater fiscal discipline. Whether Irish politics can withstand the pressure is unclear.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693717-many-people-ireland-are-angry-outgoing-government-they-dont-know-what-replace-it/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Refugees in Greece

Rising tide

With the borders closing, Greece starts to fill with migrants

Mar 5th 2016 | ATHENS | From the print edition



GREECE’S migrant crisis is getting worse. Macedonia has closed its border to all but a trickle of migrants, following the example of Austria and other countries along the so-called West Balkans route to Germany. Yet desperate Syrians and Iraqis continue to arrive at the Idomeni crossing point. On February 29th Macedonian police used tear gas against scores of migrants trying to break down the border fence. As The Economist went to press, more than 12,000 people were crammed into a tent camp with facilities for only 1,500. Food is in short supply. “It’s a tense situation,” says Panagiota Siafaka, a social worker with the UN High Commission for Refugees.

So long as the border remained open, Greece could manage the flow of arrivals from Turkey. Now almost 30,000 migrants are bottled up in Greece. Nikos Kotzias, the foreign minister, expects the number to reach 150,000; local aid agencies worry that 200,000 people may arrive in March alone. Reception centres around Athens for migrants are hopelessly overcrowded. Half a dozen new ones, mostly refurbished former military camps, are quickly filling up. Local and international charities provide food and medical care. “The state seems absent, but luckily ordinary people are here every day to help,” says Mariana, a paediatrician working at Piraeus port, gesturing towards a group of elderly Greek women handing out bananas and chocolate bars to harassed mothers in headscarves.

Things will improve, if only gradually. Greece expects to receive a large chunk of the EU’s new €700m ($760m), three-year humanitarian aid package for countries that host a lot of migrants. Of that, €300m would be spent this year. Athens-based aid agencies hope that funds will bypass the slow-moving Greek bureaucracy, going straight to needy migrants in the form of vouchers for food and housing.



INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers

But stemming the flow of migrants from Turkey is proving hard. A NATO naval mission was due to begin monitoring the strait between Greece and Turkey on February 29th, electronically locating smugglers’ boats so Turkish coastguards could nudge them back to shore. But on March 2nd the NATO vessels were still in port. The Greek defence ministry said Turkey had raised “technical problems”.

EU leaders hope for a breakthrough at a summit on March 7th with Ahmet Davutoglu, Turkey’s prime minister. The Turkish government has yet to crack down on the people-smugglers. Diplomats in Athens believe the Turks will make a deal conditional on EU countries resettling Syrians from refugee camps in southern Turkey. Meanwhile, Turkey has agreed to take back economic migrants who crossed to the Greek islands from Turkey. After weeks of bureaucratic exchanges between the Greek and Turkish police, a first group of 270 Moroccans, Tunisians and Algerians were handed into Turkish custody on March 2nd at the land border in Thrace. A group of 150 Pakistanis will be next. It is a modest start, yet even a small reduction in numbers helps relieve Greece’s migrant burden.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693987-borders-closing-greece-starts-fill-migrants-rising-tide/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Regulating EU pesticides

Fog of uncertainty

Regulators are arguing over the safety of glyphosate, the world’s top weedkiller

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



MORE herbicides contain glyphosate, a weedkilling chemical, than any other agent. Monsanto, an agricultural giant, first sold Roundup, a product containing the stuff, to farmers in the 1970s. Since then use of glyphosate-based concoctions has increased about 100-fold; gardeners as well as farmers have taken to it for killing weeds and keeping paths clear. The firm’s last patent on it expired in 2000, and farmers from Brazil to Russia spray it as never before. But as larger quantities are used, concerns grow over the harm some say it may cause. On March 7th a European Union (EU) committee will vote on whether to renew approval of glyphosate for the next 15 years.

Farmers value glyphosate for reasons that have changed since it first appeared. Once a kill-all for unwanted weeds, it was transformed in 1996 when Monsanto developed genetically engineered crops able to withstand it. In 2014 selling Roundup and modified seeds earned the company $5 billion in America alone. It is also useful in drying crops before harvests. Estimates suggest that two-thirds of all the glyphosate ever sprayed in America has been applied in the past ten years.

Glyphosate’s benefits vary depending on what crop it is sprayed on. But no organisation tracks pesticide use by type across Europe, making comparisons difficult. Monsanto claims that using glyphosate can raise crop yields between 30% and 60%—a huge boost. According to a 2011 estimate by Michael Schmitz, head of the Institute of Agribusiness, a German research organisation, a ban on glyphosate in the EU could cause annual losses of €1 billion-3.1 billion ($1.1 billion-3.4 billion).

Some scientists claim that dousing crops in glyphosate may be harmful, however. It lingers in soils and water for much longer than studies once suggested. Low levels of the stuff have been detected in products from bread to pantyliners. And as resistance to glyphosate increases in plants, as it has in recent decades, changes to cropping and tillage patterns may be needed—alongside gallons of other pesticides—to ensure good harvests.

The hottest debate surrounds glyphosate and human health. Last July the WHO’s International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) found that the herbicide is “probably” carcinogenic. But six months later the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), which oversees the assessment of active chemical substances within the EU, cleared glyphosate of causing cancer.

The two bodies traded furious letters throughout January and February; the spat is unprecedented. IARC argues that the research on which EFSA based its decision, completed by the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, ignored an association between non-Hodgkin lymphoma and glyphosate seen in certain research and relied on studies not publicly available, while it denigrated peer-reviewed ones. The furore led France’s Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety (ANSES) to step in. It concluded that glyphosate “arguably could be classified” as a substance “suspected of being carcinogenic to humans”.

EFSA plays an active role in the EU’s pesticide-approval process; IARC does not. But the European Ombudsman, Emily O’Reilly, found that process flawed after a long inquiry that ended on February 22nd. She criticised the European Commission for approving chemicals before there was “sufficient information to say that they were completely safe”. The authority now has until 2018 to ensure that those keen to clear a substance provide more data to show that it is harmless.

The dispute suggests that more research is needed. For one thing, certain ingredients with which glyphosate is mixed to form pesticides are more toxic to humans than the substance itself. But regulators examine only the compound, not the cocktail. For another, traditional toxicological tests could miss the weedkiller’s possible effects on endocrinological, reproductive and developmental systems.

Others, too, struggle with what to do about glyphosate. The Canadians have little problem with it. America’s Environmental Protection Agency failed to produce a planned risk assessment on it last year. California’s ultra-cautious environmental agency added the herbicide to a list of carcinogens last September. Monsanto is challenging the move in court.

Robust studies into glyphosate’s effects should be considered carefully alongside better data on the role it plays in feeding the world. The ways farmers use the compound have evolved. The ways regulators evaluate its safety should, too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693984-regulators-are-arguing-over-safety-glyphosate-worlds-top-weedkiller-fog-uncertainty/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

The end of Heile Welt

Germany’s illusions have been shattered

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



MORE than 1m refugees arrived in Germany last year, mainly young Muslim men. They entered a society that, relative to other Western countries, has embraced multiculturalism only recently. Suddenly these foreigners are in co-ed schools, discos, swimming pools, hospitals and parks. Some of their interactions with their hosts go easily. Others do not—as epitomised by New Year’s Eve in Cologne, where gangs of North African men sexually assaulted scores of German women who had come to watch the fireworks.

Germans who only a year ago oozed confidence about their economy and their country are now losing faith that they “can manage”, as Angela Merkel, the chancellor, likes to put it. Many fear the crisis will render Germany unrecognisable. A sense of loss pervades many conversations.

To grasp this trauma it helps to understand the German zeitgeist that developed (mainly in the former West Germany) in the post-war years, and lingered in the reunited country. Germans call it Heile Welt. The term means something like “wholesome world”, and describes an orderly, idyllic state. It may connote the nurturing environment parents create for their children to protect them from life’s ugliness, or a private oasis of peace amid public chaos. It was a state of mind that Germans clung to after the second world war.

Because it implies a degree of escapism, the term can be used sardonically. In 1973 Loriot, West Germany’s most incisive humourist, chose it for the title of an anthology of cartoons skewering his country’s bourgeois pretensions. In 1998 it was the title of a novel by Walter Kempowski, set in 1961, in which a teacher moves to an idyllic village but discovers that behind every silence and glance lurks a demon of the Nazi past.

In the immediate post-war years, with Holocaust, firebombing, mass rape and the carving up of their nation still recent memories, Germans flocked to watch Heimat (“homeland”) films. Usually shot in the Alps or in heaths and forests, they featured clean, simple tales of love and friendship between pure women and men dressed in regional garb. Outside the cinemas, Germans revelled in their “economic miracle”, as they rebuilt a devastated country into a commercial powerhouse.

Foreigners were allowed into this Heile Welt, but not entirely accepted. To man its assembly lines, Germany invited workers from southern Europe and especially Turkey. The millionth arrived in 1964 and got a motorcycle as a gift. By the time the programme ended in 1973, 4m foreigners lived in West Germany. But they were called “guest workers” rather than immigrants, on the premise that they would ultimately leave again. Unsurprisingly, most stayed. Yet mainstream Germany continued to see itself as ethnically homogenous—a Heile Welt in a tribal sense.

As part of Heile Welt, West Germans atoned for their past by becoming good democrats, good Europeans and ardent pacifists. But they did so like a teenager who experiments with increasing autonomy, confident that his uncool but protective parents are always standing by. For West Germany, dad was America, which held its aegis over the country throughout the cold war. Mum was France, which despite its nervous vanity gracefully accepted Germany back into the European family.

The dystopian flip side of Heile Welt was never far away. If the cold war had ever turned hot, Germany would have been vaporised first. (“The shorter the range, the deader the Germans,” missile strategists used to quip.) West Germany even had terrorism. But its terrorists were native white leftists who killed industrial tycoons. Ordinary Germans never felt threatened.

In their private lives Germans created micro-idylls. They kept garden plots orderly, guarded by the requisite gnome. East Germans seeking refuge from the cynically implausible Heile Welt offered by communism retreated to “the niches”: private book readings among intellectuals, or nude bathing with friends by pristine lakes. East or west, order was paramount. Visitors were impressed (if not intimidated) by how fastidiously Germans separated their white, brown and green glass for recycling.

One by one, these facets of Heile Welt are becoming brittle. Russia is aggressive again; Germans fret that, when it comes to it, the ageing American dad may not show up. Having cultivated non-violence to the point of pacifism, they now realise that defence of their state and their values may someday require them to fight, kill and die again. The terrorists they now face are not German leftists, but foreigners ready to kill women and children. Globalisation no longer just means exporting BMWs, but also allowing in Muslim refugees, some of them with attitudes on gender and Jews that Germans find offensive.

Gnomic wisdom

Some Germans react by fleeing into ever tinier Heile Welten. “We are becoming ever more like our garden gnomes,” says Wolfgang Nowak, one of Germany’s most astute social observers—inward-facing rather than open-minded. Every Monday a movement called Pegida, or “Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamisation of the Occident”, marches through Dresden. For many in the surrounding area of Saxony, these gatherings have become convivial rituals similar to American tailgate barbecues, but to outsiders they appear xenophobic and menacing. Even moderate Germans are turning against globalisation. Many see a free-trade area being negotiated between America and the EU not as an opportunity but as yet another threat to their way of life.

Above all, the tone of German conversations is changing. Language in the era of Heile Welt was sanitised, with political correctness often taken to ludicrous extremes. Now, in the name of “telling it as it is”, it is becoming coarser and aggressive. It is not clear what kind of world will replace the wholesome one the Germans once dreamed up. But it will be a rougher one.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693942-germanys-illusions-have-been-shattered-end-heile-welt/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




Transport infrastructure: Life in the slow lane

Brexit brief: In, out, find a fib to shout

Asset sales: The great British sell-off

Educating the poorest children: Premium grade

Supermarkets: Fresh from the Amazon

Cross-channel travel: Allied landings

Bagehot: Unity in disunity





Articles Sections Next

Transport infrastructure

Life in the slow lane

The government trumpets its ambitions for roads, railways and airports. In fact, infrastructure is getting worse

Mar 5th 2016 | MANCHESTER | From the print edition



IF YOU want to get rich, goes a Chinese saying, first build a road. George Osborne, Britain’s chancellor, seems to agree. He seldom misses a chance to put on a hard hat and proclaim the virtues of more roads and railways. His idea of a “Northern Powerhouse” would boost the north of England with a big new transport network that better connects the region. Certainly, if people are not stuck in traffic jams or can work in peace on a train they can get more done, leading to higher productivity and increased wages.

Yet for all the rhetoric, in recent years British infrastructure has been deteriorating. Roads are more clogged: the percentage of journeys on main routes that are classed as “on time” has fallen by six percentage points since 2010. Trains are getting more crowded, too: a quarter of trains arriving in London in rush hour are overcrowded, up from a fifth in 2010. Commuters are putting up with creaky carriages: in 2005-15 the average age of the rolling stock rose from 15 to 20 years. The number of local buses has fallen by 2.5% since 2010, even though the population has grown by 3%.

The World Economic Forum ranks the quality of Britain’s overall infrastructure 24th in the world, down from 19th in 2006, and behind Iceland and America (which is 13th). It is unlikely that things will improve soon. When the coalition government came to power in 2010, Britain was already one of the lowest spenders on infrastructure in Europe. But as Mr Osborne tries to balance the books, public-sector investment is projected to fall from 3.2% of GDP in 2010 to just 1.4% in 2020.

A small infrastructure budget is not necessarily a bad thing, if the money is used wisely. This often means spending on unsexy things—improving traffic lights and so forth—rather than big, expensive undertakings. In 2006 Sir Rod Eddington, an Australian businessman, published a government-backed review of Britain’s infrastructure provision, warning against grands projets for having cost-benefit ratios that are often worse than other less-exciting transport projects. Politicians like to be photographed at big digs, but the returns from such projects are hard to predict.

Sometimes there is no option but to build big. On many London Underground lines—which already run as many as 30 trains an hour—it is hard to make incremental improvements; the only sensible way to create new capacity is to build a new line, as the government is doing now with Crossrail, an east-to-west London link. Still, it has mostly ignored the recommendations of the Eddington review, says John Van Reenen of the Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics, instead focusing its energy on larger, shinier projects.

The addition of a third runway at Heathrow airport, for example, would cost over £20 billion ($28 billion). Transport for the North, the infrastructure arm of the powerhouse idea, envisages building an 18-mile road tunnel, perhaps Europe’s longest, under the Pennine hills, and constructing other expensive new highways. The tunnel alone could cost up to £6 billion. Meanwhile, £1.5 billion is likely to be spent improving a few miles of road between Cambridge and Huntingdon. Government figures suggest that since 2011 the expected cost of the average public infrastructure project has roughly doubled.

As a result less money is available for smaller upgrades. Funding for local roads has been cut by 20% in real terms since 2010. Analysis by the RAC Foundation, an independent think-tank, found that the number of potholes being filled in per year has increased fourfold since 2005, suggesting that costly, long-term repair is being sacrificed in favour of patching up. Government support for local bus services is down by 20% in five years.

Not down the tubes

Another consequence of tighter budgets is that the state relies more heavily on the private sector to fund infrastructure projects. An extension to the Northern Line of the London Underground is a good example. The Greater London Authority is borrowing £1 billion. But that will ultimately be repaid, largely by the scheme’s direct beneficiaries, in the form of an uplift in business rates alongside developer contributions, says Alexander Jan of Arup, a consultancy. Ultimately, the government will pay little towards the project from general taxation.

Rich cities are most likely to be able to generate big contributions from the private sector and thus better infrastructure, says Mr Jan; poor places may miss out. In recent years, government figures suggest, London has taken up a bigger share of Britain’s overall infrastructure spend.

Business gripes that, although it may be expected to shoulder more of the cost, it is not always consulted enough. Kate Willard, an executive at Stobart Group, which runs airports and other big projects, argues that politicians do not take sufficient account of future shopping patterns and retail trends when making their infrastructure plans. Andy Clarke, the head of Asda, a supermarket chain, believes that productivity could be boosted as much by getting high-speed broadband as by building HS2, the £50 billion new railway being built between London and the Midlands.

Stand up for your rights

Fortunately, as well as building shiny new stuff there are also low-cost ways of improving infrastructure. Transport nerds favour ripping seats out of certain carriages in commuter trains, making them look more like Underground trains and thus increasing their capacity (though with little regard for passengers’ comfort). Those willing to stand could pay less. “Smart motorways”, which were first deployed in 2006, use the hard shoulder as an extra lane at busy times.

One plan popular with economists is to use “dynamic pricing”—similar to that used by taxi apps—where prices rise at peak times to discourage people from travelling. Thanks to a series of subtle changes, this could soon be a reality across Britain. In 2015 the Highways Agency, which manages motorways, was converted into a free-standing company owned by the state (renamed Highways England), meaning it has secure funding for the foreseeable future. Road tax, which is now largely payable electronically and enforced with cameras that recognise number plates, will be earmarked for Highways England, says Mr Jan. In theory, the stage is set for the government to start charging for using certain roads. Many are hoping that Mr Osborne will make such a change in his budget on March 16th. Dynamic pricing for rail travel seems off the table, though: the government considered a plan for “super-peak” tickets, only to drop it in 2013.

If, as seems probable, a big boost of public money does not arrive, Britain will have to take such radical decisions. Creaky infrastructure is already weighing on productivity and wages. Without a change of direction, the load will get ever heavier.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693936-government-trumpets-its-ambitions-roads-railways-and-airports-fact-infrastructure/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit brief

In, out, find a fib to shout

Voters want facts about Britain and the European Union—but these are elusive

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



“WHAT I want is facts…facts alone are wanted in life.” Thomas Gradgrind’s grim message in Charles Dickens’s “Hard Times” is echoed in the debate ahead of the referendum on June 23rd about whether Britain should leave the European Union. Voters confused by claims made by opposing sides and in the media are asking for plain facts on Britain’s EU membership so they can make up their minds. Sadly, hard facts are hard to find.

There is a good reason for this: nobody knows what would happen post-Brexit. That is especially true of the trade deal that Britain would have to negotiate with the EU—and how long that might take (the government this week suggested up to ten years). But there is also a bad reason: that the uncertainty lets all sides distort, exaggerate or simply make up their own facts.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

Three examples illustrate this. The first is an old assertion that 3m jobs in Britain depend on trade with the EU. In fact, because of the close links among European economies, many economists reckon the true figure is higher. Yet the claim sometimes made by pro-EU voices that all these jobs would be at risk post-Brexit is a nonsense. Nobody can plausibly argue that all trade with the EU would cease. Anyway, job creation depends more on demand, wage levels and labour laws than on membership of a trade block.

The second example concerns the British contribution to the EU budget. Leavers claim that Britain pays an unfairly large amount of almost £20 billion ($28 billion) a year to Brussels, or £55m a day. In fact this is the gross amount before deducting both the rebate won by Margaret Thatcher in 1984 and the money the EU spends in Britain. Adjusting for these, and for the funnelling of some foreign-aid spending via Brussels, the net payment is less than one-third as big, at £17m a day—and Britain is only the eighth-largest contributor per head.

The third example is competing claims about trade patterns. Remain campaigners say the EU takes 45-50% of British exports, whereas Britain accounts for a tenth or less of the EU’s. Yet Nigel Farage, leader of the anti-EU UK Independence Party, has said Britain takes 20% of EU exports, giving it a stronger hand in future trade talks.

One issue here is which source to use: Europe’s statistical office, the British government and the IMF all have different figures. Another is whether to cover just goods or to add services. But the biggest question is whether to count the EU as a block, discounting all intra-EU exports. Doing that puts the share of EU exports going to Britain at almost 16%. But John Springford of the Centre for European Reform, a think-tank, points out that, in trade negotiations, individual countries, not the EU as a whole, decide what to accept. Britain’s share of all other EU countries’ exports is only around 8%, he says (our chart, using IMF figures, puts it even lower), and in many individual cases a lot less, leaving it in a weaker bargaining position.



The arguments over facts in these areas are as nothing compared with the differences on migration and sovereignty—nor compared with the bitter rows within the Tory party (see article). What should undecided or poorly informed voters do?

Fortunately, there are some good sources they can turn to. Two websites, the broadly neutral fullfact.org and the pro-EU infacts.org, both puncture myths in the debate. The House of Commons library produces excellent reports, which are available online. And a group of academics led by Anand Menon of King’s College, London, have set up “The UK in a Changing Europe”, partly financed by the Economic and Social Research Council, which has a lively website.

The Economist is not neutral in this debate: we believe Brexit would be bad for Britain, Europe and the world. But we also want to explain the issues and present the facts. So over the next four months, we will publish a series of Brexit briefs that seek to do this, as dispassionately as possible—in the hope of satisfying even the Gradgrinds among our readers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693943-voters-want-facts-about-britain-and-european-unionbut-these-are-elusive-out-find-fib/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Asset sales

The great British sell-off

The sale of government assets can hurt the public finances as much as help them

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

Two-bedroom flats a steal

“I CAN’T imagine it not being there,” says Kathy Daly, a resident of north London for 64 years, reflecting the feelings of many living around Holloway prison. This summer, the largest women’s prison in western Europe, first built in 1852, will close, to make way for new homes.

The move is part of a bigger drive to sell off government assets. In its spending review in November, the government encouraged departments to find land and property to vacate and sell, with the aim of raising around £5 billion ($7 billion) up to 2020. Financial and corporate assets are also being flogged to the private sector: this financial year the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), the government’s independent forecaster, thinks the Treasury will raise £30 billion from selling assets like shares in Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland—which were bought during the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009—and Royal Mail, with an extra £47 billion expected over the next five years. These asset sales will provide cash that George Osborne, the chancellor, can use to pay down public debt, which swelled from 37% of GDP in 2007 to 83% this year.

Selling off state assets can benefit society, if private owners can whip them into better shape. The decision also rests on the difference between the returns to the asset and the government’s own borrowing costs; there is less urgency in paying down public debt while interest rates are so low. Any big improvement in the public finances will usually be largely illusory; debt might drop, but selling will swap a future flow of income for up-front cash. The government balance-sheet will be restructured, not necessarily improved.



In November the government boasted that the land released by departments could free up space for 161,000 new homes, spurring economic growth. The proceeds from selling older prisons will be ploughed back into building nine shiny new ones, which the government hopes will save £80m in running costs each year. The newer prisons will be in cheaper locations; some women in Holloway prison will be relocated to a prison in Sutton, a south-western suburb, where a two-bedroom flat costs £300,000, compared with £600,000 in Holloway. But rows are already brewing; sometimes public services add extra social value by being located in prime spots; some worry about moving prisoners far from their families. And there are questions over how many affordable homes will be built on the Holloway site. Ms Daly is not keen on the idea of luxury flats beyond the means of local residents.

Language used by senior members of the government indicates that there might be more to gain than just a leaner state. In a leaked letter to the county council in his local constituency, the prime minister, David Cameron, complained that local services were being cut without considering “savings” that could be made in the form of asset sales. In his leaked response, the council leader echoed the words of economists before and since, that “capital income cannot be used to support revenue costs—it is neither legal, nor sustainable, in the long term since they are one-off receipts”.

Although some dispute whether the government is right to be selling its land, few would argue for holding on to the bank shares for ever. Buying the assets was meant to preserve financial stability, but now things are calmer the case for owning them has weakened. The government is keen to get the most from the sales. After market turmoil, on January 28th Mr Osborne announced that he would delay the sale of a tranche of Lloyds shares.

Cynics suspect that the chancellor is interested in more than maximising value. One of his fiscal targets is to have debt falling as a share of GDP in every year after 2015–16, but in December the OBR pointed out that this year he would only achieve this because of planned asset sales. And it also pointed out that offering some of the shares at a discount (not to mention giving away some shares in Royal Mail) actually worsens the public finances.

In some cases the struggle to achieve good value for money has prevented a quick sale. The government announced its plans to sell the student-loan book back in 2013. Currently the OBR predicts that investors would give the government around £12 billion in exchange for student-loan repayments, worth around £1.5 billion each year by 2020–21. It is unclear how much extra value could be squeezed from the asset by a private buyer, though a spokesman for the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills said unfavourable market conditions were the main reason for the delay.

One worry is that the government will get a poor deal as it unloads treasures onto the private sector. An internal government evaluation of its stake in Eurostar priced it at £305m, and then saw it sold for nearly double that. The Treasury has since set up bodies to manage such sales.

On February 26th Mr Osborne warned of looming “storm clouds” hurting economic growth and requiring bigger cuts to spending. The government owns £1.3 trillion of assets—the Ministry of Defence alone owns roughly 1% of all land in Britain—so speeding up the sell-off might look tempting. But a fire sale would burn a hole in the public finances, not fix them.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693968-sale-government-assets-can-hurt-public-finances-much-help-them-great-british/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Educating the poorest children

Premium grade

A pricey education policy looks like money well spent

Mar 5th 2016 | PORTSMOUTH | From the print edition



AT CHARTER Academy, a small, immaculately kept secondary school in Portsmouth, children who qualify for free school meals—63% of the school’s pupils—are also given a free uniform. Mums are invited in to chat about their children’s progress over a glass of wine; dads prefer watching their children on boxing nights, says Dame Sharon Hollows, the school’s headteacher. “A lot of the parents had a poor experience at school, it’s about making them feel more comfortable,” she adds. If a child is taken into care, someone from the school takes them shopping to make sure they have enough clothes. When a child doesn’t turn up to school, staff head out in a leased car to look for them. The turnaround has been fast: in 2009, the year the school became an academy, 23 children applied for 120 places; last year, 200 applied. During a 2014 visit to the school, the prime minister, David Cameron hailed the “extraordinary achievement”.

Some of these measures would have been introduced anyway, but many have been made possible by the huge boost to the school’s funding provided by the “pupil premium”, says Dame Sharon. The policy was introduced by the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition in 2011 to improve the academic performance of the poorest children. Schools receive additional funding for every child on free school meals (now £1,320—or $1,850—for primary schools, and £935 for secondary schools) and can spend the money how they see fit, with parents, governors and inspectors keeping tabs. In 2014-15, £2.5 billion was spent on the policy, 6% of the schools budget. Nick Clegg, the former deputy prime minister, called the premium one of his proudest legacies.

Evidence suggests academic progress may be slow. The gap between children on free school meals and others at GCSE—the exams taken aged 16—has remained high if measured by the percentage of children attaining five A*-C grades. Indeed, the gap between the performance of rich and poor children in Britain is larger than average for the OECD club of mostly rich countries. But there are signs of progress: the gap in exam results taken aged 11 has narrowed, as has GCSE performance if measured by results in eight core subjects.

Headteachers appreciate the flexibility the funding gives them. “It has allowed us to be much more creative, to take more risks,” says Hazel Pulley of Parkfield Community School in Birmingham. One of the school’s successful interventions was hiring teachers to work solely on communication in early years, since most of its pupils don’t speak English as a first language. Many schools use the money to help individual pupils: one in Sheffield bought a bike for a pupil struggling to care for his siblings and get to school on time.

Meanwhile, the government has poured funding into studies looking at how best to spend money, providing the Educational Endowment Foundation (EEF), a charity, with £137m. It collates evidence from abroad and funds studies at home: around one-quarter of English schools are involved in randomised control trials run by the charity.

Schools increasingly turn to the research for guidance: two-thirds now consult the EEF’s advice, up from one-third in 2012, according to a report by the National Audit Office (NAO), which scrutinises government spending. Surveys by the National Foundation for Educational Research, a charity, found that the most common interventions in the first years of the pupil premium were to reduce class sizes and increase numbers of support staff—neither of which are judged to be effective by the EEF. Now schools are more likely to put in place one-to-one tuition and pupil feedback—both of which are highly rated.

Yet, for some headteachers, “the idea that you turn to evidence is just not part of the culture,” says Sir Kevan Collins of the EEF. A number of cheap, effective approaches, such as using older children to tutor younger ones, are still rarely used. Some 44% of schools have spent part of the pupil premium sprucing up classrooms or the school environment, which has little impact on student performance. Nearly eight in ten schools use the extra money to support activities that benefit all pupils, which makes sense only where there are many pupils on free school meals.

Some argue that pupil-premium spending should be subject to tighter scrutiny. Others suggest that schools have become too reliant on research by the EEF for evidence of what works. Yet such debates are partly proof of the premium’s success. How to raise the attainment of children from poor backgrounds is now a focus for educators. Before the premium, 57% of school leaders said they aimed support at their most disadvantaged pupils; 94% now do, says the NAO. With such a wide gap in attainment between children from rich and poor families, that is no bad thing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693989-pricey-education-policy-looks-money-well-spent-premium-grade/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Supermarkets

Fresh from the Amazon

An American giant moves into online grocery shopping

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

BRITAIN’S big supermarkets have had a dismal few years. Aldi and Lidl, two upstart German-owned discounters, have taken huge bites out of their market share, margins have been squeezed and record losses have mounted.

One refuge, however, was in online shopping, which Aldi and Lidl have been reluctant to embrace, despite the fact that British consumers are Europe’s most enthusiastic e-shoppers. Online grocery sales have been growing strongly, and the likes of Tesco, the biggest supermarket, and Sainsbury’s, have taken full advantage. Tesco, which runs a “Click+Collect” service, has about 40% of the online market.

Now, however, that refuge is looking less safe. On February 29th Amazon, an American online retailer, announced that it will start selling fresh food and groceries as well, in a tie-up with the fourth-largest British supermarket, Morrisons. Thus Amazon, with deep pockets and a wealth of experience offering food online in American cities, will now go head-to-head with Tesco and others. The move had been expected, but that will be of no comfort to its new rivals. Shares in Tesco and Sainsbury’s were down on the news, while shares in Ocado, an online-only grocer, plummeted by about 10%.

Shares in Morrisons rose. It has suffered more than most at the hands of Lidl and Aldi, selling, as it does, to the same customers in the same areas of the country. Yet the deal with Amazon gives it a straightforward new sales channel into the online market. Morrisons also makes its own food products, and under the new agreement it will supply fresh and frozen foods to Amazon to sell on its Prime Now and Pantry services. Until now, the Pantry service had offered only household goods such as cleaning products, drinks and pet food.

Morrisons has an existing arrangement to sell its groceries to Ocado, and there are fears that the Amazon deal could undermine that. But Ocado hopes that the intervention of the American giant will just increase the market instead. For Amazon, this is probably just the beginning of its journey into Britain’s grocery market, which is worth about £180 billion ($254 billion) a year.

“It is a real race now,” says Ray Gaul, an analyst at Kantar Retail, of the online market. And to add to the competitive pressures, the Amazon move comes only a month after Aldi launched its first British online-shopping service. This is, for the moment, limited to wine, offering hefty discounts on boxes of six, but there will undoubtedly be more to come. The north of England used to be the bastion of Aldi and Lidl, but Aldi is now advertising this service heavily in London, Tesco’s and Sainsbury’s backyard. The two discounters also have ambitious plans to open many more shops in the capital.

The new competition should be good for online shoppers, but less so, perhaps, for the 3m or so people who work in retailing. The same day as the Amazon announcement, the British Retail Consortium, a trade body, published a report predicting that 900,000 jobs could be lost in the industry by 2025. The authors blame this partly on the cost of the new “national living wage” and apprenticeship levies, but also the rise in online shopping and the increasing costs of running shops on the high street. Avocados and cheese twists straight to the door won’t be helping everyone.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693973-american-giant-moves-online-grocery-shopping-fresh-amazon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Cross-channel travel

Allied landings

How ferries from Dover are holding their own

Mar 5th 2016 | CALAIS | From the print edition

Less strain than the train

BULLDOZERS and demolition teams moved into the migrant camp at the French port of Calais on February 29th, part of the latest attempt to resolve the problems that have plagued the port for years. Migrants breaking into lorries and rushing the rail tunnel to England have caused frequent delays to rail services, affecting schedules nearly every week last summer. Yet scenes of burning tents and migrants scaling fences have done little to dampen a little-expected commercial resurgence: for cross-channel ferry firms.

When the Channel Tunnel opened in 1994 between Folkestone and Calais, many thought that the speed and convenience of rail travel would put ferries out of business. In the late 1990s the tunnel and the advent of cut-price air fares hit the ferry market hard (see chart). But as new figures published last week show, ferry companies sailing to and from Dover, at least, have managed to stay afloat. They have even seen demand grow since 2012.



Operators believe that ferries will always have a role providing extra capacity. This is partly because it is still cheaper, on average, to cross the channel by boat than by train, says Torben Carlsen, chief financial officer at DFDS, a ferry company. The average price of taking a car with two passengers on the ferry from Kent to France is less than £50 ($70), the standard fare for taking the tunnel is £76. Many drivers do not like the shuttle services through the tunnel, either because they fear boarding the train will damage their vehicles or because it is less comfortable: the tunnel often gets very hot and there are no catering services onboard the trains.

P&O, DFDS’s main rival on the route, has started to emphasise the comparative comfort of ferry travel in their advertising, trying to borrow the glamorous image of cruising for their more mundane voyages. This has also helped boost ancillary revenues. Although the end of duty-free shopping within the EU in 1999 cut profits from onboard shops, new revenue streams, including posher restaurants, Wi-Fi and business-lounge entry, have helped make up the difference.

Ferry firms have been hit by migrant problems, too. Immigrants have regularly tried to stow away in cars and lorries waiting to board ferries at Calais; in January dozens of them managed to storm the gangway onto P&O’s Pride of Britain. The disruption led to the delay or cancellation of many sailings. Wildcat strikes by workers in Calais also contributed to a dip in ferry services last summer, as did the EU’s decision to close down MyFerryLink, a service owned by Eurotunnel (which also owns the Channel Tunnel) for anti-competitive behaviour last July. The disruptions particularly affected cross-channel freight traffic, some of which was forced to use other ferry routes or air freight. However, the chaos in Calais failed to deter passengers from taking a boat to other destinations. Although numbers on the DoverCalais route fell by 800,000 in 2015, demand grew by a similar amount between Dover and Dunkirk.

Maintaining their market share helped ferry firms swing back into profit for the first time since the financial crisis. P&O made £13m in profit in 2015 after a loss of £10m the year before. DFDS broke even on its cross-channel routes for the first time ever, on the back of lower fuel costs and higher occupancy rates. Both firms are ramping up capacity in the expectation that clearance of the migrant camps will mean less disruption this summer, for both trains and boats. Two new ships have entered service with DFDS in February to meet the expected demand. It seems it will take more than a tunnel to put an end to Britain’s long-running ferry services.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693991-how-ferries-dover-are-holding-their-own-allied-landings/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

Unity in disunity

Conservative splits on Europe belie the reality: Eurosceptics have already taken over the party

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



EYES hooded, features blade-sharp and shoulders square, Margaret Thatcher looked every bit her caricature as she addressed the House of Commons on October 30th 1990. Just returned from a European summit in Rome, she sounded it, too. The prime minister took aim at the Commission’s federal ambitions and boomed her dissent: “No. No. No.” So stark was this objection to the continent’s integration that Geoffrey Howe, her former foreign secretary, resigned two days later, triggering her fall from office. Partly because of the drama of those days, Europe has since transfixed and sundered the Conservative Party.

That seems especially so now, as Britain’s in-out referendum campaign gets rolling. Having promised the vote three years ago in an (apparently vain) attempt to cure the Tories of their neurosis, David Cameron hoped to limit support for Brexit to his party’s margins. But at the latest count a little under half of his 330 MPs are for Out, among them two big names: Michael Gove, the justice secretary, and Boris Johnson, London’s mayor. Merely disappointed in the former (a convinced eurosceptic), the prime minister is incandescent at the latter (a political opportunist). In a statement to the Commons on February 22nd he issued a string of barely veiled attacks on Mr Johnson’s arguments and motives as his target looked on, rather sheepishly, from the back benches.

The family feud will only intensify in the months leading up to the referendum on June 23rd. Piqued by Mr Cameron’s barbs, the popular mayor is now throwing his full weight behind the Out campaign. On March 1st he dismissed dire government warnings about the risks of Brexit as baloney. Meanwhile otherwise loyal MPs mock the prime minister’s “renegotiation” of Britain’s EU membership with Trump-esque scorn. Out in the country some six in ten Tory members plan to vote to leave the EU according to YouGov. Strategists worry about how to “heal the wounds” after the referendum.

So it is tempting to see the surprisingly sudden and vitriolic confrontation between parts of the party as the latest chapter in its long history of eruptions over Europe. That story encompasses first Thatcher and her Europhile assassins, then John—now Sir John—Major and the anti-Brussels “bastards”, as he called them, in his cabinet and later the party’s irritable 13 years in opposition.

But what is happening now is different. Take the comparison with the Major years. In the 1990s the Conservative fringe was calling for Brexit, but a significant section of the party also remained wedded to the European ideal. In 1994, two years after Britain’s humiliating crash out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism, the forerunner to the euro, almost a third of Tory members supported further integration and almost a quarter wanted a federal Europe. Although Sir John insisted that Britain must remain at the “heart of Europe”, in 1996 party bigwigs chided him for being insufficiently pro-European.

In the intervening years Europe’s economic woes—combined with the drum beat of the anti-EU newspapers, Mr Cameron’s ill-advised Eurosceptic overtures to his base and the rise of the UK Independence Party—have transformed the picture. Look past today’s theatrics and it is clear that almost the whole party has rallied around what, two decades ago, would have counted as its anti-EU pole. On one extreme are hard nationalists who want a complete breach. On the other are a handful of convinced Europhiles. But the vast majority, spanning In and Out camps, agrees that Britain should be in the EU’s outermost orbit: beyond the euro zone and the (notionally) borderless Schengen zone, exempt from as many rules and costs as is practical and under no circumstances subject to further integration.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

The referendum debate, however bad-tempered, merely concerns the most beneficial way to achieve this semi-detachment; it is about procedure more than principle. Most Conservative supporters of membership argue that Britain’s interests are best served by remaining a member and securing opt-outs reinforcing its “special” position on the edge of a multi-speed union. Some on this side (like Oliver Letwin, who runs the Cabinet Office) actually support Brexit but think now the wrong time. Their opponents generally want the country to quit, retain its access to the single market—perhaps at the price of some continued pooling of power—and assume an observer status in the European institutions. “We’re all Eurosceptics now,” reckons Michael Fallon, the defence secretary (and a typically unsentimental In voter).

The best example of the muddy reality of what at first glance looks like a binary divide is Mr Johnson who, by his own admission, has been “veering all over the place like a shopping trolley” on the subject. Having initially endorsed Out on the grounds that it would enable Britain to demand and secure a bespoke form of half-membership, he switched to admitting “out means out” when Mr Cameron refuted his claim, but still hints at the possibility of some sort of intermediate option.

Bastards get the last laugh

The Tory party’s convergence on this territory will continue beyond June. Whatever the result of the vote, London’s mayor stands a good chance of succeeding Mr Cameron (YouGov gives him a 21-point lead among party members) whenever the prime minister chooses, or is forced, to step down. The elevated salience of the EU question means it will dominate candidate selections, propelling the parliamentary party in a yet more Eurosceptic direction. Even if the country votes In there could be talk of a new referendum in the near future. And either way, any notion of Britain being at the heart of Europe will be dead. Thus although today’s campaign will bruise egos and break friendships, the bigger story is of a creeping consensus: over years of squabbling a once keenly pro-European party has gradually embraced a peripheral status in the union. In 1990 Thatcher’s Euroscepticism shocked her party. Now it looks restrained.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693990-conservative-splits-europe-belie-reality-eurosceptics-have-already-taken-over/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




Internet governance: We the networks

The IETF: Mother of consensus





Articles Sections Next

Internet governance

We the networks



The organisation that runs the internet address book is about to declare independence

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



IF A satirist were to create a parody of an international conference, amping up the insularity and tedious intricacies for comic effect, he might come up with something rather like the meeting that will take place this week in Marrakech. The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, known as ICANN, will bring together 1,300 participants for 346 sessions. The gatherings include “NCPH Reception and Informal Meeting: CSG with the NCSG” and “CJK Generation Panels Co-ordination Mtg with Integration Panel”.

Barring any last-minute hiccups, though, something remarkable will happen at the meeting. After two years of negotiations, ICANN is set to agree on a reform that would turn it into a new kind of international organisation. If this goes ahead, a crucial global resource, the internet’s address system, will soon be managed by a body that is largely independent of national governments. And some of ICANN’s champions reckon this is just a start. In future, similar outfits could be tasked with handling other internet issues that perplex governments, such as cyber-security and invasions of privacy.

The beauty of the internet is its openness. As long as people stick to its technical standards, anybody can add a new branch or service. For everything to connect, though, the network needs a central address book, which includes domain names (such as economist.com) and internet-protocol addresses (such as 216.239.38.21). Whoever controls the address book can censor the internet: delete a domain name and a website can no longer be found.

That is why, as the internet grew up, America decided not to hand control to the United Nations or another international body steered by governments. Instead, in 1998 it helped create ICANN, a global organisation that gives a say to everybody with an interest in the smooth running of the network, whether they be officials, engineers, domain-name holders or just internet users. Because few precedents existed, and because of a fear that ICANN would lack legitimacy, America kept it on a long leash. American approval is still required in some areas, including changes to the innards of the internet’s address system.

Most were happy with the arrangement at first. But American oversight came to seem odd as the internet grew into a vast global resource with much traffic no longer passing over American cables (see chart). Then came revelations that the National Security Agency had spied on internet users in America and elsewhere. The snooping was unrelated to the management of internet addresses. But America’s Department of Commerce, which oversees ICANN, was provoked to announce in March 2014 that it would relinquish its role if it were convinced that ICANN would be truly independent and able to resist power grabs by other governments and commercial interests.



America’s decision to let go triggered much wrangling and some stalling by those who benefit from the status quo. Gradually, though, plans for an independent organisation have come together. The new ICANN will resemble a state, says Thomas Rickert of eco, Germany’s internet association and co-chairman of one of the main negotiation committees.

It will have a government (the organisation’s board), a constitution (its by-laws, which include its mission and “core values”), a judiciary (an “independent review process”, which leads to binding recommendations) and a citizenry of sorts (half-a-dozen “supporting organisations” and “advisory committees”, which represent the different interest groups). These will have the right to kick out the board and block its budget.

Even some of ICANN’s harshest critics, such as Milton Mueller of the Georgia Institute of Technology, say the proposals are pretty good on balance—though he would like the citizenry to have more powers. One point, however, could cause trouble in Marrakech. More than a dozen countries, including Brazil, France and Russia, argue that governments will have too little sway in the new structure. ICANN’s board is obliged formally to weigh advice from a government advisory council only if that group has adopted such advice with “full consensus”, meaning no government openly objects. The dissenting countries say that full consensus will be tough to achieve. Governments are being expected to jump over a higher bar than others, complains one representative from a dissenting state.

Discussions are likely to be heated, if incomprehensible to outsiders, but few expect the reform plans to be derailed in Marrakech. How American politicians will react is another matter. Some Republicans, in particular Senator Ted Cruz, who is running for president, dislike the idea of America letting go of ICANN. Opponents have not managed to pass legislation that would give Congress the right to stop the change: as things stand, a report sent to the relevant committees would suffice. But Republicans have blocked the commerce department from spending any money on the transition. Reform could well become mired in the presidential race, and other hurdles could pop up. Some lawmakers now argue that giving ICANN more independence amounts to the transfer of government property, which requires a vote by Congress.

Dissenting governments and recalcitrant Republicans notwithstanding, an independent ICANN is not only likely to come to pass but also to become a model for other sorts of internet governance. The network is becoming Balkanised, with each country seeking to control what goes on within its own borders. Without generally accepted global rules, governments are bound to create their own, even if these cannot be implemented. “Multi-stakeholder” outfits like ICANN, where all opinions are aired, might well be the best hope to come up with rules that work.

The consensual model is hardly perfect. It seems to work well for settling technical questions (see article) but can stumble when things get more political. And it is not clear who would launch other ICANN-like organisations. NETmundial, an initiative created in 2014 to do just that, has only produced some worthy “internet governance principles”.

Perhaps Fadi Chehadé, ICANN’s president and one of the instigators of NETmundial, will be more successful getting such efforts off the ground in his new job. He will step down after the meeting in Marrakech, to be succeeded by Göran Marby, a Swedish telecoms regulator, and join the World Economic Forum to create all sorts of multi-stakeholder groups. “We need many little ICANNs,” he says.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21693922-organisation-runs-internet-address-book-about-declare-independence-we/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The IETF

Mother of consensus

Engineering the internet is too big a task for one outfit

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

The wizard of the web

TODAY ICANN is almost synonymous with internet governance (see article). But spare a thought for the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). Without this little-known outfit, which developed many of the internet’s technical standards, the network would not even exist. The IETF just celebrated its 30th anniversary. Will it be around in another 30 years?

The IETF, which was born at a meeting in San Diego, is known for its pragmatic way of making decisions. Rather than having governments or companies haggle over changes to networking protocols or routing services, “rough consensus and running code” is the rule. “Not everyone has to agree. And no votes are counted,” explains Scott Bradner, one the group’s grey-bearded elders (pictured). If the difference between two options is merely cosmetic, the IETF generally goes ahead with the more popular one if dissenters do not number more than about 20-30% of the total, although there is no firm rule. That proportion shrinks to 5-10% when a more fundamental choice must be made.

At first IETF meetings were a festival for academics and engineers such as Mr Bradner. But as the internet has grown and become vital to companies’ fortunes, that has changed. First, representatives of big makers of networking gear such as Cisco and Ericsson began to turn up. They were followed by delegates from online giants like Facebook and Google. Now a large Asian contingent is present. When the IETF met in Yokohama last November, Cisco sent around 100 engineers, Google 50 and Huawei, a Chinese hardware maker, about 60.

Jari Arkko, the IETF’s chairman (who also works for Ericsson) wants it to remain the place where exciting new technologies are discussed. But it seems to be turning into more of a conventional standards body. Commercial interests weigh heavily and issues take ever longer to sort out, says Kieren McCarthy, a longtime observer of internet-governance groups. Increasingly, internet standards are being set by more specialised groups covering the web, mobile technology and the internet of things.

The pioneers are retiring: Mr Bradner will say goodbye in the next few months. But even if the organisation becomes less relevant, its decision-making standard of “rough consensus and running code” is likely to endure. Most internet-related technical groups follow it. The IETF’s dress code is influential, too. “Many newcomers are often embarrassed when they show up Monday morning in suits,” the official “Tao of IETF” warns, “to discover that everybody else is wearing T-shirts, jeans and sandals.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21693920-engineering-internet-too-big-task-one-outfit-mother-consensus/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Volkswagen: Emission impossible

Death of a fracking pioneer: A gambler on shale

Our glass-ceiling index: Still a man’s world

Road haulage: The appy trucker

Italian coffee firms: Not so espresso

Schumpeter: A rust-belt revival





Articles Sections Next

Volkswagen

Emission impossible

The German carmaker will escape its emissions scandal largely unscathed. That is bad news for a firm in need of an overhaul

Mar 5th 2016 | GENEVA | From the print edition



VOLKSWAGEN’S new boss, Matthias Müller, was no doubt hoping that his firm’s launches of new models at the Geneva motor show this week would help it move on from the scandal over its cheating in emissions tests. A British prankster had other ideas. As VW’s sales chief, Jürgen Stackmann, unveiled a new version of the Up city car, Simon Brodkin, a comic whose past targets include FIFA’s former boss, Sepp Blatter, gatecrashed the presentation in overalls, with a spanner and a “cheat box” which he tried to fit to the car (see picture), before being led off by security men.

Mr Müller can afford to see the funny side of the stunt: he owes his job to the scandal. He was brought in to replace Martin Winterkorn, who was forced out when it emerged last September that 11m of the company’s diesel cars had been fitted with software to cheat tests for nitrogen-oxide emissions. This week VW admitted that Mr Winterkorn had been sent a memo in May 2014 about irregularities in the cars’ emissions, but said he may not have read it. Speaking to The Economist in Geneva, Mr Müller promised “monumental change”. But whatever VW does to make amends, the more far-reaching overhaul that it needs seems unlikely to happen.

The emissions scandal was a symptom of a corporate culture focused on ramping up output to 10m vehicles a year and toppling Toyota as the world’s biggest carmaker. In the quest for scale, profitability suffered. Operating profits have hovered around €12 billion ($13 billion) for years despite a big expansion in output, with the group’s huge returns from China disguising poor performance in Europe and losses in America and emerging markets.

Mr Müller says he is determined that VW not be “paralysed” by the emissions affair. Its sales fell in Europe and America in January even as their overall demand for new cars rose. But Mr Müller says 2016 has started well and that he expects little lingering impact from the scandal. He may be right. General Motors’ faulty ignition switches and Toyota’s “unintended accelerations” forced both firms to make huge recalls and generated plenty of bad press. Yet sales recovered within a few months.

Uncertainty about financial penalties will hang over VW for some time. It has delayed its annual report for 2015 until April, when the picture should be clearer. America’s Department of Justice could in theory levy a fine of €60 billion but it is unlikely to go that far. Some analysts reckon that the cost of settling with the authorities and private litigants, worldwide, and fixing the affected cars or compensating their owners, might come to a grand total of as much as €30 billion—roughly the amount by which VW’s stockmarket value has fallen since the scandal broke. Others think it could be far less: both GM and Toyota escaped with fines of around €1 billion.

If paying for its perfidy proves painful but not life-threatening, the impetus to overhaul VW will lose some of its force. Change is needed. VW is a sprawl of brands of varying fortunes. Almost two-thirds of its profits come from its premium-car brand, Audi, and performance-car division, Porsche (see chart 1). The main VW brand is a drag on the group: Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, reckons that in 2014 the brand’s profits essentially came from parts sales and royalties (paid by its joint ventures) in China, and that it made no money in its core European market.



Mr Müller is making a start by attempting to revamp the culture of a company in which hitherto a strict hierarchy sent decisions, big and small, to the German engineers that ran VW from its headquarters in Wolfsburg. Mr Müller has replaced seven out of ten senior executives. Some are outsiders, though many of the “new” faces are, like Mr Müller, VW insiders ingrained in the firm’s ways. He is, however, trying to speed up sclerotic decision-making by giving the heads of the group’s profusion of brands more responsibility.

A comprehensive restructuring plan is promised for later in the year, but the firm has said it will concentrate harder on profits. As a start, it will make €1 billion of cost cuts at the VW brand next year. But analysts reckon the company, which alone among big carmakers failed to reduce costs during the financial crisis, has plenty more fat to cut. For no good reason, its administrative expenses have trebled since 2007.

The firm will also cut the extravagant number of model variations it offers—more than 300 at last count—and its absurdly long lists of options. The choice of steering wheels on the VW Golf is set to fall from 117 to a mere 43. VW will “reconsider all costs”, says Mr Müller, including even its hallowed research-and-development budget. In 2014 it was €13 billion, €5 billion more than Toyota’s. But it is unclear what VW’s huge outlays have yielded. It missed the craze for SUVs, it is lagging its main rivals in electric-car technology and it lacks a cheap platform for budget cars in emerging markets. A project to standardise the underpinnings of many VW group models with a platform called the MQB seems not to be producing the expected cost savings.

Mr Müller is resistant, however, to disposing of any part of the firm, even a unit that makes marine diesel engines. A gruff “No” is his response when asked if he would consider selling it, though it is unclear that this division, or another that builds lorries, or Ducati, a maker of exotic motorbikes, is a core part of VW.

The most intractable problem is low productivity, especially at the mass-market VW brand. The group’s labour costs have risen from around 13% of sales in 2007 to almost 17%. Outside China (where it makes cars in joint ventures with local firms), the group’s 520,000 workers made 6.7m vehicles in 2014, or about 13 each. That is about the same productivity as at Daimler’s Mercedes division, which makes only high-margin premium models (see chart 2).



As other carmakers have shifted production to low-wage countries, VW has remained largely stuck in Germany. Some 45% of its employees are based there, many enjoying a four-day work week. The VW brand’s German factories are “among the highest-cost plants in the industry”, says Patrick Hummel of UBS, a bank.

But VW’s commitment to Germany is absolute. “We are a German company”, says Mr Müller, and will “preserve German jobs”. Powerful unions would be sure to resist job cuts. Mr Müller says that they agree on the need for reform but admits to disagreement over how it might happen. Unions could also prevent a wider rethink that might shift investment from the VW brand to others that are more profitable. The supervisory board, made up largely of union representatives and nominees of the state of Lower Saxony, which holds a 20% stake in VW, has the power to resist most changes of strategy.

Maybe an outsider with a mandate for change, if backed by the Porsche-Piëch family, which controls the voting shares, could have achieved more. But Mr Müller’s hands seem tied. The good bits of the VW group will continue to prop up the underperforming bits. That burden may get heavier: premium and low-cost carmakers are thriving while the mass market, the core of VW’s business, becomes more competitive. Odd as it sounds, VW could have done with a bigger crisis.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693947-german-carmaker-will-escape-its-emissions-scandal-largely-unscathed-bad-news/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Death of a fracking pioneer

A gambler on shale

Aubrey McClendon dies in a car crash a day after a federal indictment

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

“To hell with OPEC”

IT WAS a tragic end to a life that epitomised the winner-takes-all spirit of American capitalism. On March 2nd, the day after he was indicted by a federal grand jury on charges of rigging bids for oil-drilling rights, Aubrey McClendon, a founder of Chesapeake Energy and one of the pioneers of America’s natural-gas revolution, died after driving his car at high speed into a wall.

Mr McClendon, 56, was one of the high-rollers of the shale boom—and of its bust. He turned a $50,000 investment in 1989 in Chesapeake, based in Oklahoma City, into what became one of the two biggest natural-gas producers in the United States, with an acreage of leaseholds almost the size of West Virginia. He was also one of the champions of natural gas as a relatively clean fuel compared with coal, and an advocate for freeing America from dependence on Middle Eastern oil. “To hell with OPEC”, he was fond of saying.

Yet his ride was a white-knuckled one even by the standards of America’s oil industry. He quickly seized on the potential of two emerging technologies, horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing (fracking), to unlock vast new sources of natural gas and change the face of American energy. But it was his zeal in amassing land by borrowing heavily that gave him his edge—and ultimately brought him down.

“To be able to borrow money for ten years and ride out boom-and-bust cycles was almost as important an insight as horizontal drilling,” he was quoted as saying in Rolling Stone magazine, in 2012. That was four years after he had lost most of his personal fortune on margin calls during the global financial crisis. A year later he was ousted from Chesapeake for mixing reckless personal bets with those of his publicly traded company.

Mr McClendon, the great-nephew of a former Oklahoma governor, was not a typical wildcatter. He had preppy, Richard Gere looks. His first career choice was to be an accountant. But with Chesapeake’s other founder, Tom Ward, he was adept at leasing land quickly and quietly to secure the shale resources beneath before others realised their potential, and he was as keen to flip it for a higher price as he was to frack it.

“Geologists and engineers were the important guys—but it dawned on me pretty early that all their fancy ideas aren’t worth very much if we don’t have a lease. If you’ve got the lease and I don’t, you win,” he once said.

He became an Oklahoman hero, particularly after bringing a professional basketball team, the Oklahoma City Thunder, in from Seattle. He had a wife and three children, and regularly treated friends to his collection of fine wines. But his brash business tactics also brought him a number of lawsuits.

His leasing methods eventually attracted the attention of America’s Department of Justice. On March 1st it accused him and an unnamed co-conspirator of lowering the price of leases to drill for oil and gas on land in Oklahoma between December 2007 and March 2012, charges which carry stiff jail penalties if they lead to a conviction. It said “various corporations and individuals” were not charged but were also involved. Chesapeake said it did not expect to face prosecution.

Mr McClendon swiftly described the charge as “wrong and unprecedented”, saying he was the first person in the oil-and-gas industry in 110 years to face antitrust prosecution under the Sherman Act for joint bidding on leaseholds. His lawyers argued that the “business practices” in question were well-known in the Oklahoman and American energy industries. “Starting today, Aubrey gets his day in court,” they said. He died the next morning. As The Economist went to press, police in Oklahoma City were still unable to say whether the crash, in which he was the only victim, and which involved no other vehicle, was intentional or not.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693951-aubrey-mcclendon-dies-car-crash-day-after-federal-indictment-gambler-shale/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Our glass-ceiling index

Still a man’s world

Our index of the climate for working women now includes paternity leave

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS still common to see headlines announcing the first woman to occupy some important post or other. Asako Suzuki has just been appointed the first female board member at Honda, a Japanese carmaker. In January the Irish central bank appointed its first female deputy governor. And of course Hillary Clinton could become America’s first female president. But such milestones may not be much of a guide to the opportunities women have to make progress in the workplace.

So, in 2013, we created a “glass-ceiling index”, ranking countries by how good it is to be a working woman in each of them, to be published each year to mark International Women’s Day (March 8th). Our index now covers 29 countries; our website has a full, interactive version of the adjacent chart. Besides taking into account such things as women’s access to higher education, their labour-force participation, pay, business-school applications, representation in senior management and the cost of child care, this year we have added a new indicator: as well as measuring maternity-leave rights, we now include paternity leave.

Studies show that where new fathers take parental leave, mothers tend to return to the labour market, female employment is higher and the earnings gap between men and women is lower. Among countries in the OECD, a group mostly of rich countries, paid leave for new daddies generally remains short, averaging just eight weeks. Nine countries, America included, offer them none. Although they fare poorly on a number of other indicators, Japan and South Korea now offer the longest paternity leave in the OECD. In those two countries, fathers (and mothers) are entitled to more than 50 weeks’ paid leave.

Under Japan’s latest change to the law, in 2010, new mothers and fathers have 14 months from the birth in which to take up to a year’s paid leave, as long as they both take it. The idea is that men have the same career gap as women, and the career slippage among women of childbearing age is reduced. But cultures are hard to change, and so far the uptake has been low.

Depending on nationality, new parents take home very different proportions of their usual pay while on leave. Turkey and Spain, for example, both offer 16 weeks’ maternity leave, but in Spain new mothers receive 100% of salary whereas in Turkey it is just 66%. Our index takes this into account: it includes a “full-rate equivalent” leave entitlement for Turkey of 10.6 weeks, to reflect the pay difference.

Unsurprisingly, the Nordic countries—Iceland (a newcomer to our index), Norway, Sweden and Finland—come out top overall. In these countries, women are present in the labour force at similar rates to men. Finland has the largest share of women who have gone through higher education compared with men (49% of women have a tertiary degree, and 35% of men). Norway’s gender wage-gap (6.3%) is less than half the OECD average (15.5%).

Women have 44% of seats on listed-company boards in Iceland; strong representation in Scandinavian boardrooms is common thanks to quotas. Norway and Iceland also have voluntary political-party quotas, as does Sweden where 44% of parliamentary seats are occupied by women, one of the highest rates in the world. Hungary ranks fifth, having the lowest gender wage gap, of 3.8%. Despite having few women on boards (11%) and in parliament (10%), Hungary has generous paid leave for mothers (71 weeks at 100% of recent pay) and low child-care costs.



INTERACTIVE: Adjust the weightings and create your own “Glass-Ceiling Index”

At the bottom of the ranking are Japan, Turkey and South Korea, where men are more likely than women to have degrees, to be in the workplace and to hold senior positions. Their pay gap is also wide. In Japan and South Korea the favourable parental-leave system is mainly a response to their ageing populations and shrinking labour forces; but in other respects they are far behind the Nordic countries, whose commitment to sexual equality goes back a long way.

Even among better-ranked countries though, there is room for improvement. On average, across the OECD women are more likely to have a degree than men, but they are still less likely to be in the labour force and are paid significantly less. This is partly because of career choices (boys tend to choose things like engineering and computing; girls go for education, health care and welfare). But much of the difference also comes from child-bearing. Although the share of women on listed-company boards has increased since last year by 2.5 percentage points to 18.5%, women still hold less than a third of positions in senior management (a pipeline for board membership). Those that are in the higher echelons of management, according to the UN’s International Labour Organisation, are clustered in specific areas: human resources, public relations and communications management, and finance and administration.

Although American firms have fewer women on boards than European ones, according to MSCI, a financial-data firm, they are more likely to have a female CEO or chief financial officer—the top jobs that bring headlines. But MSCI also found that of the rich-world listed companies where the CEO is a woman, 58% had at least three others on their board. This suggests that once one woman breaks through the glass ceiling, others find it easier to follow.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693952-our-index-climate-working-women-now-includes-paternity-leave-still-mans-world/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Road haulage

The appy trucker

Digital help is at hand for a fragmented and often inefficient industry

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

The next job is just one click away

MENTION “logistics” and it may bring to mind shiny FedEx or UPS vans with their neatly uniformed drivers. However, the business of shifting cargo by road, especially larger loads, is far more fragmented and inefficient than the image of its best-known brands would suggest.

Even the world-famous names in parcel delivery compete with many lesser firms. Likewise, “third-party logistics”—the outsourcing of a business’s transport needs, including running fleets of lorries and vans on its behalf—also has some big firms but lots of smaller ones. There is even more fragmentation in what Americans call the “truckload” part of the industry—one-off deliveries of entire lorry trailers—and in the “less-than-truckload” business—the carriage of a pallet or two of goods. Whereas America’s top five airlines earn around 90% of their industry’s domestic revenues, the equivalent figure for the top five logistics firms is just 20%, reckons Armstrong & Associates, a consulting firm. Official figures show that one in nine American truckers is an independent owner-operator rather than an employee.

The entire industry is a juicy target, ripe for disruption. Together, road haulage of all kinds is worth around $700 billion a year in America and more than €310 billion ($335 billion) in Europe. The rise of internet shopping and other factors will help the industry to keep growing, by around 3% a year worldwide for the next decade, according to Deloitte, another consulting firm. But it is a wasteful business. Every year American lorries travel empty for 50 billion miles (80 billion km)—28% of their total mileage. In Europe, a quarter of the containers on the road are empty, reckons InlandLinks, a container-tracking service.

Some moves have been made towards consolidation. Low fuel prices, cheap finance and recovering rich-world economies have given larger companies the means and the motive to buy rivals. Last year FedEx bought TNT, a European parcel-delivery counterpart, for $4.8 billion. XPO Logistics of America, a broker in the truckload and less-than-truckload businesses, bought a French firm, Norbert Dentressangle, for $3.5 billion; and then a domestic rival, Con-way, for $3 billion. European firms have joined in too: SNCF Geodis, a French state-owned logistics outfit, recently bought OHL for $800m, to establish a foothold in America.

However, there seems little prospect so far of consolidating the multitude of freelance truckers into employees of a handful of big firms. This is because of the comparatively low barriers to entry in their business, says Jack Semple of the Road Haulage Association, a British trade body. The average cost of a lorry-driving course in Britain is less than £1,000 ($1,400). In California it can be as little as $1,100. Lorries can be leased, or bought on cheap credit provided by their makers. Britain nationalised and merged its biggest hauliers in the 1940s, but a state behemoth was outrun by one-man outfits and the business was privatised again in the 1980s.

The best prospects for efficiency and rationalisation, then, are in improving the creaky system by which large numbers of freight-brokers haggle with even larger numbers of truckers. Deals can take days of telephone calls to organise. And for their efforts, brokers charge hefty commissions—of as much as 45% of the delivery cost per load for short-haul trips. Brokers have an incentive to choose the priciest options for their clients to extract as high a fee as possible.

Inevitably, a bunch of startups are now seeking to make the business cheaper, quicker and more transparent by replacing the brokers with mobile-app platforms that match shippers’ loads with available trucks and truckers. Cargomatic, based in Los Angeles, lets shippers list local jobs on its app, which are pinged to the smartphones of nearby drivers. When one of them takes on a job, the shipper can track his journey in real time. Trucker Path, already a popular social app that helps around 450,000 registered American drivers find rest-stops and poker partners, is currently testing its Truckloads app, which does something similar to Cargomatic for the long-haul market.

Other systems automatically match drivers to loads, much as Uber does for taxis and passengers. Transfix, developed by a New York startup, not only scans for nearby lorries, but also rates each driver based on how many miles he would have to drive his lorry empty, how soon he will be available and his past performance. The best match is offered the job first. The whole process takes minutes, says Drew McElroy, a founder of Transfix. And the commission is just 10%, a fraction of what some brokers charge.

Other apps are attempting to do the same for containers whose journeys do not just involve the roads. Kontainers, based in Britain, aims to be a one-stop-shop for businesses that want their goods moved across the oceans. Now, to shift a load from a shipper in Britain to a customer in Australia typically requires two days, 20 phone calls and 40 e-mails to reach an agreement, says Graham Parker, one of Kontainers’ founders. He wants to make booking a container shipment as easy as buying a plane ticket. Its website does this by dealing directly with truckers and shipping lines, which provide real-time tracking throughout the journey. Mr Parker says one of his clients discovered though Kontainers that shipping from Britain to Australia could be done in 38 days rather than the 55 his broker had always told him.

Previously Nam Nguyen, of Skyline Steel in Seattle, would call five or six haulage companies whenever he needed to move a load from the company’s yard to a customer. For local jobs he says he now uses the Convoy app, created by another firm in Seattle, which went live in September. The main gains, he says, have been the “huge time savings” and reliability of delivery. Although it was at first assumed that only small businesses would be interested in such apps, big companies have also started to use them too. Barnes & Noble, an American bookshop chain, was one of Transfix’s first clients; Bosch, a German industrial giant, is now one of Kontainers’ best.

Road to riches

Drivers’ hours are restricted by law, so anything that helps them cut the time spent behind the wheel with no load (and thus no pay) is a bonus. Apps can help with this, and in generally helping them find more jobs. Mr McElroy says some of his drivers now average five weekly one-way trips between Indianapolis, where several publishers are based, and Barnes & Noble’s warehouse in New Jersey, instead of four. So they earn 25% more, with less waiting around. The apps also arrange payments much more quickly than brokers typically do, another important benefit for drivers. Some platforms, such as Transfix, guarantee payment within 24 hours of a delivery. Others, such as Truckloads, allow drivers to filter for shippers’ credit ratings and thus the likelihood of getting paid.

Investors have concluded that such platforms have proved their worth, and are ready to take off. Last year $63m was raised for seven of these companies, including $12m for Transfix and $20m for Truckloads. Such sums are small change compared with the huge sums that taxi-app firms like Uber and Didi Kuaidi are raising, but it is in the haulage apps’ favour that they can achieve scale with such relatively modest sums. And they do not need to attract millions of users to turn profitable. Kontainers says it already has more than 100 businesses as customers in Britain, a number which many offline brokers would be more than happy with.

So far, the big names of road logistics have largely stood back and left the business of “Uberising” the haulage business to the startups. Dan Lewis of Convoy argues that newcomers such as his have an edge, because incumbents would need to integrate new technology into their legacy systems, and “retrofit solutions rarely outperform something built from the ground up.” As for the established brokers, they have an incentive to maintain the status quo and keep the market offline, argues Mr Parker of Kontainers. This will change if the apps begin to eat into brokers’ business and divert a significant share of work from the big parcels and haulage firms towards freelance drivers.

Brett Parker, a founder of Cargomatic, sees large, asset-heavy logistics firms like UPS and FedEx not as competitors but as future partners, and says many such incumbents are seeking alliances with on-demand-economy firms like his. Others think the incumbents will eventually buy the most successful haulage-broker apps.

Two other, deep-pocketed names are also casting an eye over the delivery business. Uber itself is testing a service in some cities in which its freelance taxi drivers also collect and drop off parcels; and Amazon is developing an app, “On My Way”, which allows any member of the public to get paid for delivering packages. If these two giants eventually adapted their services to cover larger loads—not much of a technological challenge—then the scale of their resources and expertise would be hard to compete with.

By then, another wave of upheaval may be in prospect—including for today’s app-based disrupters—as driverless lorries begin taking to the roads. It seems likely that they will be phased in over a number of years, starting perhaps with bigger, longer-distance loads. An industry that has less need for drivers ought to tip the scales away from freelancers and towards large fleet owners. But the advantages of being able to book a shipment quickly and cheaply by app will remain.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693946-digital-help-hand-fragmented-and-often-inefficient-industry-appy-trucker/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Italian coffee firms

Not so espresso

The country’s roasters have been slow to adapt to a new coffee era

Mar 5th 2016 | MILAN | From the print edition

Seeking a caffeine boost

CAFÉ culture may be quintessentially Italian, but it took an American firm to make it global. Howard Schultz says visiting Milan and its cafés in the 1980s inspired him to develop Starbucks into what it is today. More than three decades later, the Seattle coffee giant is poised to enter the Italian market itself. On February 26th Mr Schultz announced a deal with Percassi, a retail developer, to open the chain’s first location in the country next year, in Milan.

Starbucks is not the only firm to have stolen a march. An Italian developed the first espresso machine, but a Swiss firm, Nestlé, conquered the market for personal espresso-makers with its Nespresso system. The world’s second- and third-largest coffee groups, which merged in 2015 to create Jacobs Douwe Egberts, were American and Dutch, respectively.

Italy’s coffee firms are trying to grab more of the global industry for themselves. Italy’s re-exports of beans, mostly roasted, have more than doubled over the past decade, to the equivalent of 3.2m standard 60kg sacks, increasing their share of global trade from 6.7% to 8.9%.

Last year Lavazza, Italy’s biggest coffee firm, bought Douwe Egberts’ Carte Noire premium brand for €800m ($870m), making it the market leader in France. That followed an initial public offering of 40% of Massimo Zanetti, to raise capital for expansion. Zanetti owns a score of brands, including Boncafé, an Asian roaster; and it is buying a stake in Club Coffee, a Canadian firm with which it has developed compostable capsules. Besides continuing to develop its business-to-business side, Illycaffé is expanding its younger direct-to-consumer arm. It has opened flagship coffee shops in big cities, from Seoul to San Francisco, and plans to open more.

Jeffrey Young of Allegra World Coffee Portal, a consulting firm, doubts if all this is enough in what has become a highly competitive and consolidated market. Many Italian firms have rested on their laurels, he says, believing their product to be superior. That was once true, but the emergence of coffee-shop chains, and then of craft coffee brands, has changed that. Quality is now a given; branding and the ambience of coffee shops are ever more important.

The industry is now in the grip of a fad for the “science” of coffee-making—improved grinding methods, better monitoring of water quality, and so on. Illycaffé was an early innovator, having pioneered the use of pressurised cans when most others were still selling coffee in paper bags. More recently it has created an app that lets coffee-lovers design and buy their ideal blend—it will be rolled out in some of the firm’s shops later this year. But if innovation and product development continue to be important routes to growth, even Italy’s biggest firms may be outgunned by global giants with much deeper pockets.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693945-countrys-roasters-have-been-slow-adapt-new-coffee-era-not-so-espresso/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

A rust-belt revival

New businesses are breathing life into some of America’s old industrial cities

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



IN 1984 Ronald Reagan ran a re-election ad on the theme of “It’s Morning Again in America”. Today’s presidential hopefuls ought to run a follow-up called “It’s Almost Midnight”. Donald Trump laments the loss of America’s greatness. Bernie Sanders says the country is being wrecked by greedy businesspeople. America’s leading intellectuals are equally gloomy. Charles Murray, a conservative, says that America is “coming apart”; and George Packer, a liberal, agrees that it is “unwinding”.

Mercifully, not everyone is a doom-monger. In his annual letter to shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway, on February 26th, Warren Buffett noted that “for 240 years it’s been a terrible mistake to bet against America, and now is no time to start.” The March issue of the Atlantic magazine has a cover story by James Fallows on “How America is putting itself back together”. The author undertook a three-year journey across the country in a single-engine plane and saw signs of reinvention and renewal wherever he went—and not just in trendy tech hubs. A new book by Antoine van Agtmael, who coined the phrase “emerging markets”, and Fred Bakker, a Dutch journalist, called “The Smartest Places on Earth”, argues that the rust belts of the rich world, especially in America, are becoming hotspots of innovation.

Boosterism is as American as apple pie. But this time the boosters can point to some hard data. The Kauffman Index of Startup Activity, which measures business creation, had its biggest increase in 2015 for two decades. Bruce Katz of the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, reckons that America’s 50 most research- and technology-intensive industries have added nearly 1m jobs since 2010. These industries are disproportionately based in cities and, since they pay high wages, have a galvanising effect on local economies. Three powerful forces are breathing life into bits of America that had looked as if they were permanently left behind.

First, old industrial skills are acquiring new relevance thanks to such things as advances in materials science. As Messrs Van Agtmael and Bakker note, Akron, in Ohio, has capitalised on its heritage as home to America’s four biggest tyremakers by turning itself into America’s capital city of polymers. The University of Akron’s Polymer Training Centre houses 120 academics and 700 graduate students. Companies such as Akron Polymer Systems and Akron Surface Technologies are inventing new ways to commercialise synthetic materials. North Carolina has done the same for textiles. Its state university is home to the Nonwovens Institute, which does research on textiles that can resist heat and chemicals, including ones used in weapons.

Second, old industrial towns are realising that they have a vital asset: cheap property. Disused mills and warehouses, with their high ceilings and exposed bricks and beams, can make attractive homes and workspaces for knowledge workers. In Watervliet, New York, firms such as Cleveland Polymer Technologies occupy space in an old US Army arsenal. In Manchester, New Hampshire, the old and once-crumbling riverside mill district now buzzes with knowledge businesses and fancy restaurants.

The hunt for Lebensraum is driving young entrepreneurs to explore the neglected peripheries of big cities, such as Boston’s South Side (“Southie”), Seattle’s South Lake Union Area and San Francisco’s twin city of Oakland. Some entrepreneurs are cutting the cord completely and swapping broom-cupboard-sized premises by the Bay for mansions in flyover territory. Mr Fallows also found older industries reviving in out-of-the-way places, such as in north-eastern Mississippi, where a steel mini-mill was expanding and a $300m new tyre factory was opening.

The third trend combines elements of the first two: the rise of manufacturing entrepreneurs. Startups are beginning to transform manufacturing just as they transformed service industries like taxi-hailing and short-term room lets. New techniques such as 3D printing, combined with a rapid decline in the cost of computing power, are making it easier for small firms to compete with big ones. Crowdfunding sources such as Kickstarter are making it easier for them to raise capital. And big companies such as GE are trying to crowdsource innovation by providing small manufacturing firms with space and seed-money. Exponents of this “hardware renaissance” frequently locate themselves in old industrial towns such as Pittsburgh and Detroit, in part because there is lots of cheap space available and in part because they can draw on established manufacturing skills.

Formidable problems, formidable resources

There are plenty of reasons to be sceptical about rust-belt revivalism. The overall number of jobs in manufacturing has been declining for decades, and is set to continue falling as automation keeps advancing. Brain-intensive manufacturing will not provide many jobs for high-school dropouts. Such rebirths have been heralded in the past, only to come to nothing. The rate of business creation is still 50% lower than it was in the 1980s.

Still, America’s old industrial cities have formidable resources as well as formidable problems. Akron and North Carolina point to one of the country’s strengths: it has first-rate universities almost everywhere. GE built a factory for jet-engine parts in out-of-the-way Batesville, Mississippi, largely because Mississippi State University is a centre of expertise in the new materials needed for them. America’s success in software also gives it a huge advantage in a world in which ever more software is being embedded into hardware, be it cars or smart watches. American firms also enjoy much cheaper energy than their European and Asian rivals, thanks in large part to an American innovation, fracking.

It is too early to remake Reagan’s “It’s Morning Again” ad. But it is time for Americans to recognise that, for all its troubles, their country has not lost the ability to remake and revitalise itself. As Hillary Clinton put it, “America has never stopped being great.” Messrs Trump, Sanders et al should take note.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693944-new-businesses-are-breathing-life-some-americas-old-industrial-cities-rust-belt/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Emerging-market debt: The well runs dry

Buttonwood: Living off the people

Russia and sanctions: Toe in the water

High-denomination banknotes: Cash talk

Barclays Africa: Capital in fetters

The euro-zone economy: The new mediocre

Bilking investors: Rotten advice

Free exchange: Red ink rising





Articles Sections Next

Emerging-market debt

The well runs dry

Why borrowing in dollars is central to the business cycle in developing countries

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



OIL PRICES have perked up a bit, but producers are still reeling from the slump in crude prices last year. The boss of Pemex, Mexico’s state-owned oil firm, said this week that the company faced a “liquidity crunch”. Malaysia’s state oil firm is laying off workers. Petrobras, Brazil’s troubled oil giant, recently secured a $10 billion loan from the China Development Bank to help it to pay off maturing bonds. The trouble at these firms underlines broader concerns about the burden of corporate debt in emerging markets. A particular worry for resources firms is the rising cost of servicing dollar debts taken out when the greenback was much weaker than it is now. Short-term dollar loans to be repaid with earnings in falling currencies featured prominently in past emerging-market crises. But the concern about the role of dollar lending in the current cycle is different.

The numbers are startling. Corporate debt in 12 biggish emerging markets rose from around 60% of GDP in 2008 to more than 100% in 2015, according to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Places that experience a rapid run-up in debt often subsequently endure a sharp slowdown in GDP (see article). An extra twist is that big emerging-market firms were for a while able to borrow freely in dollars. By the middle of last year, the stock of dollar loans to non-bank borrowers in emerging markets, including companies and government, had reached $3.3 trillion. Indeed until recently, dollar credit to borrowers outside America was growing much more quickly than to borrowers within it. The fastest increase of all was in corporate bonds issued by emerging-market firms.

Jaime Caruana, the head of the BIS, argues that a global liquidity cycle—the waxing and waning of dollar borrowing outside America—helps to explain the slowdown in emerging-market economies, the rise in the dollar’s value, and the sudden oil glut. When the dollar was weak and global liquidity was ample thanks to the purchase of Treasuries by the Federal Reserve (so-called “quantitative easing”, or QE), companies outside America were happy to borrow in dollars, because that was cheaper than borrowing in local currency. Capital inflows pushed up local asset prices, including currencies, making dollar debt seem even more affordable.

As long as the dollar remained weak, the feedback loop of cheap credit, rising asset prices and strong GDP growth could continue. But when the dollar started to strengthen, the loop reversed. The dollar’s ascent is tied to a change in America’s monetary policy which began in May 2013, when the Fed first hinted that it would phase out QE. When the Fed’s bond-buying ended in October 2014, it paved the way for an interest-rate increase 14 months later. The tightening of monetary policy in America has reduced the appetite for financial risk-taking beyond its shores.

The impact of this minor shift on the value of the dollar has been remarkable, particularly against emerging-market currencies (see chart 1). Wherever there has been lots of borrowing in foreign currency, the exchange rate becomes a financial amplifier, notes Mr Caruana. As companies scramble to pay down their dollar debts, asset prices in emerging markets fall. Firms cut back on investment and shed employees. GDP falters. This drives emerging-market currencies down even further in a vicious cycle that mirrors the virtuous cycle during the boom. Since much of the credit went to oil firms, the result has been a supply glut, as producers pump crude at full tilt to earn dollars to pay down their debts.



Mr Caruana’s reading of events has dollar borrowing at its centre. Yet the sell-off in emerging-market currencies has more to it. Rich countries that export raw materials, including Australia, Canada and Norway, have also seen their currencies plummet against the dollar. Falling export income as a consequence of much lower oil and commodity prices is likely to have played a similar role in the slump in other currencies.

Some analysts think the problem of dollar debt is blown out of proportion. There are countries, such as Chile and Turkey, where dollar debts loom large (see chart 2). But the average dollar share of corporate debt in emerging markets is just 10%. Chinese firms account for more than a quarter of the $3.3 trillion of dollar loans to emerging markets—and since August, when fears surged that the yuan would be devalued, they have been swapping dollar loans into yuan, notes Jan Dehn of Ashmore Group, a fund manager.



Much of the foreign-currency debt taken out by companies elsewhere was long-term: the average maturity of bonds issued last year was more than ten years, for instance. That pushes refinancing, and the associated risk of default, far into the future. In many cases, dollar debt is matched by dollar income—even if, as in the case of oil exporters, it is much diminished by low prices. And there are pots of dollars in emerging-market banks to which indebted companies may have recourse.

In any event, the dollar’s ascent has stalled because of concerns about America’s faltering economy and doubts that the Fed can raise interest rates again. Yet the cycle of dollar lending nevertheless has implications that may not be fully appreciated. A recent study of firm-level finances by Valentino Bruno and Hyun Song Shin of the BIS found that emerging-market firms with strong cash balances are more likely to issue dollar bonds. That goes against a tenet of corporate finance, that firms only borrow to invest once they have exhausted internal sources of funds. It suggests that financial risk-taking was the motivation for borrowing. On average, 17-22 cents of every dollar borrowed by an emerging-market company ends up as cash on the firm’s balance-sheet. Such liquid funds could go into bank deposits, or be used to buy other firms’ commercial paper or even to lend to them directly. In other words, the authors say, companies seem to be acting as surrogate financial firms. As a result, dollar borrowing spills over into easier credit conditions in domestic markets.

This is one of the ways the dollar-credit cycle exerts a strong influence over overall lending in emerging markets. The credit cycle took an apparently decisive turn last year. The stock of dollar credit to emerging markets stopped rising in the third quarter, says the BIS, the first stalling since 2009. Dollar credit is much harder to come by than it was. So are local-currency loans. Bank-lending conditions in emerging markets tightened further in the fourth quarter, according to the Institute for International Finance. The dollar may have peaked but, for emerging markets, tight financial conditions are likely to endure.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693961-why-borrowing-dollars-central-business-cycle-developing/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

Living off the people

A history of investment shows how managers have prospered

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR as long as there have been organised economies, people have been employed to look after the wealth of others. More than 4,000 years ago landowners in Akkad, an early Mesopotamian civilisation, hired local managers to look after their farms.

In their new book, “Investment: A History”, Norton Reamer and Jesse Downing explain how the industry has changed over time. Their fundamental idea is that investment has become “democratised”, available to a wider range of individuals.

Early investment was conducted on behalf of the wealthy, often by individuals with low status—current or former slaves in the Roman Republic, for example. In the Biblical parable of the talents, a master entrusts his wealth to a range of servants. Two of the servants doubled the master’s money but the third buried it in the ground, rather than “investing it with the bankers”. For this failure, the poor performer was “cast into the outer darkness” where “there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth”. Today’s clients might welcome the ability to add this penalty clause to their contracts.

Looking after the assets of the rich—or high-net-worth individuals, as they are known in the jargon—is still big business. But the fund-management industry’s growth has been turbocharged by the evolution of a much wider client base. In the rich world, most people have some money available for savings after they have paid for the necessities of food, clothing and shelter. With a retirement age of, in effect, around 65, they have two decades or so of old age to provide for. In America, retirement savings grew from $368 billion in 1974 to more than $22 trillion by 2014—a fivefold increase in assets relative to income.

This has transformed the industry. Investment management was once a dull business, consisting mainly of helping trust funds stock up on government bonds. The standard joke was: “Why don’t fund managers look out of the window in the mornings? Because then they’d have nothing to do in the afternoons.” Nowadays fund management is a much more glamorous profession—more masters of the universe than keepers of the paper clips.

Another key to the change in the industry’s fortunes is its reward system. Fees are linked to the value of the assets, even though the cost of managing $10 billion is little more than the cost of looking after a measly $1 billion. So fund managers have benefited twice over: first, from the expansion of pension and other savings and, second, from the huge rise in asset prices since the 1980s. The latter has been driven by falls in inflation and interest rates which have reduced the yield (and thus increased the price) of financial assets. When markets faltered in the financial crisis, central banks stepped in to buy assets through quantitative easing (QE)—in effect, an indirect subsidy of fund managers’ profits.

As Messrs Reamer and Downing point out, some fund managers have become very wealthy by looking after other people’s money. A quarter of all American billionaires work in finance and investments, an industry that employs less than 1% of all workers. In ancient times, the poor looked after the assets of the rich; in modern times, it is the other way round.

Successful managers deserve decent rewards, but a lot of mediocre managers have prospered too. Just because they are rich does not mean they are clever. Their position is slowly being eroded by the emergence of index-trackers and exchange-traded funds, which charge much lower fees. But the transformation is not occurring fast enough.

A world of low inflation and low nominal returns should prompt clients to pay a lot more attention to fees. Instead, many pension funds and endowments are moving into higher-charging “alternative asset” categories like hedge funds and private equity, a “Hail Mary” strategy that cannot work in aggregate. There may be market inefficiencies that are profitable to exploit, but none large enough to give a big, across-the-board boost to the returns of a $22 trillion industry.

The authors are right that the democratisation of investment is, on the whole, good news. Millions of people have access to diversified savings vehicles that will deliver, on average, returns that are better than those available from a savings account. But, these days, technology means that such funds can be provided for a fraction of a percentage point a year. This is becoming a utility business, and you don’t get rich by running a utility. Fred Schwed’s question to a pre-war Wall Street mogul—“Where are the customers’ yachts?”—remains as relevant as ever.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693964-history-investment-shows-how-managers-have-prospered-living-people/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Russia and sanctions

Toe in the water

Why is Russia tapping international debt markets?

Mar 5th 2016 | Moscow | From the print edition



RUSSIA last issued a dollar-denominated bond in 2013. Since then it has annexed part of Ukraine, launched a proxy war in another bit and destabilised the rest. That prompted Western financial sanctions on Russia’s banks and oil firms. Its government, though, can still tap foreign debt markets. On March 1st the ministry of finance said it would appoint advisers this month to help it issue a $3 billion bond.

One explanation might be a need for foreign cash. As Russia’s recession has eased, the government’s cost of borrowing has fallen. It could be planning to filter the dollars to favoured companies. That would help firms struggling to service foreign debt thanks to sanctions and the halving of the value of the rouble since 2014. Alternatively, the government could use the money for itself. The budget assumes an oil price of $50 a barrel and a corresponding deficit of 3% of GDP in 2016. Now the oil price has crashed to $30, the deficit could reach 7% of GDP.

But the private sector is not as desperate as it was, having reduced its external debt by about a third over the past two years. No big foreign-debt repayments are looming. Many firms still have high levels of foreign assets, according to Liza Ermolenko of Capital Economics, a consultancy.

Nor is the government in dire straits. The reserves of its sovereign-wealth funds, which Russia is already using to fund the budget deficit, still exceed $100 billion. The finance ministry is expected to propose a new budget in April, which will trim the deficit through spending cuts and tax rises. The government can readily borrow roubles, and the interest rate on dollar borrowing is likely to be high.

That suggests that the Russian government sees the bond as a long-term, strategic move. It has tapped domestic markets in the past when running budget surpluses, to prove that it could borrow more if it needed to, says Ms Ermolenko. A successful trial would be reassuring to the Kremlin, since Russia’s sovereign-wealth funds are likely to run dry within a few years if oil prices stay low. “There will be much more to come,” says one banker, who reckons that Russia will seek to borrow $6 billion-8 billion next year.

A successful international bond placement would also be a public-relations coup. Russia must tread carefully, since Western banks are wary of cavorting with the Kremlin—hence the small sum to be raised. Yet all the signs suggest that Russia will find willing partners.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693967-why-russia-tapping-international-debt-markets-toe-water/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

High-denomination banknotes

Cash talk

Getting rid of big banknotes is not as easy as it sounds

Mar 5th 2016 | ZURICH | From the print edition



A SIGN on the door of a Wild Bean café in Zurich shows the nine different cards accepted for payment inside. Below the logos is a picture of a purple bank note, crossed out in red. From behind the counter, Aymen Kandil explains that for everyday transactions, “thousand-franc notes are not so good”.

Although many merchants will not accept them, the SFr1,000 ($1,000) note makes up over 60% of all Swiss cash in circulation. It is the most valuable banknote issued by a Western country and is worth twenty times its weight in gold. Rather than being a way of paying for things, it is meant to act as a convenient store of value. In 2008, as banks were failing and the value of most assets collapsed, demand for the SFr1,000 note jumped by 16%, having grown by only 1-4% in previous years.

Yet lawmen suspect that most high-denomination notes are in the hands not of jittery savers, but of criminals. Good data on the use of such notes are scarce—their anonymity is one of their attractions. But a report in 2010 from a British police unit that focuses on organised crime claimed that only 10% of €500 ($542) notes were used for legitimate purposes. A report from Europol recounts how criminals will sometimes pay more than face value for high-value notes because of how convenient they are to transport. And it seems telling that the €500 note accounts for around 30% of euros in circulation, yet 56% of Europeans surveyed by the European Central Bank say they have never seen one.

David Lewis of the Financial Action Task Force, an international body that co-ordinates efforts to prevent criminals using the financial system, says big notes are used mainly in drug- and people-trafficking, money-laundering and racketeering. Finance for terrorism is another concern. A courier for jihadists caught travelling to Turkey in 2014 with 40 €500 bills (€20,000) in her underwear would have needed knickers of epic proportions to transport the same sum using €100 notes.

To make life difficult for criminals, Britain has barred banks and money-changing firms from providing €500 notes; the biggest British note is a mere £50 ($70). Canada started withdrawing its C$1,000 note (then worth $670) from circulation in 2000 for the same reason. Singapore is phasing out the S$10,000 note, the world’s most valuable (worth $7,100). The ECB seems to be moving in a similar direction. In early February it announced an investigation into the use of the €500 note.



The ECB will report to euro-zone finance ministers by May 1st, but resistance to scrapping the €500 note is already strong. Some (particularly in Germany) fear that the withdrawal of big notes is a precursor to the eventual abolition of cash, and thus a vast increase in the state’s power to pry and meddle. There are other benefits to the state from getting rid of high-value notes than hitting big-time criminals. Withdrawing them could help fill government coffers, by making tax-avoiding cash payments more awkward. It might even grease the wheels of monetary policy, by making it easier to impose negative interest rates. Yet the “slippery slope” argument need not hold: Canada still has smaller notes, long after it binned the C$1,000 bill.

A weightier concern is that the process of eliminating big notes has less impact on criminals the more slowly it proceeds. But central banks are reluctant to cancel or even put an expiry date on notes, for fear that this would undermine trust in those left in circulation. Instead, they tend to ask commercial banks to filter out the offending notes whenever they receive any. That is what Canada did in 2000 and, 16 years on, some 20% of C$1,000 notes remain in circulation.

Moreover, getting rid of one kind of big note will have only limited impact as long as there are others in circulation, points out Peter Sands of Harvard University. He would like to see the ECB scrap the €200 and €100 notes as well, and the Federal Reserve withdraw the $100 bill, which would be a huge inconvenience to drug-traffickers moving money across the Mexican border.

The Swiss National Bank has stated categorically that it has no plans to get rid of high-value notes, so criminals will have at least one option for the foreseeable future. As Mr Lewis says, “Whatever you do, the problem is going to get pushed somewhere else.” Nonetheless, he continues, “What you’re doing is making it harder for criminals to smuggle cash and easier for authorities to detect them.” That is nothing to sneer at.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693976-getting-rid-big-banknotes-not-easy-it-sounds-cash-talk/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Barclays Africa

Capital in fetters

The sale of Barclays’ African unit says more about the bank than the continent

Mar 5th 2016 | NAIROBI | From the print edition

A local fixture

THE chairman of Barclays, a big British bank, was asked in a conference call last year whether the firm might draw back its investment in its listed African subsidiary. Actually, he replied, “we would probably be biased to own more than less.” Yet on March 1st Jes Staley, Barclays’ CEO since December, announced that it hopes to reduce its 62% stake in Barclays Africa over the next two or three years, to focus on its main business in Britain and America.

On the face of things, the reversal is surprising. Barclays has been in Africa for over a century. Its blue eagle logo can be found in shopping centres from Nairobi to Lagos. Moreover, Barclays Africa made a healthy return on equity of 17% last year. It has grown quickly in recent years and plans to keep doing so. Over the past year it has acquired licences of various sorts in Ghana and Nigeria and part of an insurance business in Kenya. This will continue despite the sale of Barclays’ stake, Maria Ramos, Barclays Africa’s CEO, insisted this week.

But Barclays is one of the most weakly capitalised big Western banks. As well as the sale of its African division, Mr Staley announced this week that it would cut its dividend by more than half. (The not-so-prescient chairman, John McFarlane, had also suggested last year that the dividend would soon go up.)

Selling Barclays Africa would help boost Barclays’ capital in two ways. The proceeds of the sale could be retained to bolster the buffers directly. In addition, a sale would make Barclays’ existing capital go further. At the moment, even though Barclays owns less than two-thirds of the business, international rules oblige it to hold enough capital to absorb all its likely losses. If Barclays’ stake falls below 20%, however, it is off the hook, freeing it to use its capital more efficiently. Its capital ratio would rise by a percentage point.

The heavy capital requirements also make Barclays Africa less profitable for its parent, reducing last year’s 17% return on equity to 8.7%. (That is still better than Barclays’ struggling investment bank, which made a return on equity of just 5%.) Declining currencies—particularly the South African rand—and slowing growth in its main markets have further diminished Barclays Africa’s allure. Its branches outside South Africa are expensive to run and, thanks to falling commodity prices, may get less profitable in the future. And then there is the fear that it may inadvertently abet crime or corruption, earning its parent a swingeing fine in America.

Unfortunately for Barclays, there is no obvious buyer. In South Africa, its main market, where it is listed, competition authorities would probably prevent a local rival from snapping it up. Atlas Mara, an African investment fund run by Bob Diamond, a former CEO of Barclays, might bid. But with a market capitalisation of roughly $300m, it will struggle to raise the $8 billion or so it would need to buy the whole stake. There is vague talk of Chinese or Japanese buyers. If none appears, Barclays may have to reverse itself yet again.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693977-sale-barclays-african-unit-says-more-about-bank/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The euro-zone economy

The new mediocre

The ECB will do something at its meeting next week, but to what effect?

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



THE launch, a year ago, of the European Central Bank’s programme of quantitative easing (QE—creating money to buy bonds) sparked elation. Growth was picking up, consumers had a spring in their step and stockmarkets were jubilant. A year later spirits are sombre as the recovery flags, stockmarkets languish and deflation returns. After prescribing more medicine in December, the ECB is expected to increase the dose again on March 10th. But there are increasing doubts about its effects.

Consumer prices fell by 0.2% in the year to February (see chart), reinforcing the case for greater stimulus. Though this fall was driven by a renewed collapse in oil prices, the core inflation index, which excludes volatile items such as energy, is also looking wan. Prices rose by just 0.7% in the year to February, among the lowest readings since the euro was born 17 years ago. Despite a year of QE, during which the ECB has bought €60 billion ($65 billion) of bonds a month, it appears to be no closer to its goal of inflation of nearly 2% than when it started.

Unemployment has at least carried on falling, to 10.3% in January, reflecting the continuing economic recovery since the spring of 2013. But the upturn has failed to live up to the promise of early 2015, when GDP growth reached 0.5% (an annualised rate of 2.2%). That turned out to be the (not very) high point. Expansion subsequently slowed, to 0.3% (an annualised rate of 1.1%) in the final quarter of last year. GDP in the single-currency club is still below its peak in early 2008, whereas America’s is almost 10% above its pre-crisis high from eight years ago.

Consumers have sustained the euro-zone recovery as household budgets have stretched further thanks to lower energy prices. But investment growth lacks the vitality of previous upturns. That has left the currency union vulnerable to the recent setback in emerging economies, especially in China, which is hurting exporters. Industrial output fell in December in Germany, France and Italy, the three biggest economies in the euro area.

Whereas European stockmarkets were buoyant in early 2015, they sank in the first six weeks of 2016, with particularly sharp falls in bank shares. Though they have since recovered some of their poise, the Stoxx Europe 600 index remains 7% down this year; its banking component has fallen by 15%. An index of business and consumer sentiment compiled by the European Commission, which tends to mirror GDP growth, has fallen from a recent high of 106.7 in December to 103.8 in February, with especially big declines among French and Italian consumers. German industry and trade is more worried about business prospects than at any time since late 2012, not long after the euro zone skirted a break-up, according to the latest Ifo survey.

All this will probably spur the ECB to do more when its monetary-policy council meets this month. In December it extended QE by six months until March 2017, raising the programme’s total size from €1.14 trillion to €1.5 trillion (14% of euro-zone GDP). It also cut interest rates, which first fell below zero in 2014, deeper into negative territory. The deposit rate was lowered from -0.2% to -0.3%.

At its March meeting, the ECB is likely to keep pulling on more than one lever. The deposit rate looks set to fall again, to -0.4%. The central bank may also extend another programme that it introduced in 2014, in which it has offered ultra-cheap long-term funding (stretching until September 2018) to banks that improve their lending to the private sector. Most important, the ECB may step up the pace of QE for the next six months or so, from €60 billion a month to, say, €75 billion. It may also extend the programme again, until September 2017, a full year after it was first supposed to end.

The markets had expected more from Mario Draghi, the ECB’s president, back in December. But even if he comes up with the goods on March 10th, they are likely to remain sceptical. The effects of negative interest rates on inflation are hard to discern, but banks and insurers are obviously suffering. The ECB could introduce tiered negative rates, protecting most of banks’ reserves from the lowest rate, but that did not spare Japanese banks from a stockmarket beating. Moreover, twiddling the dials of QE will not have the same impact as its introduction. Mr Draghi won a reputation as a magician when he cast his “whatever it takes” spell to save the euro, but now even he seems to be running out of tricks.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693974-ecb-will-do-something-its-meeting-next-week-what-effect-new/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bilking investors

Rotten advice

America’s revolving door for financial advisers who do down their clients

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

FINANCIAL markets can seem bewildering to those who don’t have the time and energy to understand them: all that jargon, all those sudden switches in mood. So it is natural that people look for help when trying to find the right products. In America, more than half of all households have sought advice, according to a survey conducted in 2010. They have more than 650,000 registered financial advisers to choose from.

But how good is that advice? It can be hard to tell. There may be an “information asymmetry” between the advisers and the clients, simply because finance can be so complex. Furthermore, although a diner can instantly tell if wine is corked or steak is tough, it may be many years before the success or failure of a financial tip becomes apparent.

A new paper* examines the records of American financial advisers between 2005 and 2015, using a database that contains 1.2m individuals. It finds that 7% of the advisers were disciplined for misconduct over the period, resulting in a median payment to customers of $40,000 in compensation. Around one-third of the miscreants are repeat offenders; past transgressors are five times more likely to engage in misconduct than the average adviser.

What happens to the offenders? Just over half, astonishingly, keep their job. Although the remainder are let go, 44% of them are rehired by another firm within a year. On average, they take a 10% pay cut, but they continue to work as investment advisers. Unsurprisingly, the paper finds that these miscreants tend to move to firms that hire more people with a record of misconduct than is typical. The same firms are less likely to fire their staff if they do something wrong.

Why don’t such firms lose all their clients? The authors suggest that advisers with a dark past tend to prey on elderly or unsophisticated customers. At any rate, they seem to congregate in relatively wealthy, elderly and less educated counties. In some places in Florida and California, one in five advisers has a record of misconduct.

It is a sorry tale. But information on advisers’ records is at least readily available at BrokerCheck, a website run by FINRA, an American regulator. Clearly, a lot more investors need to use it.

* “The Market for Financial Adviser Misconduct” by Mark Egan, Gregor Matvos and Amit Seru



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693975-americas-revolving-door-financial-advisers-who-do-down-their-clients-rotten/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

Red ink rising

China cannot escape the economic reckoning that a debt binge brings

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



HOW worrying are China’s debts? They are certainly enormous. At the end of 2015 the country’s total debt reached about 240% of GDP. Private debt, at 200% of GDP, is only slightly lower than it was in Japan at the onset of its lost decades, in 1991, and well above the level in America on the eve of the financial crisis of 2007-08 (see chart). Sooner or later China will have to reduce this pile of debt. History suggests that the process of deleveraging will be painful, and not just for the Chinese.

Explosive growth in Chinese debt is a relatively recent phenomenon. Most of it has accumulated since 2008, when the government began pumping credit through the economy to keep it growing as the rest of the world slumped. Chinese companies are responsible for most of the borrowing. The biggest debtors are large state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which responded eagerly to the government’s nudge to spend.

State sponsors of error

The borrowing binge is still in full swing. In January banks extended $385 billion (3.5% of GDP) in new loans. On February 29th the People’s Bank of China spurred them on, reducing the amount of cash banks must keep in reserve and so freeing another $100 billion for new lending. Signs of stress are multiplying. The value of non-performing loans in China rose from 1.2% of GDP in December 2014 to 1.9% a year later. Many SOEs do not seem to be earning enough to service their debts; instead, they are making up the difference by borrowing yet more. At some point they will have to tighten their belts and start paying down their debts, or banks will have to write them off at a loss—with grim consequences for growth in either case.

An IMF working paper published last year identified credit growth as “the single best predictor of financial instability”. Yet China is not obviously vulnerable to the two most common types of financial crisis. The first is the external sort, like Asia’s in 1997-98. In such cases, foreign lending sparks a boom that eventually fizzles, prompting loans to dry up. Firms, unable to roll over their debts, must cut spending to save money. As consumption and investment slump, net exports rise, helping bring in the money needed to repay foreign creditors. China does not fit this mould, however. More than 95% of its debt is domestic. Capital controls, huge foreign-exchange reserves and a current-account surplus help defend it from capital flight.

The other common form of crisis is a domestic balance-sheet recession, like the ones that battered Japan in the early 1990s and America in 2008. In both cases, dud loans swamped the banking system. Central banks then struggled to keep demand growing while firms and households paid down their debts.

China’s banks are certainly at risk from a rash of defaults. Markets now price the big lenders at a discount of about 30% on their book value. Yet whereas America’s Congress agreed to recapitalise banks only in the face of imminent collapse, the Chinese authorities will surely be more generous. The central government’s relatively low level of debt, at just over 40% of GDP, means it has plenty of room to help the banks. Indeed, with the right policies, China could survive a deleveraging without too much pain.

By borrowing and spending, firms boost demand; when paying down debts they subtract from it. In the absence of new borrowing elsewhere in the economy, growth will atrophy. China’s government could try to compensate by borrowing more itself to finance a fiscal stimulus. It might also use low interest rates to encourage households to borrow more. (This week’s cut in banks’ reserve requirements seems designed to buoy China’s property market.) But orchestrating such a switch in growth engines is not easy. Firms and households might instead be forced to deleverage simultaneously, exacerbating the pain. Household debt in China is low but rising fast, raising the risk of a double crunch in future.

Moreover, China would have to ensure that existing bad debts are written down and bankrupt SOEs shut—a tall order politically. Reports this week claimed it plans to lay off 5m workers, but big firms will resist a proper reckoning. The bumbling response to the stockmarket and currency wobbles of the past year calls into question the leadership’s competence. The government may be able to prevent an outright banking crisis, but the slump that usually accompanies a deleveraging will be harder to avoid.

Foreign demand could perhaps help make up for the shortfall in domestic spending. Deleveraging commonly occurs alongside large depreciations; as spending in indebted economies falls the value of the currency declines, giving exports a boost. That, in turn, helps put idle capacity to work and bolsters the income of firms repaying loans. Big depreciations can also boost inflation, helping keep the deleveraging economy out of a debt-deflation trap, in which falling prices and incomes make debts with fixed values more expensive to service. Countries that see big depreciations while deleveraging, as many Asian ones did in 1997-98, typically suffer sharp but short downturns before reverting to growth. In contrast, in countries that resist depreciation, as Japan did in the 1990s and peripheral Europe has done recently, deleveraging is slower and more painful.

China’s government seems determined to prop up the yuan. But it may struggle to do so while the economy deleverages. The grinding recovery that would imply has political costs. And cutting rates to boost borrowing elsewhere in the economy would place further downward pressure on the yuan, forcing the government either to tighten capital controls yet more, run down its foreign-exchange reserves or let the currency drop.

With a deft enough touch, China’s debt bomb could fizzle. The rapid pace of credit growth makes a benign outcome ever less likely, however. Given China’s size, a prolonged deleveraging would place a dangerous drag on global demand growth, which the world’s weakened economies would struggle to cope with. The sooner China turns off the credit taps, the better.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693963-china-cannot-escape-economic-reckoning-debt-binge-brings-red-ink-rising/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Concussion: Bang to rights

Rogue waves: Incoming!

Powering the internet of things: Passive voice

Economics: A far from dismal outcome

Anthropology: The medium is the messengers





Articles Sections Next

Concussion

Bang to rights

Science is taking big steps toward understanding the impact of concussion

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



FRED McNEILL, an American-football player, died in November at the age of 63. Between 1974 and 1985 he appeared for the Minnesota Vikings. After leaving them he became a lawyer but in later years suffered from dementia and was told that he had signs of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), a degenerative brain disease. His recent death has become a milestone in the understanding of brain disorders, for post-mortem examination has confirmed this diagnosis—retrospectively making him the first person to be so diagnosed while alive.

CTE is the physical manifestation in the brain of punch-drunk syndrome—or dementia pugilistica, to give its Latinised, medical name. As that name suggests, this form of dementia particularly affects boxers, who are hit on the head as a matter of course. But doctors now understand that it is also a problem in people like Mr McNeill, who get hit on the head accidentally in contact sports. Mr McNeill, along with several other retired players, volunteered to let researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) use a scanning technique called positron-emission tomography (PET) to look at their brains.

In his case, and in those of others who had suffered concussion (a form of brain injury that leads to headaches, dizziness and nausea, and causes blackouts in 10% of those who experience it), this revealed a pattern of abnormal protein deposits. Mr McNeill’s death enabled his scans to be compared with the results of an autopsy. That confirmed the PET-based diagnosis. Specifically, PET was recording deposits in his brain of a protein called tau, which is tied to CTE and other neurological disorders, including Alzheimer’s.

Knocked about

Until quite recently, according to Julian Bailes, a director of the NorthShore Neurological Institute in Evanston, Illinois, it was thought that concussion from accidents in contact sports such as American football was a temporary malfunction rather than a permanent injury. This view began to change in 2005, when Bennet Omalu, a pathologist at the county coroner’s office in Pittsburgh, wanted to find out why another footballer, Mike Webster, had suffered mental ill-health before dying unexpectedly at the age of 50. Webster had become confused, angry and violent, and even bought a Taser gun to treat his own back pain. Dr Omalu discovered tau-protein deposits in his brain, and proposed that the footballer had died of CTE, something which had previously been recognised as a cause of death only in boxers. This revelation, and his fight with the National Football League, which regulates the game, was the subject of a recent film called “Concussion”. Since then, he and Dr Bailes have been collecting the brains of former athletes, and also of old soldiers who have been exposed to explosions, to try to understand who gets CTE, and why.

The road to CTE, their research suggests, does indeed start with concussion. One incidence in five of this then leads to post-concussion syndrome, a period of cognitive impairment that may last months, in which patients have headaches, unsteadiness and other problems. And it seems increasingly likely that, in some cases, repeated concussions may lead to CTE.

In recent years the underlying biology has started to become apparent. Mostly, this relates to the release of certain chemicals when axons, the filamentous connections between nerve cells, are damaged. Concussion is different from blunt-force trauma, such as that which results from getting hit on the head by a rapidly delivered cricket ball. Then, the injury is caused by directly transmitted shock from the impact. Concussion, by contrast, is caused by the internal movement and distortion of the brain as it bounces around inside the cranium after an impact. This bouncing, research has shown, stretches and deforms bundles of axons that connect different regions of the brain. The deformation shears some axons directly, releasing their protein contents, including tau, which with time can form abnormal tangles similar to those found in Alzheimer’s disease. It also causes abnormal inflows of sodium and calcium ions in unsevered but damaged axons. These, in turn, trigger a process which releases protein-breaking enzymes that destroy the axon, further disrupting the brain’s internal communications.

Concussive injury also damages the blood-brain barrier. This is a system of tightly joined cells surrounding the capillaries that service the brain. Its purpose is to control what enters and leaves the central nervous system. One consequence of damaging it is to release into general circulation a brain protein called S100B. The body mounts an immune response against this protein, and the antibodies it generates can find their way back into the brain and harm healthy brain cells. Researchers propose that repeated damage could set the stage for a continuous autoimmune-type attack on the brain.

The relationship between brain injury and behavioural symptoms is, nevertheless, unclear. The work at UCLA suggests a characteristic pattern of protein deposits in people who have suffered repeated concussions. The death of Mr McNeill suggests that may lead to CTE and dementia pugilistica. But many uncertainties remain, according to Huw Morris, a clinical neuroscientist at University College, London.

One challenge is to connect concussion, post-concussion syndrome and CTE itself. The immediate relevance of this will be to help understand whether a particular injury is likely to have long-term consequences. In this context yet another protein released during concussion, SNTF, is of interest. Work on concussed ice-hockey players suggests its level in the blood after a blow to the head predicts the severity of a concussion. A test for this, or for S100B, might provide a way to determine an injured player’s prognosis.

That is a matter of interest both to sportsmen and—women, and to the clubs they play for. Neither coaches nor athletes tend to be good judges of fitness to play after a head injury. It seems likely that many people return to the field long before the brain’s physical healing is complete. And players tend to underreport symptoms. A survey of American university athletes in 2014 found that 20% believed they had suffered a concussion, but almost 80% of those decided to continue to play rather than seek medical attention. Most felt their concussion was not serious and were concerned that revealing their injury would affect their standing with the team.

To try to find an objective measure of the damage an episode of concussion has caused, Dr Morris and his colleagues are studying players at Saracens, a rugby club in London. Participants will wear impact sensors to monitor collisions and give blood samples at the end of every game. The study hopes to find chemicals associated with brain injury that could be used to develop a blood test. A similar project is under way at the Translational Genomics Research Institute, in Phoenix, to study American-football players at Arizona State University.

Brain scanning, too, may have something to contribute. Magnetic-resonance imaging (MRI), a mainstream and widely available technique, can reveal reduced blood flow in the brains of athletes who have had concussions, even long after the injury. An MRI–based test might thus be developed to determine when or whether a player is well enough to return to play. There are also commercially available apps called HeadCheck and Braincheck, which are intended to help athletes work out their baseline brain performance and allow the organ’s health to be tracked. They are not approved as medical devices, so cannot be used to diagnose concussion. But they may let players, especially amateurs, monitor themselves after blows to the head to search for signs that they might need medical advice.

Suffer the little children

In the end, adult athletes can make up their own minds about what risks they wish to take. Children, though, cannot. It is therefore children who should attract the greatest attention. Not only are some children obliged to play contact sports at school, but they may also be participating in an environment that encourages a “stiff upper lip” when they are injured. Yet it has been clear since a study published in 2012 by Andrew Mayer at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque that subtle brain changes in children who have sustained a concussion persist for months after the injury, even when there are no longer any obvious symptoms.

Work published last December by Charles Hillman of the University of Illinois found that children who had sustained a single sports-related concussion still had impaired brain function two years later. Ten-year-olds with a history of concussion performed worse on tests of working memory, attention and impulse control than did uninjured confrères. Among the children with a history of concussion, those who were injured earlier in life had larger deficits. This study was small (it involved 15 injured participants) but if subsequent research confirms it, that will be great cause for concern.

Concussion—once an invisible injury—is rapidly being illuminated. Many sports-lovers have been disturbed to learn that injuries on the field have caused their heroes to undergo profound personality changes. And many parents now worry, with good reason, about their children playing sports. Taking one for the team is all very well. But the price of doing so may be paid over a lifetime.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693906-science-taking-big-steps-toward-understanding-impact-concussion-bang/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Rogue waves

Incoming!

A new system that warns of potentially ship-destroying ocean waves

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

Peril on the sea

STORMY seas can wreak havoc on ships and oil rigs, but the damage they do pales beside that which a rogue wave can dole out. These behemoths, which may be up to 30 metres (100 feet) high, can badly damage, and even sink, all but the largest merchant vessels. They form when smaller, harmless waves meld into one. Until now, predicting them has proved impossible. But Will Cousins and Themistoklis Sapsis, two mechanical engineers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, think they have cracked the problem.

Most ocean waves move independently of one another. Sometimes, though, they travel in groups. Waves within a group have the potential to share energy via a phenomenon called modulation instability, in which one wave grows at the expense of the others and all of the group’s power is thus concentrated into it.

Past teams of researchers who have attempted to predict such rogues have tried monitoring every wave in a region using radar, and then forecasting the behaviour of each of them. This needs a lot of processing power—far more than is carried on board an average merchant vessel. Moreover, it can take hours to run the calculation, which rather diminishes its value. Yet Dr Cousins and Dr Sapsis suspected they could bypass these problems by ignoring most of the waves in an area and homing in on only a tiny, relevant subset of them.

Their system starts by tapping into statistics collected over the years by instruments such as buoys about a particular part of the ocean surface. Using these data, it works out how that sea area normally behaves. It then analyses this behaviour alongside data on wave heights and movements collected in real time by ships’ radar, looking for groups of waves that might possibly end up forming a rogue. Only when it has identified these does it bring the full power of the computer to bear on them. It thus conserves its resources for those analyses that actually matter.

The two researchers report in the Journal of Fluid Mechanics this week that because their algorithm is so parsimonious, it runs well on the sorts of laptops skippers often take to sea. They also report that when they tested it on 100 simulations containing 336 rogue waves, it was able to run all of the calculations needed to predict such waves in a matter of seconds. There were false alarms—91 of them. But, crucially, the algorithm successfully flagged up all 336 “real” rogues, and did so an average of 153 seconds before a putative wave would have struck. That is not enough time to get out of a wave’s path. Nor, in the researchers’ view, is reorienting the vessel so that it meets a wave bow first (which would be a natural response to stop a ship rolling and capsizing when hit) of much value in the face of rogues of this magnitude. The system does provide enough time, though, for a crew to batten down the hatches, both literally and metaphorically, and to brace for impact before they are hit, thus increasing the chance that both they and the vessel will survive.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693903-new-system-warns-potentially-ship-destroying-ocean-waves-incoming/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Powering the internet of things

Passive voice

Redesigning Wi-Fi may let devices communicate more easily

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



MANY prophets of information technology (IT) believe that the next big movement in their field will be the “internet of things”. This, they hope, will connect objects hitherto beyond the reach of IT’s tendrils so that, for example, your sofa can buzz your phone to tell you that you have left your wallet behind, or your refrigerator can order your groceries without you having to make a shopping list. That, though, will mean putting chips in your sofa, your wallet and your fridge to enable them to talk to the rest of the world. And those chips will need power, not least to run their communications.

Sometimes, this power will come from the electricity grid or a battery. But that is not always convenient. However Shyam Gollakota and his colleagues at the University of Washington, in Seattle, think they have at least part of an answer to the problem. They propose to reconfigure a chip’s communications so that they need almost no power to work.

Most conceptions of the internet of things assume the chips in sofas, wallets, fridges and so on will use technologies such as Wi-Fi and Bluetooth to communicate with each other—either directly, over short ranges, or via a base-station connected to the outside world, over longer ones. For a conventional chip to broadcast a Wi-Fi signal requires two things. First, it must generate a narrow-band carrier wave. Then, it must impress upon this wave a digital signal that a receiver can interpret. Following Moore’s law, the components responsible for doing the impressing have become ever more efficient over the past couple of decades. Those generating the carrier wave, however, have not.

Dr Gollakota and his team reasoned that it should be possible to separate the jobs of generation and impression. The system they have designed has a central transmitter (which might be built into a Wi-Fi router) that broadcasts a pure carrier wave. Dr Gollakota’s new chips then impress binary data on this carrier wave by either reflecting it (for a one) or absorbing it (for a zero). Whether a chip reflects or absorbs the signal depends on whether or not its aerial is earthed, which is in turn controlled by a simple switch.

Not having to generate its own carrier wave reduces a chip’s power consumption ten-thousandfold, for throwing the switch requires only a minuscule amount of current. Moreover, though Dr Gollakota’s prototypes do still use batteries, this current could instead be extracted from the part of the carrier wave that is absorbed.

The chips in this system, which Dr Gollakota plans to unveil on March 17th at the USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation in Santa Clara, California can, he claims, transmit data at a rate of up to 11 megabits a second to smartphones or laptops over 30 metres (100 feet) away, and through walls. Though that rate is worse than standard Wi-Fi it is ten times better than the low-energy form of Bluetooth which is the current favourite for the internet of things.

Dr Gollakota has helped found a company, Jeeva Wireless, to commercialise his research and he predicts that passive Wi-Fi chips, as he calls them, will be in production in less than two years. Eventually, he hopes, the idea behind his system—of generating carrier waves centrally—might be adapted for use in mobile phones. That would mean base stations providing a carrier wave, and phone users making calls, sending text messages and connecting to the internet without constantly having to recharge their handsets.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693901-clever-way-forward-powering-internet-things-redesigning-wi-fi-may-let/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Economics

A far from dismal outcome

Microeconomists’ claims to be doing real science turn out to be true

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



SCIENCE works for two reasons. First, its results are based on experiments: extracting Mother Nature’s secrets by asking her directly, rather than by armchair philosophising. And a culture of openness and replication means that scientists are policed by their peers. Scientific papers include sections on methods so that others can repeat the experiments and check that they reach the same conclusions.

That, at least, is the theory. In practice, checking old results is much less good for a scientist’s career than publishing exciting new ones. Without such checks, dodgy results sneak into the literature. In recent years medicine, psychology and genetics have all been put under the microscope and found wanting. One analysis of 100 psychology papers, published last year, for instance, was able to replicate only 36% of their findings. And a study conducted in 2012 by Amgen, an American pharmaceutical company, could replicate only 11% of the 53 papers it reviewed.

Now it is the turn of economics. Although that august discipline was founded in the 18th century by Adam Smith (pictured above) and his contemporaries, it is only over the past few decades that its practitioners (some of them, anyway) have come to the conclusions that the natural sciences reached centuries ago: that experiments might be the best way to test their theories about how the world works. A rash of results in “microeconomics”—which studies the behaviour of individuals—has suggested that Homo sapiens is not always Homo economicus, the paragon of cold-blooded rationality assumed by many formal economic models.

But as economics adopts the experimental procedures of the natural sciences, it might also suffer from their drawbacks. In a paper just published in Science, Colin Camerer of the California Institute of Technology and a group of colleagues from universities around the world decided to check. They repeated 18 laboratory experiments in economics whose results had been published in the American Economic Review and the Quarterly Journal of Economics between 2011 and 2014.

For 11 of the 18 papers (ie, 61% of them) Dr Camerer and his colleagues found a broadly similar effect to whatever the original authors had reported. That is below the 92% replication rate they would have expected had all the original studies been as statistically robust as the authors claimed—but by the standards of medicine, psychology and genetics it is still impressive.

One theory put forward by Dr Camerer and his colleagues to explain this superior hit rate is that economics may still benefit from the zeal of the newly converted. They point out that, when the field was in its infancy, experimental economists were keen that others should adopt their methods. To that end, they persuaded economics journals to devote far more space to printing information about methods, including explicit instructions and raw data sets, than sciences journals normally would.

This, the researchers reckon, may have helped establish a culture of unusual rigour and openness. Whatever the cause, it does suggest one thing. Natural scientists may have to stop sneering at their economist brethren, and recognise that the dismal science is, indeed, a science after all.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693904-microeconomists-claims-be-doing-real-science-turn-out-be-true-far/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Anthropology

The medium is the messengers

A global study reveals how people fit social media into their lives

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition

I won’t tell if you don’t

TO SOME, Facebook, Twitter and similar social-media platforms are the acme of communication—better, even, than face-to-face conversations, since more people can be involved. Others think of them more as acne, a rash that fosters narcissism, threatens privacy and reduces intelligent discourse to the exchange of flippant memes. They might even, these kinds of arguments go, be creating a generation of electronic addicts who are incapable of reflective, individual, original thought.

A topic ripe for anthropological study, then. And such a study, the “Why We Post” project, has just been published by nine anthropologists, led by Daniel Miller of University College, London.

The participants in “Why We Post” worked independently for 15 months at locations in Brazil, Britain, Chile, China (one rural and one industrial site), India, Italy, Trinidad and Tobago, and Turkey. They embedded themselves within families and their surrounding communities. That, the team believes, let them form a nuanced view of the roles of social media in their study sites which could not be gained by analysing participants’ public postings.

These fly-on-the-wall perspectives refute much received wisdom. One of the sceptics’ biggest bêtes noires is the “selfie”—which is often blamed for fostering self-regard and an undue focus on attractiveness. “Why We Post”, however, reveals that the selfie itself has many faces. In Italy girls were indeed seen to take dozens of pictures of themselves before settling on one to post. In Brazil many selfies posted by men were taken at the gym. But at the British site, Dr Miller found, schoolchildren posted five times as many “groupies” (images of the picture-taker with friends) as they did selfies. Britons have also created a category called “uglies”, wherein the purpose is to take as unflattering a self-portrait as possible. And in Chile another unique genre has developed: the “footie”. This is a shot taken of the user’s propped-up feet, a sign of relaxation.

The often-humorous, marked-up images known as memes have also come in for criticism. They debase traditional forms of public debate, lament some, spreading far and wide with little context. But memes serve different purposes in different cultures. In India they tend to focus on serious and religious issues; Trinidadian memes are more often send-ups of politicians. Yet in all cases Dr Miller sees meme-passing not as limiting what social-media users think and say, but as enabling discourse. Many users happily forward memes laced with strong ideological messages about which they would not dare to comment individually.

Critics also often view the online personae people create for their social-media postings as false fronts designed for the medium at hand. Trinidadians, however, disagree. They see online profiles as more representative of a person’s true self even than what is seen in real life. And, though the perceived loss through social media of the anonymity that once characterised online life causes much hand-wringing in the West, young boys and girls in Turkey see things differently. Social media permit them to be in constant contact with one another, in full view of their parents, but to keep their conversations and photos to themselves.

In rural China and Turkey social media were viewed as a distraction from education. But in industrial China and Brazil they were seen to be an educational resource. Such a divide was evident in India, too. There, high-income families regarded them with suspicion but low-income families advocated them as a supplementary source of schooling. In Britain, meanwhile, they were valued not directly as a means of education, but as a way for pupils, parents and teachers to communicate.

“Why We Post” thus challenges the idea that the adoption of social media follows a single and predictable trajectory. Indeed, the Chinese sites show that the use of such media can vary from place to place within a single country. The study also refutes the idea that social media are making humans any less human. Users are, in Dr Miller’s words, “merely attaining something that was latent in human beings”.

The sceptics’ reaction to new technology seems equally deep-rooted. New means of communication from railways and the telegraph onwards have always attracted critics. Sooner or later, the doubters either convert, or die. The adopters, meanwhile, chatter on until the next wave of disruption happens, an advance that some of them will reject as unnecessary and possibly dangerous flummery.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693905-global-study-reveals-how-people-fit-social-media-their-lives-medium/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




America’s presidential election: Pushback

The art world: African horizons





Articles Sections Next

America’s presidential election

Pushback



The 2016 campaign is putting the most influential political-science book in recent memory to a stiff test

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



OF ALL the theories to explain the unexpected success of Donald Trump’s presidential campaign, this, surely, is the most novel. Forget about a disaffected working class buffeted by globalisation and automation, pent-up racial resentments finding an outlet or the advent of the 24-hour news cycle. No: in the assessment of Daniel Drezner, a professor of international politics at Tufts University, it’s the political scientists who are to blame.

Although clearly tongue-in-cheek, this hypothesis sounds less absurd now than it would have done before 2008, the year that four American academics brought out a book called “The Party Decides: Presidential Nominations Before and After Reform” (TPD). The book’s main thesis is that political parties have formidable power to influence voters in presidential primaries.

TPD was never a bestseller. Nonetheless, it has gained more attention from journalists than any political-science book in recent memory. According to Google News, 763 articles have cited TPD’s title since the start of 2011. Just over 500 more contain its catchphrase “invisible primary”, which describes how candidates compete for support from party grandees before the first votes are cast. Such coverage is comparable only to that received by bestsellers like “Dreams From My Father” by Barack Obama (758) or Michael Lewis’s “Moneyball” (784).

During Mr Obama’s presidency, a new generation of young journalists has emerged who are focused on Washington, DC. They eschew the sources, leaks and scoops that are pursued by their more traditionally minded colleagues in favour of the sage counsel of academic political science. Many of these whizz-kids have treated TPD with awed reverence. For much of 2015 they dismissed Mr Trump’s chances in the Republican primaries by relying on the book’s claim that parties usually guide voters towards “acceptable” nominees. But it was precisely by making such overconfident pronouncements, Mr Drezner argued recently in the Washington Post, that the authors sowed the seeds of their own demise.

Scientists are well acquainted with the “observer effect”, which, in physics, for example, stipulates that the characteristics of a subatomic particle can never be fully known because they are changed by the act of measuring them. Similarly, wrote Mr Drezner, “The Party Decides” has been “the primary theory driving how political analysts have thought about presidential campaigns. It seemed to explain nomination fights of the recent past quite well.” However, in previous elections, there were no crowds of journalists citing TPD. This time, says Mr Drezner, Republican decision-makers “read smart take after smart take telling them that Trump didn’t have a chance…so GOP party leaders didn’t take any action. Except that the reason smart analysts believed Trump had no chance was because they thought GOP leaders would eventually take action.”

The 2016 primaries are putting political science—as exemplified by TPD—to a very public test. Republicans in Congress have already sought to cut off public funding for research in the discipline. Now, if it is seen to have failed, it will slow down the steady advance into the mainstream media that the field has made over the past eight years—and could possibly bring it to a halt.

When journalists write about gravitational waves, they talk to scientists. When they write about interest rates, they talk to economists. But until recently, when they wrote about elections, they often pretended that academic expertise did not exist. “In 2005, when I came to Washington,” writes Ezra Klein, a founder of Vox, an “explanatory-journalism” site, “knowing political science wasn’t a legitimate form of knowing about politics, or at least it wasn’t presented as one to young journalists like me.” The numbers bear him out: since 2006 there have been 7.5 references to “economist” in the New York Times for every mention of a “political scientist”.

A political (journalism) revolution

Theories abound to explain this imbalance. One hypothesis is self-segregation: journalists with a penchant for numbers are likely to gravitate towards covering obviously quantitative fields, whereas those with a more narrative bent may prefer politics. Another is the availability of sources. There is no one person who can speak for, say, consumers or debtors as a whole, so economic journalists must resort to experts who study aggregate behaviour. In contrast, politics is conducted by a small number of individuals who are usually keen to talk to reporters, making outsiders’ analysis seem redundant. Arthur Lupia of the University of Michigan argues that, whereas fields like economics can seem “objective” and technical, political issues are visceral, emotional and tribal. People hold immovable beliefs about politics, he concludes, and have no inclination to defer to “impartial experts” on such topics. And Mr Drezner thinks that there is little appetite among either reporters or readers for the dispiriting structural analyses that are professors’ stock in trade.

Throughout George W. Bush’s presidency, most American political reporters were allergic to any numbers more advanced than a cherry-picked poll result. The tide did not start to shift until 2008, when Nate Silver, a baseball writer who developed statistical expertise by predicting how players would perform, began posting forecasts for that year’s topsy-turvy primary elections online as an anonymous blogger. Mr Silver used techniques that any political scientist would find familiar.

Thanks to rigorous analysis and a sterling track record—he was bullish on Mr Obama’s chances long before the Iowa caucuses, and correctly called 49 of 50 states in the general election—Mr Silver developed a devoted following. Eager to test the audience for what would soon be called “data journalism”, in 2010 the New York Times began hosting his blog, which he called “FiveThirtyEight” for the number of votes in America’s electoral college. Even Mr Silver, who by that point was a well-known forecasting whizz, could not have predicted how big the market for his cleverer-than-thou takes would become: on the eve of the 2012 election 20% of the visitors to the paper’s website read “FiveThirtyEight”.

Mr Silver’s success set off a modest paradigm shift in political journalism. Perhaps his biggest draw was his thinly veiled disdain for the innumerate punditry that ruled the airwaves. Mr Silver delighted in savaging commentators who relied on vapid clichés like “momentum shifts” and “game-changers”. And unlike any other commentator in Washington, he was willing to put his money where his mouth was.

In October 2012 Joe Scarborough, a television presenter and former congressman, took aim at Mr Silver, writing: “Anybody that thinks that this race is anything but a toss-up right now is such an ideologue, they should be kept away from typewriters, computers, laptops and microphones for the next ten days, because they’re jokes.” Mr Silver promptly tweeted him an offer of a $2,000 bet that Mr Obama would win, which Mr Scarborough wisely passed up. Mr Silver had brought the rules of political science to Beltway journalism: no longer were all opinions equally valid. Some interpretations were right, some were wrong, and every election provided a new opportunity to put them to the test.

Like all good businesses, “FiveThirtyEight”—which was acquired by ESPN in 2013—quickly attracted imitators and competitors. Mr Klein started Vox, the New York Times established a new quantitatively minded section, called “The Upshot”, and the Washington Post annexed a blog, called “The Monkey Cage”, dedicated to political science. What was once Mr Silver’s lonely crusade soon became an echo chamber. And although these sites occasionally conducted their own statistical studies, they mostly relied on existing academic work, giving political scientists an audience of unprecedented scale.

At the same time a movement was developing within political science to expand its reach beyond the ivory tower. In 2013 the American Political Science Association devised a plan to increase the field’s impact. Mr Drezner began advocating loudly for political scientists to publish papers on subjects where a consensus existed among the media and policymakers that was strongly refuted by academic literature. “We got tired of hearing people say things like ‘Values voters determine the outcome of this election’,” says Lynn Vavreck of UCLA. “We got tired of hearing things written into the history books that weren’t true.”

One group of professors who heard this message were the authors of TPD. Although their writing style does not quite qualify the book as a page-turner, TPD is essentially organised as a chronological narrative that is free of jargon and is sometimes outright funny. For example, it calls the share of delegates a candidate has won when a nomination is decided the “fat lady share”, in homage to the saying “It ain’t over ‘til the fat lady sings.”

The book’s argument is simple, convincing and provocative. Following the debacle of the Democratic convention in 1968, when police and street protesters clashed violently for days while delegates chose a pro-Vietnam-war candidate against the electorate’s wishes, America’s two major political parties introduced binding primary elections to let the public select nominees. But in the very first election cycle under the new system, Democratic voters made the disastrous choice of an anti-war insurgent, George McGovern, who went on to lose 49 of the 50 states to Richard Nixon. As a result, TPD claims, the parties soon set about undermining their own reforms. After a brief period of trial and error, they succeeded, maintaining a veneer of democratic legitimacy while all-but-inevitably guiding voters towards the preferred choice of party heavyweights and interest groups. “The reformers of the 1970s tried to wrest the presidential nomination away from insiders and to bestow it on rank-and-file partisans,” the authors write. “But the people who are regularly active in party politics have regained much of the control that was lost…Insider control is not unshakable, but it has usually been sufficient to the task at hand for some two decades.”

The arrow of causality

TPD backs up this claim with resounding evidence. For every contested primary between 1980, when the authors believe parties recovered their power over the process, and 2004 they measure the relative effect of polls, endorsements, fund-raising and media coverage on candidates’ delegate shares. Although successful candidates tend to fare well on all these indicators, the authors find that endorsements—their preferred measure of party support—are the best single predictor of delegate-winning. More important, early endorsements tend to yield cash, news coverage and popularity later on. In contrast, an early fund-raising push, media bubble or poll surge does not usually produce a flurry of endorsements. They conclude that parties tell the electorate how to vote, rather than voters telling the party whom to support.

When TPD was first published on the eve of Mr Obama’s election, it had virtually no impact on American politics. It was not until 2011, after Mr Silver cited the book in an article in the New York Times Magazine and the Republicans’ “invisible primary” to challenge Mr Obama was in full swing, that the public began to take notice: a look at Google searches reveals no significant interest for the phrase “invisible primary” before Mr Silver’s article. By May 2012 “invisible primary” had caught up with a well-known term like “efficient markets hypothesis” by search volume. And just when awareness of TPD was growing, its thesis was bolstered by an extraordinary performance. From the summer of 2011 until the Republicans’ South Carolina primary in January 2012, a parade of candidates with no support from the political elite (Michele Bachmann, Herman Cain and Newt Gingrich) took turns leading the polls. In the end it was Mitt Romney—whom many non-quantitative journalists dismissed as too moderate and establishment-friendly for an angry Republican electorate, even though he led the race for endorsements early on—who waltzed to the nomination.

So three years later, when a clownish insurgent called Donald Trump leapt to the top of the Republican polls, data journalists had their ammunition ready. In a story last July entitled “Here’s Why He Won’t Win”, Andrew Prokop of Vox predicted it would be hard “for candidates like [Mr Trump] to appeal to party elites”. “Dear Media, Stop Freaking Out About Donald Trump’s Polls” was the title of a piece in November by Mr Silver. “Donald Trump…will most likely follow the classic pattern of a party-backed decline,” concurred Nate Cohn of “The Upshot” in July. And we wrote in late September that “Outsiders don’t win presidential nominations any more…barring a stunning reversal of precedent, [Mr Trump’s] failure to impress GOP elders…all but precludes [him] from becoming the party’s flag-bearer.” In a daily reminder to readers that Mr Trump’s bubble was sure to pop, “FiveThirtyEight” has paid homage to TPD by maintaining an “endorsement primary” tracker, which is updated each time a senior elected official announces support for a candidate. After Mr Trump’s poor showing in Iowa, such observers had reason to feel smug.



One month later, however, it seems clear that Mr Trump is no Herman Cain. The first panic bells went off after his dominating performance in the New Hampshire primaries, which occurred in tandem with Bernie Sanders’s trouncing of Hillary Clinton, the establishment favourite. (“Bad Night for ‘The Party Decides’,” Ryan Lizza of the New Yorker tweeted as the polls were closing.) Mr Trump’s thumping win in South Carolina forced Jeb Bush, the original leader in the Republican “endorsement primary”, out of the race, setting off a new wave of sober predictions that the party would now clear the field for Marco Rubio to eviscerate Mr Trump one-on-one. Then came Mr Trump’s 22-percentage-point win in Nevada, his victories in seven of the 11 Super Tuesday states and the continuing division of his opposition. Since late February the very Republican governors and senators who previously swore he had to be stopped have begun to offer him their endorsements. There isn’t much time left for TPD to be proved right.

What good is political science if it flubs the biggest development in American politics in generations? The authors of TPD themselves are responding cautiously to what might look like humiliation. Martin Cohen, of James Madison University, plaintively maintains that the book’s statistical model has actually held up rather well. TPD did include a crucial caveat in its argument: “The party and not individually powerful candidates decide nominations—but only if the party can make up its collective mind.”

TPD found that a high share of early endorsements usually leads to the nomination. Although Hillary Clinton was widely considered the insider favourite in 2008, her endorsement totals on the eve of the Iowa caucuses lagged far behind her husband’s at the same stage in 1992 or Al Gore’s in 2000. Meanwhile, TPD’s authors noted that Mr Obama, the eventual victor, had already amassed a healthy share of endorsements from low-level party insiders. This year, Mrs Clinton really has been the overwhelming endorsement leader, and looks set to cruise to victory. In contrast, among the Republicans in 2016, no candidate received significant endorsement support by historical standards. Mr Bush, the endorsement leader, had 30% less backing from the party ahead of the Iowa caucuses than the lowest previous total on that date by an eventual Republican nominee. “The party really didn’t decide,” Mr Cohen says, “and as a result it was left to the voters.”

Yet Mr Cohen is not hiding behind this technicality. “We think that it’s in the party’s interest to decide, and that they should be deciding,” he says. “The fact that they failed to is a lack of foresight on their part.” Even if TPD’s statistical model is sound, its central claim—that American political parties have successfully “beaten” the reforms intended to entrust nominations to the electorate—is hard to reconcile with Mr Trump’s winning streak.



For political scientists, The Donald’s success paves the way for a host of new questions. What determines which are the elections where a “party can make up its collective mind”? How far can a party stretch the preferences of its voters before they revolt? Within the academy, no one will suggest that the authors of TPD should be muzzled or ignored just because they failed to foresee Mr Trump’s ascent.

For data journalists, however, the stakes are higher. Mainstream audiences will not be satisfied with excuses or technicalities: the best and the brightest said that Mr Trump could never win, and it looks as if they were wrong. One crucial corrective would be to actually read the original versions of academic political-science texts rather than relying on caveat-free summaries: a close reading of TPD applied to the 2016 Republican race might have been entitled “The Party Hasn’t Decided, So Anything Goes”. Another would be to take a nibble of humble pie and recall that there is a reason “political science” sounds like an oxymoron: there are no iron laws in politics. There is only so much a study of ten primary campaigns between 1980 and 2004 can tell people about a new set of circumstances and candidates in 2016.

Ultimately, however, popular evangelists for political science need to stand their ground. For years, sceptics cited the failure of baseball teams assembled by Billy Beane (the protagonist of Mr Lewis’s book, “Moneyball”) to win a championship as proof that statistics had no place in baseball. Today, virtually all these flat-earthers have been forced into early retirement. Every statistical model has its flaws, but presidential elections are still far easier to predict months in advance than, say, economic growth or the weather. Just like Mr Beane’s Oakland Athletics, Mr Silver’s disciples need to keep offering wagers to the Joe Scarboroughs of the world. In the long run, they—and therefore the voters who depend on them for information and analysis—will win more often than they lose.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21693910-2016-campaign-putting-most-influential-political-science-book-recent-memory/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The art world

African horizons

Why the Armory Show in New York is focusing on Africa

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



IN OCTOBER 2010 a wealthy South African, bidding at Bonhams in London, bought a portrait of a doe-eyed Indian girl from the island of Zanzibar that had been painted in 1945. The artist was Irma Stern, who was born in the Transvaal, the daughter of German-Jewish émigrés. Sentimental in style, it was not a fashionable work of art. Nevertheless, the bidder paid a record £2.37m ($3.3m) for the picture, more than twice the top estimate. Much has changed since that moment, when homesick white South Africans, grown rich on rising commodity prices, would spend millions on the work of artists who reminded them of their parents and grandparents and the white world they grew up in. Half a decade on, the global art world has discovered a quite different Africa—and in a big way.

In the course of the 20th century African tribal art was praised by many outsiders, including Henri Matisse and Pablo Picasso, who absorbed what they saw as its “primitive” imagery into their own work. But few collectors on the continent or beyond were interested in Africa’s contemporary art, still less in its artists. One exception was Jean Pigozzi, heir to the Simca motoring fortune, who, starting in the 1980s, amassed a huge collection of contemporary African art, though never by going to the continent himself; instead, he sent a curator with cash, canvasses and paint for encouragement.

Since then other collectors, both on the continent and beyond, have begun buying. First among them is Sindika Dokolo, a Congolese businessman who is married to Africa’s wealthiest woman, Isabel dos Santos, daughter of Angola’s president. Mr Dokolo owns more than 5,000 pieces of mostly contemporary art, and his foundation plans to build an exhibition space and, later, a museum in Portugal.

In recent years galleries have been popping up all over the continent. Regional events like Dak’Art Biennale and LagosPhoto Festival are growing bigger. Last year the Venice Biennale appointed its first artistic director from Africa, Okwui Enwezor, a Nigerian curator who lives in New York and Munich. In the latest development, on March 3rd the historic Armory Show (on Piers 92 and 94) in New York unveiled its first show focusing on Sub-Saharan Africa. In 2017 Jochen Zeitz, a German art collector and conservationist, plans to open Zeitz Museum of Contemporary Art in Cape Town to show his art from Africa and the African diaspora.

Four of the most prominent contemporary artists of African origin move with ease between Africa and the rest of the world. Julie Mehretu was born in Ethiopia and lives in New York, as does Kenyan-born Wangechi Mutu; El Anatsui (whose beer-bottle-top “fabrics”—pictured—are instantly recognisable) was born in Ghana, has worked for much of his career in Nigeria, and has been exhibited all over the world, as has William Kentridge, a white South African. Only the work of Ms Mutu and Mr Kentridge can be said to deal with the African experience directly, though both also address larger themes. Ms Mutu does so through an Afrofuturist exploration of gender and identity. Mr Kentridge is concerned with South African politics.

The art world zeros in on a new region for two reasons. The first is that young people in fast-growing economies often begin buying art, as well as luxury goods, when they start becoming rich. The second is that local collectors favour local artists, and these are often undervalued. Buying and representing these artists is attractive to international dealers and collectors because, if a home-grown collecting culture does emerge, then prices for art from that region can only go up.

Africa’s recent economic growth is a factor in its expanding art market. In the past decade the GDP of the 11 largest sub-Saharan countries has increased by roughly half, twice the rate in the rest of the world. “We have ten times as many collectors from South Africa as we did ten years ago,” says Joost Bosland, director of the Stevenson Gallery, which has showrooms in Cape Town and Johannesburg. The leader among the international auction houses, Bonhams, has seen average lot prices for African art increase fivefold, to $50,000, since it decided to hold stand-alone sales of African artists. Half its bidders now originate from within the continent. Bonhams has been so successful that both Sotheby’s and Phillips are thinking of copying their African sales.

Only eight of the 14 artists featured in the special exhibition at the Armory, “African Perspectives”, are from galleries in Africa. The rest are based in Paris, London, Berlin and Seattle. To Julia Grosse and Yvette Mutumba, the curators of “African Perspectives”, this was a more accurate way of reflecting the world that many contemporary African artists now inhabit. How to classify someone who is born in Lagos, splits their time between there and Brussels, and does residencies in Hong Kong and New York? Everyone lives more globally now; artists are no exception. Another element is that growing interest in colonialism, slavery and the diaspora has expanded the story of Africa into the story of the world.

Art with African or African-American origins is quickly gaining wider audiences across America. There are now museums of the African diaspora in both San Francisco and New York. In 2014 Harvard University opened the Ethelbert Cooper Gallery of African & African-American Art and the long delayed Africa Centre is being built just north of “Museum Mile” in New York, at Fifth Avenue and 110th Street. Barack Obama, America’s first president with an African father, will step down in 2017, but global interest in Africa’s artists is certainly not about to disappear.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21693909-why-armory-show-new-york-focusing-africa-african-horizons/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Eric “Winkle” Brown: Know your enemy





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Eric “Winkle” Brown

Know your enemy

Eric “Winkle” Brown, test pilot, died on February 21st, aged 97

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition



AT 17, Eric Brown had flown only once before: on his father’s lap in a one-seater Gloster biplane, when he was eight. This time the biplane was a Bücker Jungmann two-seater, and the pilot strapped him in with particular care. Nice of him, he thought. Minutes later, the aircraft was somersaulting like a performing flea: for the pilot was Ernst Udet, a German flying ace of the first world war. He clapped Eric heartily on the shoulder as he stumbled out and roared “Hals und Beinbruch!” Broken neck, broken legs, but you’re alive!

The old fighter pilots’ motto summed up Captain Brown’s career. In the course of it he flew 487 different types of aircraft, most of them prototypes. He changed planes so often that he kept a loose-leaf folder, meticulously handwritten, of all the different cockpit layouts, hydraulics and emergency drills, to try to keep on top of things. Many of these craft he operated on aircraft-carriers; he clocked up 2,407 carrier landings and 2,721 take-offs, both world records. He tested the earliest helicopters, jets and rocket-powered machines. His working life took him from the wood-and-canvas craft in which he started with the Fleet Air Arm, to overseeing training on the nuclear strike force at Lossiemouth in the 1960s. The rising arc of power and accuracy was so steep that it astonished him.

He faced his own demise on a regular basis. His de Havilland 108 once started oscillating so fast that he was blacking out, and just saved himself by pulling both sticks in time. His jet-powered flying-boat crashed into debris off Cowes and trapped him under water; others got him out. In a Tempest V his propeller froze in mid-flight and the engine caught fire. As a Scot, short on words but not confidence, he tended to react with a calm joke or two: “Let’s sort this out,” he would say to himself. This time, with his feet slow-roasting, he jumped. The slipstream was so strong that he had to catapult himself clear, landing in a duckpond. In short, accidents were ten a penny. He survived for two reasons: he was careful, and he was small. Small enough to curl up in a cockpit, rather than get his legs sheared off. Hence “Winkle”.

In a glamorous trade he cut a neat, practical figure, but there was no lack of dash. He flew Spitfires into the black heart of cumulonimbus clouds to discover why aircraft often emerged from them in bits. He crash-landed aircraft without undercarriages, to see if that was a good idea. On aircraft-carriers he had to contend with too-short flight decks, pitching seas, failing to hook on the arrester wires or crashing into the barrier. He was such a dab hand, though, that he sometimes came in sideways, crab-wise, without a batsman, to glide to a perfect stop. And then he would wander off grinning. When he made the first-ever jet-aircraft landing on the carrier Ocean, screaming down in his favourite Vampire in December 1945, it was just such touch-down perfection, though the sea was so high that he had been ordered not to attempt it. Well, he wasn’t going to let the Americans do it first.

A bump on landing

All through the war the Germans kept one step ahead with aviation technology. As each new threat appeared, he had to work out how to counter it. On the aircraft-carrier Audacity in the north Atlantic in 1941 he was pitting fiery, beautiful little Martlets against Focke-Wulf Kurier bombers; he found the only way to dispatch them was to go for them head-on, shattering the windscreen to kill the pilots. When V1 flying bombs appeared he discovered that, by overtaking very close in a Tempest V, he could clip their wings with his own and send them plunging into the Channel.

It struck him as strange that his life’s obsession had become to beat the Germans. That jaunt with Udet had sealed his passion for flying (though he already loved speed, and was the only boy at Edinburgh Royal High to ride a Norton 500cc motorbike). Udet had also inspired him to learn German and to teach there for a while. He admired the Germans for their industry and ingenuity. A colossal amount of both had been poured into fighter aviation.

At the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough after the war he studied and flew many of these experimental machines. German experts helped him. In France he worked with them to fix and fly the Dornier 335, the fastest piston-engine aircraft. He searched for, and found, the top-secret Me 262, the world’s first operational jet fighter, so swift and with such a punch that he felt untouchable. He also test-flew the suicidally dangerous Me 163B, powered with rocket fuel so volatile that a bump on landing could explode the plane; its design became the basis of craft that could attempt supersonic flight. Having tried all these, and survived, he was the natural choice to train a new generation of German test pilots in the late 1950s.

In those years he came across Luftwaffe aces whom, as a boy, he would have idolised. Having seen the walking dead of Bergen-Belsen, he was not about to repeat that mistake. But his job could be summed up as “Know the enemy” and in a way he had indeed come to know them, in that fellowship of death-defying souls. So when in 1945 he went to interrogate Hermann Goering, and at the end the ex-Reichsmarschall made to shake hands, Winkle cried instead “Hals und Beinbruch!” And they both tentatively smiled.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21693807-mr-brown-regularly-defied-death-humour-and-smile-he-was-97-obituary-eric-winkle-brown/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

The Economist poll of forecasters, March averages

Output, prices and jobs

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21693998/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693994-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693995-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist poll of forecasters, March averages

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693997-economist-poll-forecasters-march-averages/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693993-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Mar 5th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693931-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Fri, 04 Mar 2016]

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



The primaries: Battle lines





E-commerce in emerging markets: India online





Iran’s election: Revolt against the reactionaries





Malaysia’s prime minister: The Najib effect





Concussion: Schools and hard knocks





Letters



Cannabis, freedom of press, US politics, diversity, Brexit, language, Cornwall: Letters to the editor





Briefing



Online retailing in India: The great race





United States



Super Tuesday: Goodbye, Rubio Tuesday





Abortion: Back in court





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





The primaries: The party declines





Lexington: The big schmooze





The Americas



Argentina’s debt: At last





Canadian foreign policy: Trudeaumania 2





The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act: Border babies v the IRS





Bello: An Olympic oasis





Asia



Malaysia’s scandals: The art of survival





Malaysia’s 1MDB affair: Follow the money, if you can





Sanctions on North Korea: Big bother





Confronting intolerance in Pakistan: A game of dare





Banyan: The last refuge





China



Politics: Loyal to the core





Hong Kong and the mainland: Fear-jerker





Middle East and Africa



Iran: Mr Rohani’s complicated victory





Syria’s fragile truce: Too many holes to last





Lebanon: When elephants battle





Egyptian television hosts: Sisi’s foaming mouthpieces





Electricity in Nigeria: Powerless





Film-making in Uganda: Lights, camera, no budget





African migration: To the land of good hope





Europe



France’s labour reforms: Working nine to four





The Irish election: Fragged





Refugees in Greece: Rising tide





Regulating EU pesticides: Fog of uncertainty





Charlemagne: The end of Heile Welt





Britain



Transport infrastructure: Life in the slow lane





Brexit brief: In, out, find a fib to shout





Asset sales: The great British sell-off





Educating the poorest children: Premium grade





Supermarkets: Fresh from the Amazon





Cross-channel travel: Allied landings





Bagehot: Unity in disunity





International



Internet governance: We the networks





The IETF: Mother of consensus





Business



Volkswagen: Emission impossible





Death of a fracking pioneer: A gambler on shale





Our glass-ceiling index: Still a man’s world





Road haulage: The appy trucker





Italian coffee firms: Not so espresso





Schumpeter: A rust-belt revival





Finance and economics



Emerging-market debt: The well runs dry





Buttonwood: Living off the people





Russia and sanctions: Toe in the water





High-denomination banknotes: Cash talk





Barclays Africa: Capital in fetters





The euro-zone economy: The new mediocre





Bilking investors: Rotten advice





Free exchange: Red ink rising





Science and technology



Concussion: Bang to rights





Rogue waves: Incoming!





Powering the internet of things: Passive voice





Economics: A far from dismal outcome





Anthropology: The medium is the messengers





Books and arts



America’s presidential election: Pushback





The art world: African horizons





Obituary



Obituary: Eric “Winkle” Brown: Know your enemy





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





The Economist poll of forecasters, March averages





Output, prices and jobs





Markets





