The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



Industrial unrest spread throughout France. A week after a blockade of oil refineries led to panic at the petrol pumps, the country was crippled by another round of strikes, as transport workers joined the picket lines. The dispute, over the government’s modest reforms to loosen labour-market restrictions, has pitted unionised workers against the Socialist government of François Hollande. See here and here.

The UN’s refugee agency reported that at least 880 migrants were feared drowned in a single week in the Mediterranean. In the first five months of 2016, 2,510 had died trying to make the crossing to Europe, up by 35% compared with the same period last year.



In Brussels the European Commission issued a formal objection to changes made by the Polish government in December to Poland’s constitutional court, which potentially endanger the rule of law. The government, led by the Eurosceptical Law and Justice party, now has to address the criticisms; failure to do so could lead to sanctions or to Poland losing its voting rights in the European Union.

After two decades of work, Switzerland officially opened the Gotthard base train tunnel, the world’s longest, at an event attended by European leaders, including Angela Merkel. At 57.5km (35 miles) the Gotthard base is 7km longer than the Channel Tunnel. When it starts operating in December it will increase the capacity for transporting freight along the Rotterdam-to-Genoa corridor.

Breaking the rules

Luis Almagro, the secretary-general of the Organisation of American States, called an emergency meeting to consider suspending Venezuela under the organisation’s “democratic charter”. He is the first head of the OAS to invoke the charter against the will of a member state. But a group of countries led by Argentina is seeking to delay the meeting in order to allow more time for mediation between Venezuela’s populist government and the opposition.

Brazil’s interim anti-corruption minister, Fabiano Silveira, resigned after recordings were leaked in which he appears to advise a high-ranking politician on how to defend himself in an investigation of the multibillion-dollar Petrobras scandal. He is the second minister to resign in similar circumstances since Michel Temer became Brazil’s interim president in May. See article.

Still defiant, but going to jail



Hissène Habré, the president of Chad from 1982 to 1990, was found guilty of crimes against humanity, rape and torture by a court in Senegal set up under the auspices of the African Union. Around 40,000 people died under the dictator’s reign of terror before he fled Chad for exile in Senegal. He is the first ex-head of state to be convicted in another country’s national court-system, rather than at a special tribunal. See article.

Uganda announced it has cut all military ties with North Korea after international pressure. It used to buy rifles and hire military instructors from the dictatorship.

Mohamed Kuno, the plotter behind the attacks on Garissa University in Kenya last year in which 148 people were murdered, was killed in Somalia, according to officials.

Fighter jets bombed Idlib, a rebel-held provincial capital in northern Syria, killing over 20 people. Russia denied it was responsible for what was the heaviest bombardment of the city since a partial ceasefire was declared last February. See article.

Iran said it was banning its citizens from joining the pilgrimage to Mecca in September in protest at Saudi Arabia’s “obstacles”. Hundreds of Iranians were among some 2,400 pilgrims killed in last year’s stampede at Mecca, but the two countries have failed to agree on compensation.

Libyan forces pushed Islamic State fighters back from two coastal towns near oil installations, reducing its control of the Mediterranean shore.

Escalating tensions

South Korean officials said that North Korea tried to launch a missile from its east coast, which flew for a few seconds before exploding. China urged calm. Barack Obama called North Korea “a big worry”.

Rodrigo Duterte, president-elect of the Philippines, was embroiled in more controversy. Just days after a reporter was killed in Manila he said, “If you’re an upright journalist, nothing will happen to you,” but “just because you’re a journalist, you are not exempted from assassination if you’re a son of a bitch.”

Prosecutors in Singapore opened a money-laundering probe into 1MDB, a Malaysian state-investment firm. It is the city-state’s biggest-ever inquiry of its kind. Bail was denied to a former wealth manager at the branch of a Swiss private bank, who faces charges in connection with the investigation.

China’s capital, Beijing, is planning to introduce a congestion charge, possibly later this year, according to state media. The rapid growth of a car-owning middle class has reduced traffic in parts of the city to a crawl during peak hours. Cars are already sometimes banned from being used at certain periods of the week.

America’s defence secretary, Ashton Carter, said China could be erecting a “great wall of self-isolation” by undercutting principles that other countries have sought to establish for use of the seas, the internet and management of the global economy, which reflected “the region’s distant past, rather than the principled future”. China responded by saying that some Americans’ minds were “stuck in the cold war”.

Not letting the memory fade



Barack Obama visited Hiroshima, the first president of the United States to go there since America dropped an atom bomb on the city in August 1945. Mr Obama called again for a world free of nuclear weapons, though under his administration America has upgraded its nukes, as have Russia and China.

Donald Trump, the putative Republican candidate for president, announced that he would be in Scotland at the reopening of one of his golf courses on June 24th. The date, a day after Britain votes on whether to remain in the EU, may not be a coincidence. Although Mr Trump appears not to know the meaning of “Brexit” in interviews, he has expressed a desire that Britain should leave the club (Europe, not his golf club).



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21699980-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



In its latest twice-yearly global assessment, the OECD warned that the world economy is “stuck in a low-growth trap”. The organisation said monetary policy alone could no longer be relied on to deliver growth and governments should be using the fiscal tools at their disposal, such as increases in investment spending, to stimulate demand. It also pointed to several downside risks to global growth, the most immediate of which would be if Britain votes to leave the European Union in a referendum on June 23rd.

The OECD forecast that Brazil’s economy will shrink by 4.3% this year. Official data this week showed that the country’s GDP contracted by 5.4% in the first quarter compared with the same period last year. Although bad, many economists were expecting the figure to be much worse. See article.

Shinzo Abe, Japan’s prime minister, delayed a controversial rise in the country’s sales tax until 2019. The increase, from 8% to 10%, was supposed to take place next April, having already been postponed once. An initial rise in the tax in 2014 was widely blamed for throwing Japan into recession. See article.

Tiger, tiger, burning bright

India’s economy grew by 7.9% in the first three months of the year compared with the same quarter in 2015. For the fiscal year ending March 31st GDP rose by 7.6%, the fastest pace in five years. The government was quick to take the credit, pointing to its pro-business reforms. But India’s impressive figures came with the usual warnings about their reliability. Other indicators, such as weak private investment and exports, suggest the economic picture is more mixed. See here and here.

Consumer spending in America grew by 1% in April compared with March, the biggest increase in nearly seven years. The data will be taken as more evidence that the economy is racing ahead by those who want the Federal Reserve to lift interest rates again this month.

Martin Senn, who stepped down as chief executive of Zurich Insurance in December, committed suicide at his holiday home in Klosters. Three years ago the company’s finance director also took his own life, prompting soul-searching about the stresses faced by busy executives. An independent investigation into that incident concluded that the insurer’s leadership was not putting undue pressure on management.

Yusuf Alireza unexpectedly quit as chief executive of Noble Group, Asia’s biggest commodities-trading firm. Noble, which is based in Hong Kong, has been hit by the slump in commodity prices and faces allegations from a research outfit that it overstated its assets, which the company denies. On the day that Mr Alireza’s departure was announced Noble also said it would sell its profitable American retail-energy business; the proceeds will go towards repairing its balance-sheet.

Debt spirals

The Obama administration detailed new rules to regulate providers of payday loans. Such lending is aimed at people on low incomes and attracts very high interest rates. The government wants lenders to do more to assess a borrower’s ability to repay.

Saudi Arabia’s sovereign-wealth fund ploughed $3.5 billion into Uber and got a seat on its board. It is the taxi-hailing app’s biggest single infusion of cash, and brings the total from its latest round of financing to $5 billion. The privately held firm is estimated to be worth more than General Motors.

SoftBank, a multinational telecoms and internet group that is based in Japan, decided to sell $7.9 billion-worth of the shares it holds in Alibaba, which will reduce its stake in the Chinese e-commerce company from 32% to 28%. SoftBank needs to repay the debt it accumulated to fund a number of big acquisitions, including the Sprint network in America. It is reportedly looking to offload some of its other stakes, including in Supercell, a Finnish mobile-gaming firm.

A jury in California rejected Oracle’s $9 billion claim that Googleinfringed its copyright onJava by wiring the software into Android phones. Oracle took ownership of Java when it bought Sun Microsystems in 2010 and it has been battling with Google in the courts ever since. The jury found that Google’s use of Java came under the “fair use” element of copyright law.

High maintenance

A former director at Barclays in New York was charged with allegedly passing inside information on forthcoming mergers to his plumber, who has pleaded guilty to using the illegal tips to make money on the markets. The director has yet to enter a plea. The plumber repaid the banker in part by refurbishing his bathroom, but this apparently did not include plugging financial leaks.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21699968-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21699994-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




Free speech: Under attack

Strikes in France: Don’t cave in, Mr Hollande

Rethinking the welfare state: Basically flawed

Indian banking: Of banks and bureaucrats

Shopping in America: Between Bentonville and Bezos

Fighting corruption: Cleaning up





Articles Sections Next

Free speech

Under attack

Curbs on free speech are growing tighter. It is time to speak out

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



IN A sense, this is a golden age for free speech. Your smartphone can call up newspapers from the other side of world in seconds. More than a billion tweets, Facebook posts and blog updates are published every single day. Anyone with access to the internet can be a publisher, and anyone who can reach Wikipedia enters a digital haven where America’s First Amendment reigns.

However, watchdogs report that speaking out is becoming more dangerous—and they are right. As our report shows, curbs on free speech have grown tighter. Without the contest of ideas, the world is timid and ignorant.

Free speech is under attack in three ways. First, repression by governments has increased. Several countries have reimposed cold-war controls or introduced new ones. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia enjoyed a free-for-all of vigorous debate. Under Vladimir Putin, the muzzle has tightened again. All the main television-news outlets are now controlled by the state or by Mr Putin’s cronies. Journalists who ask awkward questions are no longer likely to be sent to labour camps, but several have been murdered.

China’s leader, Xi Jinping, ordered a crackdown after he took over in 2012, toughening up censorship of social media, arresting hundreds of dissidents and replacing liberal debate in universities with extra Marxism. In the Middle East the overthrow of despots during the Arab spring let people speak freely for the first time in generations. This has lasted in Tunisia, but Syria and Libya are more dangerous for journalists than they were before the uprisings; and Egypt is ruled by a man who says, with a straight face: “Don’t listen to anyone but me.”

Words, sticks and stones

Second, a worrying number of non-state actors are enforcing censorship by assassination. Reporters in Mexico who investigate crime or corruption are often murdered, and sometimes tortured first. Jihadists slaughter those they think have insulted their faith. When authors and artists say anything that might be deemed disrespectful of Islam, they take risks. Secular bloggers in Bangladesh are hacked to death in the street (see article); French cartoonists are gunned down in their offices. The jihadists hurt Muslims more than any others, not least by making it harder for them to have an honest discussion about how to organise their societies.

Third, the idea has spread that people and groups have a right not to be offended. This may sound innocuous. Politeness is a virtue, after all. But if I have a right not to be offended, that means someone must police what you say about me, or about the things I hold dear, such as my ethnic group, religion, or even political beliefs. Since offence is subjective, the power to police it is both vast and arbitrary.

Nevertheless, many students in America and Europe believe that someone should exercise it. Some retreat into the absolutism of identity politics, arguing that men have no right to speak about feminism nor whites to speak about slavery. Others have blocked thoughtful, well-known speakers, such as Condoleezza Rice and Ayaan Hirsi Ali, from being heard on campus (see article).

Concern for the victims of discrimination is laudable. And student protest is often, in itself, an act of free speech. But university is a place where students are supposed to learn how to think. That mission is impossible if uncomfortable ideas are off-limits. And protest can easily stray into preciousness: the University of California, for example, suggests that it is a racist “micro-aggression” to say that “America is a land of opportunity”, because it could be taken to imply that those who do not succeed have only themselves to blame.

The inconvenient truth

Intolerance among Western liberals also has wholly unintended consequences. Even despots know that locking up mouthy but non-violent dissidents is disreputable. Nearly all countries have laws that protect freedom of speech. So authoritarians are always looking out for respectable-sounding excuses to trample on it. National security is one. Russia recently sentenced Vadim Tyumentsev, a blogger, to five years in prison for promoting “extremism”, after he criticised Russian policy in Ukraine. “Hate speech” is another. China locks up campaigners for Tibetan independence for “inciting ethnic hatred”; Saudi Arabia flogs blasphemers; Indians can be jailed for up to three years for promoting disharmony “on grounds of religion, race...caste...or any other ground whatsoever”.

The threat to free speech on Western campuses is very different from that faced by atheists in Afghanistan or democrats in China. But when progressive thinkers agree that offensive words should be censored, it helps authoritarian regimes to justify their own much harsher restrictions and intolerant religious groups their violence. When human-rights campaigners object to what is happening under oppressive regimes, despots can point out that liberal democracies such as France and Spain also criminalise those who “glorify” or “defend” terrorism, and that many Western countries make it a crime to insult a religion or to incite racial hatred.

One strongman who has enjoyed tweaking the West for hypocrisy is Recep Tayyip Erdogan, president of Turkey. At home, he will tolerate no insults to his person, faith or policies. Abroad, he demands the same courtesy—and in Germany he has found it. In March a German comedian recited a satirical poem about him “shagging goats and oppressing minorities” (only the more serious charge is true). Mr Erdogan invoked an old, neglected German law against insulting foreign heads of state. Amazingly, Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, has let the prosecution proceed. Even more amazingly, nine other European countries still have similar laws, and 13 bar insults against their own head of state.

Opinion polls reveal that in many countries support for free speech is lukewarm and conditional. If words are upsetting, people would rather the government or some other authority made the speaker shut up. A group of Islamic countries are lobbying to make insulting religion a crime under international law. They have every reason to expect that they will succeed.

So it is worth spelling out why free expression is the bedrock of all liberties. Free speech is the best defence against bad government. Politicians who err (that is, all of them) should be subjected to unfettered criticism. Those who hear it may respond to it; those who silence it may never find out how their policies misfired. As Amartya Sen, a Nobel laureate, has pointed out, no democracy with a free press ever endured famine.

In all areas of life, free debate sorts good ideas from bad ones. Science cannot develop unless old certainties are queried. Taboos are the enemy of understanding. When China’s government orders economists to offer optimistic forecasts, it guarantees that its own policymaking will be ill-informed. When American social-science faculties hire only left-wing professors, their research deserves to be taken less seriously.

The law should recognise the right to free speech as nearly absolute. Exceptions should be rare. Child pornography should be banned, since its production involves harm to children. States need to keep some things secret: free speech does not mean the right to publish nuclear launch codes. But in most areas where campaigners are calling for enforced civility (or worse, deference) they should be resisted.

Blasphemy laws are an anachronism. A religion should be open to debate. Laws against hate speech are unworkably subjective and widely abused. Banning words or arguments which one group finds offensive does not lead to social harmony. On the contrary, it gives everyone an incentive to take offence—a fact that opportunistic politicians with ethnic-based support are quick to exploit.

Incitement to violence should be banned. However, it should be narrowly defined as instances when the speaker intends to goad those who agree with him to commit violence, and when his words are likely to have an immediate effect. Shouting “Let’s kill the Jews” to an angry mob outside a synagogue qualifies. Drunkenly posting “I wish all the Jews were dead” on an obscure Facebook page probably does not. Saying something offensive about a group whose members then start a riot certainly does not count. They should have responded with words, or by ignoring the fool who insulted them.

In volatile countries, such as Rwanda and Burundi, words that incite violence will differ from those that would do so in a stable democracy. But the principles remain the same. The police should deal with serious and imminent threats, not arrest every bigot with a laptop or a megaphone. (The governments of Rwanda and Burundi, alas, show no such restraint.)

Areopagitica online

Facebook, Twitter and other digital giants should, as private organisations, be free to decide what they allow to be published on their platforms. By the same logic, a private university should be free, as far as the law is concerned, to enforce a speech code on its students. If you don’t like a Christian college’s rules against swearing, pornography and expressing disbelief in God, you can go somewhere else. However, any public college, and any college that aspires to help students grow intellectually, should aim to expose them to challenging ideas. The world outside campus will often offend them; they must learn to fight back using peaceful protests, rhetoric and reason.

These are good rules for everyone. Never try to silence views with which you disagree. Answer objectionable speech with more speech. Win the argument without resorting to force. And grow a tougher hide.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21699909-curbs-free-speech-are-growing-tighter-it-time-speak-out-under-attack/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Strikes in France

Don’t cave in, Mr Hollande

The game that really matters is the political one, not football

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



FRANCE has been looking forward to staging a big spectacle this month. Euro 2016, an international football tournament second in importance only to the World Cup, kicks off in the Stade de France near Paris on June 10th, the first of 51 matches around the country ending with the final on July 10th. But a spectacle of a different sort is attracting attention to France early, and for the wrong reasons: industrial unrest, which threatens to spread chaos and spoil the party.

Last week a blockade of oil refineries led to panic among motorists as petrol stations ran dry. This week the havoc spread to the railways. Pilots at Air France have voted to disrupt flights. A national day of strikes is threatened on June 14th, when the Senate, the upper house, is due to consider the changes to France’s labour laws which are at the centre of the dispute.

At issue are modest reforms designed to tackle the country’s high unemployment, which remains stubbornly at 10%. The law would ease rigid collective-bargaining rules and make firing workers slightly less complex. But this is not the direction of change that France’s Socialist president, François Hollande, promised when he was elected four years ago, pledging to fight austerity and soak the rich (see article). Fearful of a rebellion by left-wingers in his own party, his prime minister, Manuel Valls, decided to ram the measures through the National Assembly using executive powers that allow a law to be approved by a motion of confidence, rather than voted on directly. The country’s biggest union, the hard-left Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT), has opted to confront the government in the time-honoured French way—and at a moment of maximum pressure, with Euro 2016 looming.

This time, no surrender

The last thing the government wanted was further trouble for a tournament already beset by heightened concerns over terrorist attacks (this week the State Department warned would-be American travellers that Euro 2016 was a potential target). Mr Hollande, his approval rating at a dismal 13%, is poorly placed for a showdown. And the labour reforms, already diluted to an extent that has cost the support of the main employers’ groups, might seem an odd cause for the Socialist leader to fight for. At this point, with mass protests growing, past French administrations would have climbed down. Ten years ago it was a centre-right president, Jacques Chirac, who abandoned a controversial labour reform after weeks of student demonstrations. That followed similar retreats in 1986, 1994 and 1995.

Caving in once again in 2016 would be a mistake. The government should resist even the sort of messy compromise that seems to be tempting it as a means of avoiding disruption at Euro 2016—making concessions to the CGT on restructuring efforts for the national railways, say, in exchange for its acquiescence on the labour laws. Such a compromise would be against the spirit of the reforms, which aim to dilute the role of national law and branch agreements.

Mr Valls says that he is determined to hold his ground. If he and Mr Hollande want to show that they are serious about the change France needs, this is their moment. For once, they must be frank with the French about why these labour-market reforms are a step towards job creation and growth, and in everyone’s interest. Disruption of the coming football tournament would be a shame. But for the sake of France’s future, it is the political game that the government has to win.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21699916-game-really-matters-political-one-not-football-dont-cave-mr-hollande/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Rethinking the welfare state

Basically flawed

Proponents of a basic income underestimate how disruptive it would be

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



WORK is one of society’s most important institutions. It is the main mechanism through which spending power is allocated. It provides people with meaning, structure and identity. Yet work is a less generous, and less certain, provider of these benefits than it once was. Since 2000 economic growth across the rich world has failed to generate decent pay increases for most workers. Now there is growing fear of a more fundamental threat to the world of work: the possibility that new technologies, from machine learning to driverless cars, will cause havoc to employment.

Such worries have revived interest in an old idea: the payment of a “universal basic income”, an unconditional government payment given to all citizens, as a supplement to or replacement for wages (see article). On June 5th Swiss citizens will decide in a referendum whether to require their government to adopt a basic income. Finland and the Netherlands are planning limited experiments in which some citizens are paid a monthly income of roughly €1,000 ($1,100). People from all points on the ideological spectrum, from trade unionists to libertarians, are supporters. It is an idea whose day may come. But not soon.

The basic income is an answer to a problem that has not yet materialised. Worries that technological advance would mean the end of employment have, thus far, always proved misguided; as jobs on the farm were destroyed, work in the factory was created. Today’s angst over robots and artificial intelligence may well turn out to be another in a long line of such scares. A much-quoted study suggesting that 47% of today’s jobs could be automated in the next two decades looks too gloomy, for example (see article). Machines may one day be a match for many workers at most tasks. But that is not a reason to rush to adopt a basic income immediately.

If the need for a basic income is unproven, the costs are certain. Its universality is designed to encourage citizens to think of the payment as a basic right. However, universality also means that the policy would be fantastically costly. An economy as rich as America’s could afford to pay citizens a basic income worth about $10,000 a year if it began collecting about as much tax as a share of GDP as Germany (35%, as opposed to the current 26%) and replaced all other welfare programmes (including Social Security, or pensions, but not including health care) with the basic-income payment.

Such a big jump in the size of the state should make anyone wary. Even if levied efficiently, on an immovable asset like land, tax rises on this scale would have unpredictable effects on growth and wealth creation. Yet an income of $10,000 is still extremely low: it would leave many poorer people, such as those who rely on the state pension, worse off than they are now—at the same time as billionaires started getting more money from the state.

A universal basic income would also destroy the conditionality on which modern welfare states are built. During an experiment with a basic-income-like programme in Manitoba, Canada, most people continued to work. But over time, the stigma against leaving the workforce would surely erode: large segments of society could drift into an alienated idleness. Tensions between those who continue to work and pay taxes and those opting out weaken the current system; under a basic income, they could rip the welfare state apart.



Household income inequality: ladders to climb

Lastly, a basic income would make it almost impossible for countries to have open borders. The right to an income would encourage rich-world governments either to shut the doors to immigrants, or to create second-class citizenries without access to state support.

Basic questions

Make no mistake: modern welfare states leave plenty to be desired. Disability benefits are for many people an unsatisfactory version of a basic income, providing those who will no longer work with enough to get by. But rather than upend society with radical welfare reforms premised on a job-killing technological revolution that has not yet happened, governments should make better use of the tools they already have.

Labour-market reforms—to crack down on occupational licensing, say—would boost employment growth. More generous wage subsidies, such as an earned-income tax credit, would help people stay out of poverty. Long-overdue public investment in infrastructure would foster demand. Relaxing planning restrictions would create jobs in construction, and homes for workers in places with robust economies.

A universal basic income might just make sense in a world of technological upheaval. But before governments begin planning for a world without work, they should strive to make today’s system function better.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21699907-proponents-basic-income-underestimate-how-disruptive-it-would-be-basically-flawed/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Indian banking

Of banks and bureaucrats

Proposed reforms to India’s financial system are welcome but insufficient

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



BANKS are usually reliable barometers of the health of the economies they help finance. So news in recent days that India’s lenders have lost over 200 billion rupees ($3 billion) in the most recent quarter sits oddly with zippy growth in GDP of 7.9%. A revving economy may help the banks overcome their weakness. Far likelier is the opposite outcome: that the Indian economy ends up being damaged by its lenders.

Most of the trouble lies in India’s state-owned banks, a network of 27 listed but government-controlled entities that account for 70% of India’s banking system by assets (see article). Their share prices have tumbled ever since the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the central bank and regulator, sensibly forced them to confess to past mistakes. A staggering 17% of the loans they made in a mini credit boom around 2011 have either had to be written off or are likely to be.

Corporate lending, particularly to powerful Indian conglomerates, is at the root of the problem. Some of the dodgy loans have soured because of bad luck: mining projects have been hit by slumping commodity prices. Some reflect bad judgment: loans to infrastructure developers have proved bankers to be wildly optimistic about the ability to get stuff built in bureaucratic India. And some reflect bad faith: politicians in the previous government leant shamelessly on public banks to supply money to their cronies in business.

To its credit, the government of Narendra Modi, in office since 2014, has cracked down on this kind of corruption. Along with Raghuram Rajan, governor of the RBI, it has been willing to air the financial system’s problems. A recently passed (but not yet operational) bankruptcy law will give banks power to foreclose on defaulting borrowers, many of them tycoons who have historically run rings around their bankers. The government even wants to consolidate the 27 banks into less than half that number, over the objection of trade unions.

It needs to be still bolder. The priority is to be more scrupulous about cleansing the financial system of sour loans. The option of setting up a “bad bank” to remove the dud assets from ailing lenders’ balance-sheets has been ruled out. The funds earmarked to recapitalise the banks, which now have the most threadbare equity cushions in Asia, are insufficient. Credit-rating agencies are warning that the banking miasma is a threat to India’s sovereign rating.

Muddling through is a tried-and-tested strategy when it comes to struggling banks. Europe is a past master at this approach and the result is a banking industry that has been unable to support growth. This ossification may be starting in India, where loans to industry are growing by a meagre 2% a year. By contrast, America forced recapitalisations on its banks after the 2007-08 financial crisis—a painful exercise for all sides, but one that was rewarded with a swift return to health. America is the example for India to follow. An early confirmation of a second three-year term for Mr Rajan, who will otherwise depart in September, would send the right message.

Banks, not bureaucrats

A government that describes itself as “pro-market” should also lay out a path to the privatisation of state-owned lenders. It is no coincidence that private-sector banks have experienced only a small fraction of the losses of state-backed rivals. Mr Modi should also aim to scrap socialist-era rules that force all banks to make a fifth of their loans to support farming and that dictate where they can open branches. The government has made some welcome changes. But until it abandons its belief that a state-owned banking system is the right way to allocate credit, India’s banks will hold the economy back.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21699911-proposed-reforms-indias-financial-system-are-welcome-insufficient-banks-and-bureaucrats/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Shopping in America

Between Bentonville and Bezos

Lessons from the two giants of American retailing

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR decades a titan has towered over America’s shopping landscape. Walmart is not just the world’s biggest retailer but the biggest private employer and, by sales, the biggest company. Last year its tills rang up takings of $482 billion, about twice Apple’s revenue. But now the beast of Bentonville must cope with an unfamiliar sensation. After ruling as the undisputed disrupter of American retailing, Walmart finds itself being disrupted.

The source of the commotion is online shopping, specifically online shopping at Amazon. E-commerce accounted for $1 in every $10 that American shoppers spent last year, up by 15% from 2014. Amazon’s North American sales grew at about twice that rate. Walmart’s share of America’s retail sales, which stands at 10.6%, is still more than twice Amazon’s, but it peaked in 2009 at nearly 12%. In January Walmart said it would close 154 American stores. It may need to shut more.

Walmart’s “supercentres” once offered an unmatched combination of squeezed prices and expansive choice, but this formula is losing its magic (see article). Discounters and other competitors are rivalling Walmart’s low prices at the same time as Amazon’s warehouses can beat its range.

Amazon is also offering something different. Whereas Walmart has strived to help Americans save money, Amazon is obsessed with helping them save time. Amazon has become a new kind of big-box retailer, with warehouses placed strategically around America to speed deliveries to customers. Innovations such as Dash, which lets you press a button in your kitchen to order soap or coffee, could turn Amazon from an online store into something like a utility.

Walmart is fighting back. It is spending billions in the hope of growing even larger. It is offering more goods to more customers, in stores and online. With its legendary attention to detail, it is making its operations even more efficient. For instance, it will save more than 35 truckloads of buttercream icing this year, after spotting that its bakers were leaving too much icing in the bottom of their tubs. By using 27 different boxes rather than 12 to deliver online goods, the firm reckons it can save 7.2m cubic feet of cardboard boxes a year.

Last month sunny results sent up its share price by 10%. Yet far from offering comfort to other retailers hoping to knit together physical and online businesses, Walmart’s fightback shows how hard it will be for them to repel Amazon.

Other retailers cannot rival Walmart’s size—still its most potent weapon. Nine out of ten Americans live within ten miles of a store owned by Walmart. That gives it a unique advantage in e-commerce, because it can both ship from its stores and let consumers pick up baskets of goods that they ordered online. Its vast grocery business, which is harder to move online than non-perishable goods, provides further protection. Although investments have squeezed Walmart’s profits, the firm can afford to invest more than any other in information technology.

Space race

For smaller, worse-managed firms selling clothing, shoes and so on, the prognosis is bleaker. Since April 1st shares in some of America’s most famous retailers, including Macy’s, Gap and J.C. Penney, have plunged by more than 25%, in part because of the march of online firms. In the age of Amazon only those that offer better service, greater convenience or an experience that is hard to mimic online will do well. TJX, which offers brand-name goods at a discount, is thriving, because customers prefer hunting for treasures that are physically there in front of them. Customers come to Nike’s shops not just for trainers but for running clubs. Walmart is betting that it has the brawn and the brains to be in this group. However, others have less cause for hope.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21699913-lessons-two-giants-american-retailing-between-bentonville-and-bezos/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Fighting corruption

Cleaning up

More visible scandals may mean that a country is becoming less corrupt

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



A CAR slams into a tree at speed, and is crushed. Inside, the Romanian police find the body of the chief executive of a company that makes detergents for hospitals—one under investigation for watering down its products and leaving patients to die from drug-resistant infections. The Hexi Pharma scandal (see article) sounds like something out of “The Third Man”. For many foreigners, it confirms Romania’s reputation as a kleptocracy riddled with malfeasance and graft.

Romania is certainly rotten. But the Hexi Pharma affair is evidence of how much the country is doing to tackle corruption. After investigative journalists exposed the case in late April, it was quickly taken up by the judiciary. This has become much more independent under pressure from the European Union, which Romania joined in 2007. The new general prosecutor, appointed in April by a president elected on an anti-corruption platform, is pursuing Hexi Pharma zealously. Laura Codruta Kovesi, the dauntless head of the country’s anti-corruption directorate, says her agency is also investigating. Last year it prosecuted over 1,250 officials and helped force the prime minister from power. At last month’s global corruption-fighting summit in London, Ms Kovesi was treated as if she were a rock star.

It is a common paradox: the world often becomes aware of corruption when someone is doing something about it. That leads people to conclude that things are getting worse when they are, in fact, getting better. The incentives for countries can thus be perverse. Investors long shrugged off the graft that permeated Brazil’s political system. Then, in 2014, crusading prosecutors revealed that the state-owned oil company, Petrobras, had funnelled hundreds of millions of dollars to officials and parties in exchange for contracts. The next year Brazil’s score on the Corruption Perceptions Index compiled by Transparency International, a global watchdog, fell by five points.

Guatemala has suffered a similar fate. Since 2008 the country has hosted a pioneering UN-backed independent prosecuting agency known as CICIG. Last year it uncovered graft at the customs agency and brought down the president and vice-president. Yet in 2015 the country’s score on Transparency International’s index got worse. Dan Hough, a corruption expert at Sussex University, notes that Britain’s score on the Transparency International index declined after the parliamentary expenses scandal of 2009, though the excesses had been taking place for decades—and, in the scheme of things, Britain was not especially venal. It was the exposure, not the activity, that created the perception of corruption.

Make an honest country of them

The tendency to see countries as dirtier when they start to clean up will not surprise students of British or American history. The impression that both countries were unusually sleazy in the late 1800s is largely due to the rise of reform and progressive movements dedicated to making politics honest. The question is whether countries such as Romania, Brazil, Guatemala or China will be able to follow the same path.

They may not. The Orange revolution in Ukraine and the mani pulite (clean hands) prosecutions in Italy failed to sanitise those countries’ politics. Still, if a country like Romania is embroiled in scandals, voters and investors should applaud, not despair. When crooks make the front page, it is often because someone honest has put them there.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21699917-more-visible-scandals-may-mean-country-becoming-less-corrupt-cleaning-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




On anti-Semitism, Brexit, Ban Ki-moon, Jordan, referendums, egg shells: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

On anti-Semitism, Brexit, Ban Ki-moon, Jordan, referendums, egg shells

Letters to the editor

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



Anti-Semitism and the left

The Anti-Defamation League’s research confirms Bagehot’s assertion that anti-Semitic opinions are not widespread among the British public, but are disturbingly prevalent in Britain’s Muslim population (May 7th). ADL’s Global 100 poll, released in 2014, showed just 8% of British respondents agreeing with a majority of the 11 anti-Semitic stereotypes presented, compared with 27% in Germany and 37% in France. Our follow-up poll in 2015 showed a slight increase to 12%, though the score for British Muslims was 54%.

Although we did not ask about political affiliation in our polls, we have long observed on the far-left in Britain, as in America and elsewhere, a demonisation of Israel with Nazi analogies and conspiracy theories and broad tolerance within those political circles for anti-Semitic statements. If these noxious attitudes cannot be eliminated, they must be criticised and kept out of the political mainstream.

ERIC HORODAS

Chair

International Affairs

Anti-Defamation League

New York

It is quite devastating that only 52% of British Muslims think homosexuality should be legal (“Integration nation”, May 21st). However, in 1983 68% of British Catholics said homosexuality was mostly or always wrong, according to the British Social Attitudes study. By 2013 the figure had dropped to 2%. Will living in an increasingly liberal Britain cause Muslim attitudes to change, just as it did for Catholics?

TIM RICHARDSON

Melbourne, Australia





Farmers’ views on Brexit

Your Brexit brief on agriculture (“We plough the fields and scarper”, May 21st) referred to two surveys which suggested most farmers back the Leave campaign. The surveys had a potential for self-selecting bias. Farmers certainly have diverse views on whether Britain should continue its membership of the EU. Our own telephone poll suggests over half the members of the National Farmers’ Union plan to vote to remain in the EU and over a quarter may vote to leave. But many are undecided.

Because farmers want more information we commissioned our own impact assessment, referred to in your article, of potential Brexit scenarios. Farmers’ key concerns are access to the single market, fairness with respect to farm-support payments, proportionate and science-based rules and access to labour.

There is a lot of uncertainty. We need the best possible access to the EU single market and as yet no clear model of future trade with the EU has emerged. The Leave campaign has officially committed to continuing farm-support payment at its current rate, but they have also suggested other uses for the money.

For those who advocate that we stay within the EU, it is clear that there is massive scope for improvements. We want to see proportionate and science-based regulations that allow us to compete fairly in the EU and international markets. What is the EU’s strategy for achieving this?

MEURIG RAYMOND

President

National Farmers’ Union

Stoneleigh Park, Warwickshire

I think we need a referendum to decide if we should Remain in or Leave the Eurovision Song Contest.

RAY ROBERTS

Budapest





* Bagehot reported (21st May) that in a “reconciliation reshuffle” Boris Johnson may become home secretary. This would only add to the already considerable entity that is Mr Johnson’s ego, in particular the side of it that is convinced he is the modern-day Churchill—who was also home secretary from early 1910 to late 1911. If he has to be given a position, far better would be secretary of state for energy and climate change, perhaps then he would give up the EU fight and return to his work on London’s air quality.

It would also be a great blow to Mr Johnson’s ego to discover that his seniors think he would be far better suited to a post once held by Ed Miliband, than one held by Churchill, the political colossus he tries to imitate.

GABRIEL OSBORNE

Bristol





Ban Ki-moon’s record

Your readers deserve a more complete portrait of Ban Ki-moon’s tenure as UN secretary-general (“Master, mistress or mouse?”, May 21st). He has indeed helped secure consensus on the landmark agreement on climate change. But Mr Ban has also championed women’s equality and backed his words with actions, shattering glass-ceilings across the UN by appointing a record number of women to high-level positions.

In the face of often unrelenting opposition, Mr Ban is a staunch advocate of human rights on contentious issues such as xenophobia in Europe, the persecution of gays and lesbians in Africa or the denial of the Holocaust in Iran. He has modernised the UN by strengthening peacekeeping operations, streamlining the bureaucracy and overhauling its IT systems. Never has so much information about UN budgets and activities, and even personal financial disclosures of senior officials, been so readily available.

As one who grew up as a recipient of UN aid in war-ravaged Korea, Ban Ki-moon speaks from the heart. This helps him connect where it counts most: with the suffering peoples of the world.

STEPHANE DUJARRIC

Spokesman for the UN secretary-general

New York





Blessed are the peaSEZsemakers

* Your article misses key flaws in the “Jordan Compact’s” proposed model for addressing the refugee crisis in host countries (“Peace, bread and work”, May 7th). The model suggests that the establishment of special economic zones (SEZs) with investment incentives such as access to EU markets will deliver a virtuous cycle of foreign direct investment, export-led growth and employment opportunities for Jordanians and Syrian refugees. Provided refugees can work in the zones legally, they will convert from a burden to a “development opportunity”. However, six SEZs already exist in Jordan. In addition to exemption from income tax and customs duties they enjoy highly liberalised trade relations with the EU thanks to a series of free trade agreements since 1997. Yet they are nearly empty: the largest has the capacity to employ 100,000 people, but currently only employs 10,000.



Jordan must take advantage of the current surge in international support by boldly reforming its wider business environment, including tackling its inefficient public sector, costly energy supply and mediocre education system. The key reform proposed in the “Jordan Compact” is a minor trade concession for SEZs exports to the EU that will mainly apply to textiles. This will not attract the promised foreign investment that will lift Jordan from the crisis.



HANNAH TIMMIS

Manager

Afghanistan, Middle East & North Africa

Adam Smith International

London





Show some initiative

James Madison may have had a sceptical regard for referendums (“Let the people fail to decide”, May 21st). But Thomas Jefferson was more insightful:

I know of no safe depository of the ultimate powers of the society but the people themselves: and if we think them not enlightened enough to exercise their control with a wholesome discretion, the remedy is not to take it from them, but to inform their discretion by education.

David Cameron’s principal shortcoming, and that of the many politicians who default to plebiscites when they lack the courage to decide, is the failure to educate.

GREG PARSTON

London



Referendums may indeed be the best way to decide “once-in-a-generation national questions”. It is, however, unfair if those who support a change, such as the Leave campaign on Britain and the EU and the Yes campaign on Scottish independence, then clamour for a second referendum if they do not get their way the first time. Their opponents have no such option: if they lose, the decision is irrevocable. There should, therefore, be a rule that such a referendum can only be held every, say, 30 years.

ANTONY BLACK

Dundee





I am the eggman



Recycling egg shells for use in plastics put me in mind of the war years (“A cracking yarn”, May 14th). My aunt lived in the country and kept chickens. She would wash and grate the shells until they were very fine and she would then put the eggshell powder into various foods, such as homemade jams. She said she would get extra calcium for her bones. She never got osteoporosis or any other bone problem and lived until she was 88.

I never ate her eggs as she fed her hens on fish meal made from fish bones she grated and I could taste the fish.

ROSEMARIE PALLISER

Aigues-Mortes, France

All yolks aside, but shelling out money for the R&D of new products is not really such an eggcellent idea. As a poultry grower, I feed the shells of my chicken’s eggs back to them for the minerals needed for the next clutch. Since your scientist has to keep buying unshelled eggs, selling them back to a supplier might be a more albumentary solution.

VI NOVIELLO

Long Branch, New Jersey

* Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21699889-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Universal basic incomes: Sighing for paradise to come





Articles Sections Next

Universal basic incomes

Sighing for paradise to come

Arguments for a state stipend payable to all citizens are being heard more widely

Jun 4th 2016 | Maricá, Olten and Zurich | From the print edition



THE future is a paradise of technological abundance, some say, in which paid work is optional and no one goes without. A tiny glimpse at what that future might look like is on offer in the village of Maricá, a small seaside town just a short drive from Rio de Janeiro. In December 2015 each of the town’s 150,000 residents became eligible to receive a monthly payment worth just under $3, financed with the help of Maricá’s share of Rio state’s oil royalties.

The sum is small but for Washington Quaquá, the mayor of Maricá and architect of the payments plan, the idea is a big one. He says he is guided by “an ethical precept” that may realise his lifelong dream of an egalitarian society. His programme is an example of a “universal basic income”: a no-strings cash payment to everybody in a given jurisdiction.

The idea has a long pedigree, endorsed by great figures of the enlightenment such as the Marquis de Condorcet and Thomas Paine. Three centuries on, a handful of governments around the world, mostly in rich countries, are launching experimental basic-income programmes, or at least considering the idea. Finland will roll out a trial programme next year, in which some citizens will receive unconditional cash grants of up to €800 ($900) per month. Similar programmes are being mulled in several Dutch cities. On June 5th the Swiss will vote on a constitutional change to introduce a basic income for all citizens.

Political activists and thinkers across a broad array of ideologies, from libertarians to social liberals to the hard left, are intrigued, or even keen. The Cato Institute, an American think-tank which spends much of its time calling for a smaller state, published a sympathetic analysis of the policy in 2015. It feels that, though it might prefer a world with no government redistribution, a basic income is the simplest, least intrusive and least condescending way to provide redistribution if redistribution there must be.

American liberals including Paul Krugman, an economist and columnist, and Robert Reich, a former labour secretary, are also interested. Along with writers such as Anthony Atkinson, a British economist, and Andy Stern, an American union leader, they see a basic income (in some form) as a way of expanding the welfare state to reduce growing inequality (see chart 1). The idea also has some support in the further reaches of the left as, in the words of a paper published in 1986, “A capitalist road to communism”.



Unsurprisingly, given the Utopian and libertarian flavour of the idea, Silicon Valley is interested, too. This is not, though, simply faddishness. The idea of a universal basic income has long been tied up with worries about accelerating technological change. The basic income, or “social credit”, put forward in the 1920s by C.H. Douglas, a British polymath, was born of the worry that technology was opening up a gap between total output and the income earned by workers. He suggested that governments could make up the gap by issuing every citizen with a “national dividend”. (The first novel by Robert Heinlein, a canonical 20th-century science-fiction writer much rated in libertarian circles, consists largely of arguments in favour of social credit and nudism, both of which he saw as central to his Utopia.)

Some of the people behind today’s technological change see universal basic income in similar terms—a way of assuring a living for all in a world of robots and artificial intelligence. To the extent that such disruption is part of their business model, this beneficence is also a way to neutralise complaints about the havoc their innovations may wreak. Albert Wenger, a partner at Union Square Ventures, a technology-oriented venture-capital firm, argues in favour of the policy in a new book “World After Capital”. Sam Altman, the founder of Y Combinator, a startup incubator, plans to pilot a basic income of $1,000-2,000 a month in Oakland, a city in California. “Fifty years from now...it will seem ridiculous that we used fear of not being able to eat as a way to motivate people,” is how Mr Altman puts it.

Startup statists

Backers make other arguments, too. Workers could take more time to train and explore different careers. The security of a basic income could boost enterprise, because leaving a job and using up savings to open a business are more palatable prospects in such a world. So is finding fulfilment in unremunerated ways.

A basic income could also help to right certain old injustices. Women do the lion’s share of the world’s unpaid labour. In most of the world, they work more hours a day than men do, but command a lower share of financial resources, largely because they take on more unpaid child care and responsibilities for the family home. A universal basic income would shift purchasing power toward people who do work which, though valuable to society, is not rewarded financially.

As well as offering the possibility of a simpler and perhaps fairer welfare state, supporters of a universal basic income say it answers fears that paid work will break down as a mechanism for distributing purchasing power. In recent years, across many rich economies, the wages earned by the typical worker have grown pitifully slowly—and by less than GDP per person (see chart 2).



Low wages appear to be necessary to coax firms into taking on new employees, often in very low-productivity jobs that could potentially be done by machines instead. This could be a temporary phenomenon; the workers at the bottom of the income scale may eventually shift into better-paid work, or future generations may cleverly invent new sources of employment for themselves. If it is a permanent state of affairs, though, then a basic income might be a way of making sure that everyone shares in society’s progress, at least to some extent.

But how such a step might be made to work, and what harmful effects it might have, are still open questions. The Swiss government, which is arguing for a “no” vote in this month’s referendum, worries that a basic income would be ruinously expensive and morally corrosive, leaving the country with unsustainable public finances and a society of unmotivated loafers. Both supporters and critics agree that universal basic incomes would challenge the centrality of paid work to the way people live. A world with them in place could be as different from today’s as that of public education and guaranteed pensions was in the 1950s, compared with a century before, when the loss of a job could mean starvation for a worker and his family.

Welfare review

The reforms introduced by Otto von Bismarck, the German chancellor who created the world’s first modern welfare state, were intended to undermine support for socialism and build working-class backing for the German empire. The system he put in place was conceived as an insurance against the woes of hardship, rather than as a natural entitlement. Over the following century, as trade unions sought a better deal for labourers, work was a central principle of organisation. Those reforms created the developed countries’ modern welfare systems: some sort of unemployment benefit, health-care provision, universal education and state pensions.

Universal-income ideas such as those championed by Douglas were for the most part peripheral during the rise of the welfare state. In the 1970s, in part because of flaws that were becoming apparent in the existing structures, they briefly interested mainstream policymakers. They were experimented with in Canada, where Douglas’s ideas had always had a following. In Alaska a basic income was discussed as a way to distribute oil riches. George McGovern, the Democratic candidate in the 1972 American election, proposed a “demogrant” of $1,000 ($5,700 at today’s prices) to every citizen, a policy drawn up by James Tobin, an economist.

McGovern lost 49 of the 50 states, but a reform to the welfare state that was similar, in some ways, still went ahead. In 1975 Congress created the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). It was a sort of “negative income tax”, an idea promulgated by the economist Milton Friedman, which provided support in inverse proportion to a worker’s income. Like Tobin’s demogrant, Friedman’s idea was in part a response to worries about the “poverty trap” in existing welfare systems. The way that benefit programmes cut off at particular income thresholds provided a strong incentive for recipients not to earn too much.

The demogrant avoided the trap by not phasing out benefits as incomes rose. The EITC lessened it by tapering away only gradually. For the unemployed, this increased incentives to work by amplifying the income earned by the lowest-paid. Two things made the second policy much easier to sell: it was cheaper, and it was only available to those in work. Britain, France and others adopted EITC-like working-tax credits in the 1990s and 2000s. Wage subsidies were increasingly seen as important for battling poverty.

Today three decades of unequal economic growth, the pain that followed the financial crisis in 2008 and the disruptive potential of digital technologies have once again focused attention on the welfare of the struggling working class. One response, in much of the developed world, has been to raise minimum wages. But economists warn that minimum pay can only rise so much before employment suffers. Rising labour costs encourage firms to look for labour-saving alternatives, an investment in productivity which might be good for GDP but would exacerbate the shortage of jobs for less-skilled workers.

Populist politicians argue, wrongly if seductively, that the key to boosting worker welfare is to undo the liberalising measures of the previous generation. Supporters of a universal basic income, on the other hand, claim that the re-engineering of the welfare system they envisage could allow societies to enjoy the fruits of dynamic economies while also ensuring they are widely spread.

Their argument runs as follows. The wage-subsidy approach to welfare has gained ground because it has real effects on poverty, it maintains incentives to work and it doesn’t cost all that much. America’s spending on its EITC programme, for example, is just 8% of its spending on public pensions. But it has three problems, too. Though such subsidies reduce the poverty-trap effect, they do not eliminate it; generous wage subsidies that phase out as incomes rise reduce the incentive to find better-paying work, because some of the gain received from a raise is offset by a reduction in benefits. A gently sloping phase-out answers the problem to some extent, but it also increases costs, with more of the workforce qualifying for at least some of the benefit.

Those cost increases highlight a second concern, of political economy. The targeting which keeps these programmes cheap also limits their constituencies. That makes them cuttable. In recent years austerity-minded governments have been more willing to gut means-tested welfare payments than to take an axe to entitlements such as universal pensions. It is harder to build broad support for programmes which, by design, are aimed at a small underprivileged part of the citizenry. Programmes for the poor, who have little to spend on lobbying and also tend to vote less, are vulnerable to being chopped.

Perhaps most importantly, such tax-credit policies begin to break down if there is no prospect of jobs that make use of people’s skills. When manufacturing jobs that were the keystone to a regional economy move abroad, for example, people with few prospects look for alternative means of support, such as disability benefits. In most age groups in Britain the share of population claiming disability benefits is systematically and substantially above the level of the 1980s, despite efforts to control growth in disability-benefit costs. Since 1988, America’s disability payments have risen from one in ten of every social-security dollar spent to one in five. Those unable to find work or get on such programmes sink deeper into poverty. In America many are slipping through the cracks of a conditional welfare system: the number of people living in extreme poverty rose sharply between 1996 and 2011, from 636,000 to 1.5m, according to Luke Shaefer of the University of Michigan and Kathryn Edin of Harvard University.

A universal basic income might solve these problems. As Tobin argued, a flat basic-income payment eliminates the poverty trap. Since the benefit would not phase out, there would be no reduced incentive to seek additional work hours or income. Because it would be paid to all citizens, its advocates hope that it would enjoy the political support of an entitlement programme, and come to be seen as a right of citizenship. And it would clearly benefit people with no prospect of work, and thus most of those in extreme poverty.



But that still leaves very hard questions, of which the toughest is cost. Any universal basic income generous enough to make a dent in poverty would be very expensive. As Mr Atkinson notes, a universal basic income worth a given percentage of the average income (measured as GDP per person) requires a proportional rise in tax collection as a share of GDP. In other words, a basic income of 15% of average income would require tax revenues of 15% of national income dedicated to it. That is a lot of tax for not much basic income (only about $8,000 in America, in this example).

Some of the money needed could be drawn from other welfare programmes displaced by the basic income. The most generous states in the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries, spend nearly a third of GDP on social programmes. In Finland, where such spending, less the share devoted to health, accounts for about a quarter of GDP, dividing what is spent across all citizens would yield a payment of close to $10,000 for every man, woman and child; in America the same exercise would yield a payment per person of about $6,000 (see chart 3).



This would transfer a lot of money from today’s welfare recipients to people already in work. The largest group of losers would be old-age pensioners, the people who, in most countries, already enjoy a basic income (one that in America costs more than ten times as much as EITC does).

It is possible that providing a less generous basic income to all could help sever the link between receipt of a pension and retirement, encouraging more of a balance between work and leisure for adults of all ages. It might also help the governments of countries with ageing populations manage demographic change, by encouraging older workers to stay working for longer, and by balancing the fiscal burden of government income support across people’s lives. But politically, the scope for reductions in pensions is likely to be slim. It is hard to see how a universal basic income of even moderate ambition would not require new forms and levels of taxation.

As a share of GDP, taxes on income and profits in the OECD range from about 12% in America and Britain to 33% of GDP in Denmark. The share has fallen as often as it has risen over the past decade or two. It is plausible that the tax take, especially in the countries with the lowest share, could go up without many adverse effects. If America is unlikely to become Denmark, it might nevertheless become Australia, with a 15% share of GDP taken in such taxes. That would represent half a trillion extra dollars a year.

Raising taxes on income and profits has its risks, though. It increases incentives for avoidance and evasion, and reduces the incentives for the most productive workers to work and for companies to invest. An alternative would be to increase income through more efficient taxes, such as value-added tax (VAT). Most European countries raise at least 10% of GDP through taxes on goods and services, primarily VAT. America, in contrast, raises only 4.5% through taxes on goods and services, none of which is collected in VAT form. But although a VAT is efficient, it is also regressive, hitting poorer people relatively harder.

In some places payments for natural resources could provide some funding. Oil revenue pays for most of the Maricá scheme, and allows Alaska’s Permanent Fund to pay an annual dividend to each of the state’s citizens (last year’s was $2,072). Not every state has a commodity that it can tax that way; but every single state has perhaps the lowest-hanging of all taxable fruit—land.

A land tax has the advantage of being progressive. Unlike taxes on income, land taxes do nothing to encourage apathy or avoidance; rather, they provide an incentive to owners to get the most out of their property. And they can also be lucrative. The sum value of all land in America, according to one recent estimate, is about $23 trillion, or 1.6 times GDP. A land-value tax of 5% would raise a little over $1 trillion, which works out at about $3,500 for every American, or $8,500 for every American household.

Thomas Paine would have relished such a prospect. His case for a basic income justified it as a quid pro quo for the existence of private property. Before the advent of private property, he believed, all men had been able to support themselves through hunting and forage. When that resort is taken from them, they should be compensated by means of a “natural inheritance” of £15 to be paid to all men every year, financed from a “ground rent” charged to property owners.

What might have seemed like common sense to Paine, though, might not be so immediately appealing to those hit by a trillion-dollar land-tax bill. Acceptable levels of taxation do change over time. The original growth of the welfare state provides an illuminating example. At the turn of the 20th century, government spending was about 15% of GDP in Britain and less than 10% of GDP in America. By 1960, those percentages had risen to nearly 35% in Britain and 30% in America.

But the fact that such an increase has been carried off once does not mean it can be again. Today’s combination of stagnant pay and falling labour-force participation is serious, but it is not on a par with, say, the Depression or the world wars that bracketed it, which drove the expansion of the state’s role in the economy (see chart 4). Things will need to become a lot worse to generate political support for the radical changes to budgets and tax systems a universal basic income requires.



And what do you do?

Cost is not the only concern about a universal basic income. Many worry that a general disengagement from work might prove alienating, and money for nothing socially corrosive. (Some on the left also fear that, by weakening the power of labour and the sense of solidarity that comes with it, a basic income would lead to the political and economic irrelevance of the working class.)

People rely on work to provide order to their day and purpose to their lives, not just for money to pay for food and shelter, and may not find purposeful, satisfying alternatives in its absence. Analysis of time use by Americans who suffered a loss of work during the recent recession found that about half of the spare time went to leisure, mostly sleeping and watching television. In general retirees who continue to work part-time are happier than those who do not work, though it is worth noting that this is not the case for those who feel forced to keep working to make ends meet.

In experiments with a guaranteed income in Manitoba, a Canadian province, in the 1970s overall labour-market participation did not change very much. Later analysis has suggested that there were widespread non-economic benefits—less use of mental-health services, fewer hospital visits and so on. But such experiments, limited in space and duration and subject to what is known as the “Hawthorne effect”—change that comes about simply because people know there is an intervention afoot—may not be good guides to the effects of a universal system.

Plenty also fret that a world of universal incomes would mean even higher hurdles to migration than today’s. The evidence that benefits are a draw to immigrants is thin—they care more about jobs than the generosity of the welfare system. But if rich countries began offering basic incomes generous enough to live on, migrants might instead be drawn by the money on offer. (The payments being considered in Finland and the Netherlands are vastly larger than the tiny income available in Maricá, for example.) Rich countries would face the choice of paying generous benefits to immigrants, shutting borders, or tolerating the growth of a second-class citizenry of foreign workers without recourse to the welfare state.



These, then, are the questions swirling around Switzerland ahead of its referendum. The Swiss initiative does not look likely to pass, both because of its expense and the fear of subsidising layabouts. Though surveys show that only 2% of the Swiss think that a universal income would stop them working themselves, about a third think it would scupper the work ethic of others.

Payment protection

Hans Peter Rubi, a 64-year-old in the small town of Olten, has no such worries. He was given a pension of SFr2,600 on being sent into early retirement, and became an entrepreneur. “After doing nothing, you get bored—people want more. After a while of boredom you might become innovative.” He has used his pension to start an exotic ice-cream parlour. The avocado ice cream is proving difficult to perfect, and the innovation of staying open through the winter (Olten’s established ice-creamery closes) has yet to pay off. He needs a good summer for the business to be profitable; but he can afford to fail. “My security now is that I have my basic income. It gives a security to take a basic challenge.”



Household income inequality: ladders to climb

In a world of universal basic incomes, it is possible that the streets would be lined with mostly empty ice-cream shops, as people used society’s largesse on projects no one really needs. It is also possible that such stipends would give workers the boost in incomes they have been missing in recent decades, and the additional leisure time to enjoy it, thus helping to make businesses like Mr Rubi’s profitable.

It may be, too, that the need for a universal basic income never becomes truly urgent. Silicon Valley visionaries could be wrong in their belief that a thriving 21st-century economy will be one where jobs go to robots faster than new jobs can be created, and that a universal income is the way to make that transition humane. The capitalist system has been remarkably good at finding new ways to work as it gets rid of old ones.

But the past is not always a good guide to the future. The welfare system grew up to service a model of industrial modernity. It is failing the poorest in society and may be at risk from technological upheaval. It may yet need a radical redesign.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21699910-arguments-state-stipend-payable-all-citizens-are-being-heard-more-widely-sighing/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




Bernie Sanders: California, here we come

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

Chicago: Predictable policing

Refugees: Their own public Idaho

Lexington: Trumpology





Articles Sections Next

Bernie Sanders

California, here we come

The Democratic challenger thinks he still has a shot at the nomination. He’s wrong

Jun 4th 2016 | OAKLAND | From the print edition



IN A dismal primary season, the enthusiasm and moral purpose of Bernie Sanders’s clamorous supporters has been uplifting. Reflected in the vast crowds that have flocked to hear the crotchety senator from Vermont, and the vaster sums he has raised—over $210m so far, mostly in donations of less than $30—it suggests that America’s democracy remains vigorous. It is also a tribute to the clarity and justified outrage with which he has described problems from corrupt campaign financing to choking student debt. Yet all things have their measure, and the outpouring of Bernie-love offered up by a crowd of 20,000 Sandernistas, at an open-air rally in Oakland on May 30th, seemed mostly inane.

As Mr Sanders clambered onto a wooden stage, wearing his customary $99 suit, with a face burnt purple by the sun and broadly grinning, his adorers screamed and showered him with flowers. “Bern-ie! Bern-ie!” they chanted, yelling louder whenever the senator waved or chortled to acknowledge the adulation of which he, a septuagenarian social democrat, is such an unlikely object. Feeling the Bern has become for the most devoted Sandernistas an all-consuming pleasure; “Bernie or bust”, “Bern the system”, their slogans read. “He’s the only politician who speaks of the downtrodden,” said Jennifer, an actor, who swore she would write Bernie onto the ballot paper in November even if his rival, Hillary Clinton, wins the Democratic nomination. And if that should hand victory to Mr Trump? “That’s her problem,” she shrugged.

As almost anyone would, Mr Sanders, who a year ago was hardly known to most voters, shows signs of believing the hype. He revels in the adulation more visibly than he used to. More important, and bizarrely, he appears sincerely to believe he can win. With a big turnout in California, the biggest Democratic primary, he told the crowd in Oakland, “We are going to capture a very good majority” of the state’s 475 pledged delegates, “then we will go into the Democratic convention with a great deal of momentum and we will come out with the nomination.” He is currently trailing Hillary Clinton in the Golden State by around seven percentage points: a formidable gap, given her advantage with the Hispanic voters who make up over a quarter of its electorate, but closable. All the same, Mr Sanders’s prediction seems so unlikely as to be almost delusional.



He has done unexpectedly well; but Mrs Clinton has never looked especially threatened by him. Mr Sanders has won almost 10m votes; she has won 13m. The senator’s best, perhaps only, hope of victory lay in mobilising his advantage among white liberals and in caucuses, where the result can be swayed by a small number of well-organised diehards, for an early assault. He aimed to win the first three contests, in Iowa, New Hampshire and Nevada. This, he hoped, would shatter the aura of inevitability that was his opponent’s greatest advantage. But Mrs Clinton won in Iowa and Nevada, gained massive momentum in the southern states that followed, and so built a lead of around 300 pledged delegates—twice as big as Mr Obama ever managed over her in 2008. And that is without factoring in her much bigger advantage among the 715 Democratic officer-bearers, or “superdelegates”, who will also vote for the candidate at the convention; 543 have already come out for her.

In short, Mr Sanders appears to have lost. Yet he is hurting Mrs Clinton by refusing to acknowledge this. The excitement around his campaign always showed up her woodenness as a campaigner; it takes a lot of loud pop music to work up an atmosphere at Mrs Clinton’s rallies. His persistence in winning clusters of smallish states that play to his strengths—typically those, recently including Washington, Utah and Idaho, that hold caucuses—has meanwhile given his supporters, and some journalists, an exaggeratedly rosy view of his progress. For the most part, this has been to Mrs Clinton’s advantage; it suits her to be seen fighting. Yet it is has latterly denied her the boost in the polls that is customary for a presumptive nominee, and which her Republican rival, Donald Trump, is now enjoying. Having trailed Mrs Clinton in head-to-head polling by double digits in April, he is now more or less level-pegging with her.

Desperate to heal their feuding party, and turn its fire on Mr Trump, Democratic bigwigs have for weeks implored Mr Sanders to bow out. If the way the Republicans are rallying to Mr Trump is a guide, the reunification could happen rapidly—indeed the Democrats’ primary wounds look less deep than the Republicans’ did. Asked whether they would support Mrs Clinton in November, many of those in Oakland recoiled at the question: “Of course we would!” said Annette, a teacher, as behind her a hawker did brisk trade in “Fuck Trump” posters and badges. It is also apparent that some of Mr Sanders’s advisers are turning their thoughts to what he might demand as the price of his surrender. There is talk of making Mrs Clinton raise her pledge of a $12 minimum wage to the $15 Mr Sanders is promising.



America's primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

A defeated candidate is not generally in a position to make such demands. But Mr Sanders, who only joined the Democratic party last year and is aggrieved by its leaders’ preference for Mrs Clinton, seems minded to test that. Having implanted surrogates into the convention’s rule-making committee, he expects to influence its policy agenda; that is normally inconsequential but, in the event of an aggressive loser, could be fraught. “If he does lose, the party is going to have to help him help Clinton,” says Tad Devine, a Sanders adviser.

Painfully for Mrs Clinton, Mr Sanders meanwhile persists in criticising her personally, especially over her fund-raising on Wall Street, thereby softening her up for Mr Trump. How long can it go on? Mr Sanders has no serious chance of overhauling Mrs Clinton’s lead of 268 delegates in the nine remaining votes, the last of which, Washington, DC, is on June 14th. He would need to secure 68% of the delegates available, which, given that the Democrats hand them out in proportion to vote share, not all to the winner, is almost unimaginable. To justify his pledge to fight on, he therefore needs at least to win most of the remaining states; above all California.

It is by far the biggest prize of the Democratic primaries. Winning it handsomely would also bolster Mr Sanders’s only serious argument for turncoat superdelegate votes: that he is likelier than Mrs Clinton to beat Mr Trump. The polls, which give Mr Sanders a double-digit lead over the Republican, give some support to that. Yet if Mr Sanders loses California, on the night that Mrs Clinton is likely to cross the requisite threshold of 2,383 delegates, counting superdelegates, they would be immaterial. Mr Sanders would have lost his last shred of an excuse for fighting on. Even his closest advisers admit this. According to Mr Devine, “California is the sine qua non.”



Heard on the trail

The latest quips and quotes from the campaigns



Trumpology

Asked to choose between conservative principle and nastiness, Trump voters pick the latter



Guns, weed and relevance

Gary Johnson could launch the Libertarians on a big third-party run



A Trump presidency could undermine the rule of law

Donald Trump's tirade against a federal judge



The fire next time

Voter ID laws may be an issue at the election





More US election coverage



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21699914-democratic-challenger-thinks-he-still-has-shot-nomination-hes/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The campaigns

Heard on the trail

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition





Patience is a virtue

“I don’t have a timeline in my mind and I have not made a decision.”

The Speaker of the House, Paul Ryan, still resists the charms of Donald Trump

Life, liberty and narcissism

“I want a statue in Washington, DC. Maybe share it with Jefferson.”

Mr Trump’s aspirations go beyond merely becoming president

Peace, love and understanding

“We’re not buying tanks. We’re not buying grenade-launchers. We’re not militarising our police department.”

Cleveland city councillors reassure groups who plan to protest at the Republican convention in July

Crybaby

“Instead of being, like, ‘Thank you very much, Mr Trump,’ or ‘Trump did a good job,’ Everybody’s saying, ‘Well, who got it?...And you make me look very bad.”

Mr Trump on the press fact-checking his claims about fundraising for veterans

Black is the new orange

“You don’t want to look like one of those anarchist photographers.”

A former commando advises journalists attending the Republican convention not to wear black. The New Yorker

Un-conventional

“I don’t think freewheeling crazy is unique to Libertarians.”

Gary Johnson, the Libertarian Party candidate, remarking on the convention speaker who stripped down to his thong

Lactose intolerant

“Feel the Bern: Hot cinnamon ice cream with hot cinnamon swirl and red hot candy.”

An ice-cream shop in Rehoboth Beach, Delaware, has produced a terrifying Sanders-themed ice cream. Politico Playbook

The gentleman’s for turning

“I want to be helpful. I don’t want to be harmful, because I don’t want Hillary Clinton to be president.”

Senator Marco Rubio is now supporting his former rival. CNN

Miles to go before...

“That’s how I can sleep at night.”

Mitt Romney, Republican candidate in 2012, explains his continued objections to Mr Trump. Wall Street Journal

Friends like these

“There are many positive aspects to Trump’s ‘inflammatory policies’.”

North Korea’s state news outlet, DPRK Today, is thrilled by the prospect of a Trump presidency. NK News



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21699908-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Chicago

Predictable policing

A hot summer awaits the city’s new police chief

Jun 4th 2016 | CHICAGO | From the print edition



IT WAS Eddie Johnson’s first big test. Memorial Day weekend usually marks the start of the most violent period of the year, as the crime rate rises along with the temperature (see chart). Thousands of officers patrolled the city’s parks, beaches and neighbourhoods, including Mr Johnson, the boss of Chicago’s besieged police force since April, who worked a night shift. Fixed-wing aeroplanes circled the area’s expressways, which have recently seen a spike in shootings. In the run-up to the weekend Mr Johnson launched one of the biggest anti-gang raids in Chicago’s history, resulting in the arrest of 140 gang members and the seizure of numerous guns, as well as drugs apparently worth tens of thousands of dollars.

Considering the steep rise in gun violence this year, the sheer size of Chicago’s territory, the complexity of its social problems, the large number of fractious gangs with ever-younger members and the recent breakdown in trust between residents and the Chicago Police Department (CPD), Mr Johnson has taken on perhaps the toughest job in law enforcement in the country. The results of the Memorial Day operations were mixed: killings were down this year, with six murders, including one of a 15-year-old girl, between Friday morning and Tuesday morning, compared with 12 last year. Shootings were higher: 63 compared with 56.

From the start of the year until mid-May, the number of murders increased by 62% to 216. Shootings also rose by 60%. Many theories compete to explain why. One is the low morale of CPD officers, many of whom feel they are unfairly vilified and “are all being grouped with Jason,” says a former cop, referring to Jason Van Dyke, a white police officer who shot a black teenager 16 times as he lay in the road in 2014. A task-force subsequently appointed by the mayor to look at race and policing concluded in April that the CPD has “no regard for the sanctity of life” when it comes to black Chicagoans.

Mr Johnson reckons that the problem is lack of confidence in the justice system. He argues that trust has broken down—between the police and the policed, between the police and an “overburdened and broken” judiciary, as well as between the officers and their leaders. In some ways, though, the CPD has suffered from an excess of trust, among officers at least. On May 31st the city paid out $2m to settle a lawsuit with two police officers who say they were targeted by colleagues and even suffered death threats after they informed on corrupt cops who ran a criminal fief in a housing complex on the South Side.



Daily chart: Revisiting the world's most violent cities

Trust will take time to rebuild, but Mr Johnson hopes that technology will pay dividends sooner. The CPD confiscates 150-200 guns per week on average, more than New York and Los Angeles combined. (Though Chicago and Illinois have strict gun laws, it is easy to buy a gun in Indiana or Wisconsin, a short drive from the city.) The department wants to make more use of the CPD’s “Strategic Subject List” (SSL), which is based on a computer algorithm developed by the Illinois Institute of Technology that calculates the propensity of individuals to get shot or shoot. The fourth iteration of the SSL, the one now in use, has become really good in its murderous predictions, according to Mr Johnson.

The software looks at ten variables, including a person’s previous arrests and convictions, gang affiliations and involvement in shootings. People are ranked according to their probability of becoming a “party to violence” (PVE), either as victim or assailant. According to the CPD, a mere 1,400 people are responsible for most of the gun violence in a city of 2.7m. Of the 140 arrested in the recent gang raid, 117 were already on the SSL. Three-quarters of shooting victims and more than 80% of those arrested for shootings so far this year were also found to be on the list.

The SSL is a work in progress: the police department is constantly updating the list and fine-tuning its technology. It is also trying to use its data to prevent crime. The SSL score ranges from one to 500, with higher scores representing greater risk. Since 2013 officers, social workers and community leaders have visited the homes of more than 1,300 people with high scores; this year the CPD aims to reach 1,500 people likely to be involved in violence and to meet gang members every other week. Mr Johnson’s next big test will be the weekend of the 4th of July. Last year ten people were killed and 55 shot while everyone else was celebrating Independence Day.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21699912-hot-summer-awaits-citys-new-police-chief-predictable-policing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Refugees

Their own public Idaho

Twin Falls, a conservative city in Idaho, likes refugees

Jun 4th 2016 | TWIN FALLS | From the print edition



THIS has not been a great election season for cool appeals to reason. Few public debates have strayed as far from Socratic ideals of truth-seeking as those involving refugees, and in particular whether America is running intolerable risks by granting asylum to Muslims from such terror-wracked regions as the Middle East. Strikingly, some of the loudest calls to bar new refugee arrivals have come from communities that are rarely, if ever, sent refugees from Syria or other high-risk countries.

After terrorist outrages in Paris, California and Brussels, in some cases involving attackers who arrived as asylum-seekers, more than two dozen governors and numerous members of Congress have decried the decision, made by Barack Obama in September 2015, to increase the number of Syrians admitted as refugees in fiscal 2016 to 10,000, up from 2,000 the previous year. Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, has gone further, calling—loudly but vaguely—for a temporary national entry ban on Muslims “until we find out what’s going on.” What’s going on is that whereas 158,655 Syrians completed asylum applications in Germany in 2015, Mr Obama’s much more modest target may be missed. Between October 1st, the start of the current fiscal year, and May 23rd, a total of 2,235 Syrian refugees were resettled in America.

A distinctively different sort of refugee debate has gripped the small rural city of Twin Falls, Idaho for the past several months. Twin Falls knows more about asylum-seekers than many towns its size. Idaho, with just 1.6m people, has taken over 20,000 refugees since 1970s, with most placed in Boise and Twin Falls. The Twin Falls refugee resettlement centre is managed by the College of Southern Idaho (CSI). Go back to the 1980s and the centre brought Vietnamese boat people and Cambodians, among others. In the 1990s war in the Balkans sent waves of refugees from Bosnia (several Bosnian families stayed, and provide much oomph to the local soccer league). The most recent arrivals have come from Iraq, Afghanistan and Sudan, as well as from Congo, Eritrea, Nepal and Iran. At the same time residents cheerfully call Twin Falls “ultraconservative”: the city and surrounding county, in the heart of Idaho’s dairy belt, gave the Republican candidate, Mitt Romney, more than 70% of their vote in the 2012 presidential elections. Though it is a young town, barely a century old, it has links to dark chapters of history: from 1942 to 1945 there was an internment camp for Japanese-Americans in the high desert 17 miles to the north.

National alarm over Syrian arrivals found an echo in Twin Falls late last year. A group of locals launched a petition drive to put a formal ballot initiative before county voters, asking them whether they wanted the refugee centre closed. Rick Martin, the owner of a small repair service for medical devices, was the prime mover behind the petition. He denies being anti-immigrant, recalling a school friend from his childhood in Twin Falls, a Hmong whose father had fought with the Americans in South-East Asia. But rumours that Syrian refugees might be coming galvanised Mr Martin, who believes that Islam is “a violent religion, antithetical to American values.” His grievances are broad: he says refugees take up much-needed affordable housing and drive down wages, and may have brought polygamy to Twin Falls. But insecurity tops his list: Syrians have already reached Twin Falls, he asserts, and there is a “very, very high potential that [Islamic State] sympathisers are in our community right now.”

What happened to Mr Martin’s campaign was less predictable. His ballot initiative failed woefully. He and his fellow-organisers had six months to collect 3,842 local residents’ signatures, but by the final deadline in early April secured only 894. Mr Martin blames cold winter weather for slow signature-gathering: “Most of our volunteers are elderly,” he notes. He also blames city power-brokers for intimidating the silent majority that he feels backed his cause, notably the city newspaper, the Times-News, which he says falsely portrayed his campaign as “bigoted”. His next plan is to try to have anti-refugee trustees elected to the board of the CSI, a long shot.

City elders and defenders of the refugee centre have a different take. They say that they quelled public alarm with the least fashionable of tools: facts. In particular, supporters of the refugee programme point to the impact of a public forum attended by more than 700 people, organised by the Times-News, and addressed by Twin Falls school, public safety and medical officials, as well as by an invited speaker from the federal government, Larry Bartlett, director of the State Department’s Office of Refugee Admissions.

Patiently, the panellists set out the costs and benefits of receiving a few hundred refugees in Twin Falls each year. Refugees are not a burden on the public purse: they are helped to find work fast, and typically the newcomers pay more in federal taxes in a single year than they receive in their one-off resettlement grants. On average, refugees make over a dollar more per hour than the state’s minimum wage, and provide a useful boost to a healthy local economy. Unemployment in Twin Falls, a city of about 47,000 people, stands at 3.4%, well below the national average, thanks to expansion by such employers as Chobani, a yogurt-maker.

Latter-day saints

Refugees are screened for health problems and commit crimes at an exceedingly low rate, panellists added. Asked for safety guarantees, Mr Bartlett of the State Department assured the forum that, while nothing in life is “100%” guaranteed, background checks for refugees by several security and intelligence agencies are strong, and are under review to become stronger. A less diplomatic speaker might have added that terror groups trying to infiltrate America would find it much easier to send militants who hold European passports, who can visit without visas.

Wiley Dobbs, superintendent of the Twin Falls school district, told the forum how special services for refugees and immigrant children, including two centres that prepare newcomers to learn in American schools, account for 0.42% of his budget. “There was a lot of false information out there,” Mr Dobbs recalls. “The neat thing is, we were just sharing the facts.”

Lonely work in Twin Falls

Culture also matters. Perhaps a quarter of the city’s residents are Mormons, and many churches of all denominations have long worked with refugees. Not least because so many young Mormon adults serve as missionaries around the world, Twin Falls families “appreciate having diversity” in their schools and neighbourhoods, says Bill Brulotte, who directs federal programmes in the school district.

Twin Falls may offer some other lessons, suggests the mayor, Shawn Barigar. His is a handsome city, built on the southern edge of the Snake river canyon, a meadow-bottomed gorge which at that moment glows a vivid green behind him in the evening light. The scene is peaceful now, but the debate at times became “Who can scream the loudest?” he recalls, with a “handful of very vocal opponents” shouting at city council meetings about al-Qaeda plots. Mr Barigar is a fifth-generation resident of farming stock, and also heads the local chamber of commerce. Local businesses have long seen refugees as high-quality employees in a sparsely populated corner of the country. But refugee-supporters were “apathetic”, the mayor says. They did not fully realise that helping to integrate newcomers might be their responsibility, too.

Bob Naerebout, executive director of the Idaho Dairymen’s Association, an industry group, agrees. Some of his members employ scores of refugees, in dairy farms and cheese plants. To date, no Syrians have actually reached Twin Falls. But Mr Naerebout thinks refugee-supporters could explain Syrian arrivals to the city. They just need to “speak out and do the education”. When those who back the refugee centre stay silent, “we leave a void,” he now realises. And in the present political climate, a void free of facts is a perilous thing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21699874-twin-falls-conservative-city-idaho-likes-refugees-their-own-public-idaho/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

Trumpology

Asked to choose between conservative principle and nastiness, Trump voters pick the latter

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



IN AT least one sense, Donald Trump’s rise is terrific news for principled conservatives. Right-wingers have long endured allegations that many of their cherished ideas—promoting free markets or seeking to devolve power away from Washington—are cover for a cruder, nastier agenda. However unfairly, when American conservatives promote individual liberty and limited government, they are charged by critics with appealing to the worst, I-got-mine instincts of their supporters. When Republicans suggest that government safety-nets will have to be trimmed back before they grow unaffordable, Democrats and their allies do not see hard-headed prudence. Instead conservatives are accused of having, or pandering to, hard hearts.

Here is the good news for conservatives. Mr Trump shows that their principles and heartlessness are not the same thing. The presumptive Republican nominee’s campaign fairly drips with nastiness, but is strikingly uninterested in limiting the powers or costs of government. Short of designing himself a uniform involving ermine and red velvet, he could hardly make it clearer that he dreams of reigning over, rather than governing, America.

He has promised not to devolve power from Washington but to concentrate it in the Oval Office, where a President Trump would bully and browbeat global friends, foes and corporate bosses alike. At rallies he asks roaring crowds to imagine him lifting the telephone to impose punitive taxes on businesses or trading partners who defy him. Individual liberty would look rather different in his promised America, as police and federal agents began door-to-door raids to round up and deport 11m undocumented migrants. Nor does balancing the public finances hold any terrors for Mr Trump. He opposes raising the retirement age, promising to “save Social Security and Medicare without cuts.” At the same time, he promises to slash taxes and to raise spending on defence. Eliminating waste, and a booming economy, will make America rich enough to eliminate budget deficits, he promises vaguely, and, anyway, he understands how to manage debt “better than probably anybody.”

The bad news for Republicans is that, when millions of primary voters were invited to choose between candidates representing most major strains of conservative thought, and Mr Trump’s mix of nonsense and nastiness, they chose the latter. The past few weeks have been filled with the grisly spectacle of Republicans and conservative pundits reconciling themselves to the businessman’s victory, and explaining why, though he may be a bit rough around the edges, Mr Trump is conservative in the ways that really matter. Some take a narrowly partisan path from the #NeverTrump camp to Oh, Never Mind. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, who during his presidential campaign called Mr Trump a “con man”, will now speak on his behalf if asked: “because I don’t want Hillary Clinton to be president.” The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, told USA Today that he wants to win the election, adding: “and I have to say Donald Trump has done a good job so far of winning elections.” To Mr McConnell’s credit, he did then tell NPR that, under him, the Senate would block a Muslim entry ban proposed by President Trump, calling that a “very bad idea”.

Some conservative thinkers, such as the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Paul Ryan, have signalled that they want concessions on policy and on tone before endorsing Mr Trump. Trump-supporting politicians and columnists have started trying to shame hold-outs into joining them, by casting surrender to the businessman as an act of class contrition. For too long conservative elites have “ignored” the preferences of grassroots activists, they say. If Republican primary voters want mass deportations of migrants in America without legal papers, a halt to global free-trade deals and a promise not to touch old-age pensions, they argue, then that is what the Republican Party now stands for.

That is self-serving cant. Republicans in Congress and in governors’ mansions have not ignored the wishes of Trump supporters who favour protectionism or nativism or oppose reforming Social Security. Republicans who believe in free markets and limited government should (and, until five minutes ago, did) disagree with those Trump voters, because they think that the businessman’s policies would do more harm than good. If Republicans are sounding a tactical retreat now, it is because they do not know how to win in November without Mr Trump’s followers.

Compassion for us, conservatism for them

Apologists for Mr Trump claim that, if you squint a bit, their new champion fits onto the conservative end of a left-right political spectrum. In fact Mr Trump uses a different spectrum: one which divides the world into Ins and Outs. Time and again he presents life as a zero-sum contest between his supporters and some undeserving Other. He was at it again over the Memorial Day weekend, not only telling old soldiers at a motorcycle rally in Washington, DC, that he would improve medical care by the Veterans Administration—a laudable goal, given that agency’s deficiencies—but growling that “illegal immigrants are taken much better care of by this country—better than our veterans.”

No promise is too rash or too expensive when Mr Trump is addressing those he treats as In-groups. To Out-groups—such as the Muslims he says he would temporarily ban, or the millions of immigrants he claims he would deport—he presents the hardest of hearts. Sympathise, by all means, with hard-pressed voters who long to believe his empty promises, for not all of them are bigots. But then condemn Mr Trump for playing divide-and-rule, and for assuring Americans that others must lose if they are to win again. The businessman is running as a left-winger’s caricature of selfish, unprincipled conservatism. If elected Republicans embrace that travesty, they have themselves to blame for the damage that Mr Trump will surely do their cause.



California, here we come

The Democratic challenger thinks he still has a shot at the nomination. He’s wrong



Heard on the trail

The latest quips and quotes from the campaigns



Guns, weed and relevance

Gary Johnson could launch the Libertarians on a big third-party run



A Trump presidency could undermine the rule of law

Donald Trump's tirade against a federal judge



The fire next time

Voter ID laws may be an issue at the election





More US election coverage



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21699918-asked-choose-between-conservative-principle-and-nastiness-trump-voters-pick/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Brazil’s economy: Nowhere to go but up

Poverty in Argentina: Gutted community

Bello: Fujimori versus anti-Fujimorismo





Articles Sections Next

Brazil’s economy

Nowhere to go but up

The interim government proposes some reforms

Jun 4th 2016 | RIO DE JANEIRO | From the print edition



WITH bearded baristas and furniture cobbled together from wooden crates, Curto Café in Rio de Janeiro is a typical outpost of Brazil’s nascent hipster scene. Aficionados of its organic coffee do not pay set prices; instead they pay what they think reasonable—or what they can afford. This, says Gabriel Magalhães, one of Curto’s founders, is less and less. Like other Brazilians, cariocas (as Rio residents are known) are pinching their pennies.



Brazil is suffering its worst recession since the 1930s, perhaps of all time. On June 1st the government reported that GDP contracted by 0.3% in real terms in the first quarter of this year; it is 5.4% smaller than it was a year earlier (see chart). Over that period GDP per person dropped by more than it did during the hyperinflationary “lost decade” from 1981 to 1992, notes Alberto Ramos of Goldman Sachs, an investment bank. Over two years the number of jobless Brazilians rose from 7m to 11m. It is a “downright depression”, says Mr Ramos.

The task of pulling Brazil out of this morass falls to Michel Temer, who took over as interim president after the Senate voted in May to try President Dilma Rousseff on impeachment charges. Politically, his government has had a rough start. Two of the ministers in his all-white, all-male cabinet, including the one in charge of fighting corruption, had to step aside after recordings were leaked in which they appeared to criticise prosecutors’ investigation of the massive corruption scandal surrounding Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company. They say they were misinterpreted.

Mr Temer’s economic programme is faring better. His heavyweight team, led by Henrique Meirelles, a former governor of the Central Bank, has proposed the most ambitious overhaul of Brazil’s economic governance in decades. Public spending, including on the unaffordable pension system, is to be slashed, though the government has yet to say just how. Enterprise-crushing regulations are to be lifted, starting in the oil and gas sector. Mr Meirelles says the government will consider reforming Mussolini-era labour laws and the Byzantine tax code. Privatisation, long a taboo, is a possibility for the first time since the 1990s. Such ideas are a radical break from the left-wing interventionism practised by Ms Rousseff’s government, which is largely responsible for the economic mess. They offer hope of a way out of it.

The centrepiece of Mr Temer’s plan is a constitutional amendment to freeze public spending in real terms. Even health and education—which consume more than a quarter of government revenue without providing commensurate benefits—may not be spared. The government is expected to present a draft to Congress within the next two weeks.

The idea is to cure the government of one of its principal vices. Public spending has grown by an annual average of 6% for the past 20 years, much faster than GDP. The central government’s primary fiscal balance (before interest payments) went from a surplus of 2.2% of GDP in 2010 to a deficit of 2.3% in the year to April 2016, the highest level yet. This, and the prospect of deficits stretching far into the future, keeps interest rates high, which further worsens the deficit. The government’s interest bill is a massive 7% of GDP. Brazil’s high taxes thus pay for past profligacy rather than effective government.

The spending cap, if approved by majorities of three-fifths in both houses of Congress, will lead to lower deficits as soon as growth and tax revenues revive. It could help even sooner, says Arthur Carvalho of Morgan Stanley, an investment bank. That is because confidence that Brazil will reduce its debt could lower long-term interest rates, cutting the government’s interest bill. As important, the spending cap will force the government to undertake other reforms, though in the long run it may prove impossible to maintain as the population grows. Currently, the constitution and other legislation protect 90% of spending from cuts, no matter how unproductive it is. If the government is not to breach its self-imposed ceiling, those laws will have to change.

Such prospects are already stirring hopes among unhappy entrepreneurs and investors. Bond yields have fallen from about 17% in January to 13%; the cost of insuring against default is down by a third since December. With more than a third of industrial capacity idle, production could revive quickly if sentiment improves. “In six months we may look back at today as an inflection point,” says Marcelo Carvalho of BNP Paribas, a bank. But only if Mr Temer delivers what he has promised.



Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts

That “will be tough”, admits Mr Meirelles, the finance minister. He hopes to enact some reforms, including the spending cap, before next year’s budget is submitted to Congress, which must happen by August 31st. With important local elections looming in October, few politicians will be in the mood to vote for less spending on schools and hospitals.

But members of Mr Temer’s team, several of whom left lucrative private-sector jobs to help rescue the economy, dispute that. They think the political and economic crisis has made both voters and congressmen more receptive to proposals for radical change. A billboard put up by the National Confederation of Industry at the airport in Brasília, the national capital, demands: “Pension reform now!”

In theory, Mr Temer can count on 356 votes in the 513-seat lower house of Congress, and 56 in the 81-seat Senate, more than enough to amend the constitution. Unlike Ms Rousseff, who also enjoyed solid nominal majorities in Congress, Mr Temer knows how to charm and cajole his allies. Unencumbered by past commitments, he has more perks and patronage to offer politicians who formerly supported Ms Rousseff.

Despite watching two ministers sink into the quicksand of the Petrobras scandal, Mr Temer has managed to keep his government functioning. That may be in part because Brazilians have low expectations. A handful of other members of his cabinet are under investigation, as is Renan Calheiros, the president of the Senate and a member of Mr Temer’s Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement, who features in the leaked recordings. But neither Congress nor the voters are demanding the toppling of Mr Temer’s government. The howls of rage from Ms Rousseff and her allies have so far had little effect.

A survey published this week by IMD, a business school, puts Brazil in last place out of 61 countries in the efficiency of its government, behind war-torn Ukraine and, astoundingly, bankrupt and autocratic Venezuela. Brazilians are not expecting moral purity from Mr Temer’s interim government, which will probably continue in office until after elections are held in 2018. But they are hoping for relief from their economic pain. The early signs are that Mr Temer knows how to provide it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21699948-interim-government-proposes-some-reforms-nowhere-go-up/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Poverty in Argentina

Gutted community

Scandal strikes a famous social project

Jun 4th 2016 | SAN SALVADOR DE JUJUY | From the print edition

The pools are not the only things that have been drained

EL CANTRI is a cheeky name for a housing project built for the poorest people in Jujuy, one of Argentina’s poorest provinces. The message is that its 15,000 inhabitants are no less entitled to comfort than residents of a posh gated community—known in Argentina as “countries”. A playground is equipped with dinosaur-shaped slides; a vast aquatic park has giant plastic sea lions. There is a full-scale replica of the Kalasasaya, a pre-Columbian temple, constructed out of breeze blocks. El Cantri has two factories, a clinic and a sports centre. On top of each house is a water tank stencilled with images of such popular heroes as Che Guevara and Eva Perón.

The settlement was built by Túpac Amaru, a social movement that for 17 years has provided housing and other services to 70,000 poor jujeños. The group thrived during the dozen years when Argentina was governed by the populist Kirchners: the late Néstor Kirchner and then his wife, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. It was the third-largest employer in a remote agricultural province, in which 45% of the land is owned by just five companies, according to Carlos Aramayo at the National University of Jujuy. Túpac Amaru’s firebrand leader, Milagro Sala, is a celebrity. Pope Francis invited her to the Vatican in 2014.

Argentina’s elections last October brought about a change of regime, and a dramatic reversal of fortunes for Ms Sala and her movement. Gerardo Morales became the first non-Peronist governor of Jujuy in more than 30 years. He is an ally of the new centre-right president, Mauricio Macri, who is more likely to bet on free enterprise and new infrastructure than on left-wing social movements.

A clash was not long in coming. On December 10th, the day he took office, Mr Morales said that all co-operatives must register with the government in order to continue receiving money. Four days later Ms Sala and her supporters set up camp outside his office, demanding a meeting. Police arrested her on January 16th, saying she had incited violence. Since then the charges have mounted up: she is accused of fraud, extortion and conspiracy. Judges have ordered her to stay in prison while prosecutors investigate. It is not certain that the Túpac Amaru movement, named after the leader of an uprising against the Spanish in 1780, will survive the onslaught.

Joaquín Millón, Jujuy’s new anti-corruption investigator, alleges that more than half of the 1.3 billion pesos ($90m) funnelled by the national planning ministry through the provincial government and municipal authorities to Túpac Amaru from 2004 to 2015 has gone missing. The co-operative movement was contracted to build some 8,500 houses; after touring more than 30 projects, Mr Millón concluded that 2,300 were either incomplete or non-existent. Residents of El Cantri told Jujuy’s prosecutor, Mariano Miranda, that the movement illegally withheld title deeds to their homes and threatened to evict them if they did not support Ms Sala. She denies all the allegations.

The scandal raises awkward questions for Ms Fernández. Allegations have emerged linking her family to the scandal in Jujuy. In April a provincial deputy who is a former Túpac Amaru member told a judge that Ms Sala had delivered suitcases of cash to Ms Fernández’s son, Máximo Kirchner, in the Quinta de Olivos, the president’s official residence. They both deny it.

Human-rights groups have leapt to Ms Sala’s defence. Amnesty International criticised her initial arrest, saying she had been “criminalised for peacefully exercising her rights to freedom of expression and protest”. In March the UN’s Working Group on Arbitrary Detention urged Argentina’s government to justify her detention in writing. Mr Miranda bristles at the criticism. “They say that she’s a political prisoner, but she’s guaranteed due process,” he fumes. “Amnesty International hasn’t tried living near Milagro Sala.”

The beneficiaries of her work are beginning to lose faith. El Cantri’s pastel-painted terraced houses are showing signs of neglect. The clothing factory, opened in 2008 by Ms Fernández, supposedly employs 146 people, but just a handful could be seen during a recent tour. The water park, the community’s hub, has been drained. Since Túpac Amaru’s refusal to register, so too have its coffers. “Ninety percent of people here are against Milagro Sala,” says a man who lives close to El Cantri. “But that doesn’t mean they oppose Túpac Amaru.”

If the movement fails, Jujuy will need something to replace it. More than half of jujeños are poor and jobs are scarce. At three o’clock one recent afternoon the benefits queue at San Salvador de Jujuy’s post office stretched around the block. The last passenger train to Buenos Aires departed in 1993. Jujuy is among the ten provinces that are to benefit from Plan Belgrano, a scheme promoted by Mr Macri to reduce poverty, encourage enterprise and improve infrastructure in the north. “For decades Argentina turned its back on the north,” declared the president during a visit to Jujuy on May 16th. He pointedly promised to back projects “that aren’t synonymous with corruption”.

For residents of El Cantri, such schemes mean little compared with the tangible reality of their imperilled community. Daniela Calderón, a teacher at the newly opened primary school, bursts into tears as she watches her pupils playing happily in the playground. “They’re gradually dismembering our organisation,” she laments. “But we’ll be back, stronger.” Given Túpac Amaru’s monumental problems, that may prove a forlorn hope.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21699717-scandal-strikes-famous-social-project-gutted-community/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

Fujimori versus anti-Fujimorismo

The split imperatives of Peru’s presidential election

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



PERHAPS it is a sign of the times in Latin America that both the candidates in Peru’s run-off ballot for the presidency, on June 5th, support the continuation of the free-market policies that have made the country one of the region’s most successful economies. After all, Peru is heading for economic growth of around 4% this year, while the region as a whole faces its second year of recession. What is at stake in the election is something more basic, if the campaign rhetoric is to be believed: what kind of government do Peruvians want, and for whom should it govern?

Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, a liberal former economy minister, argues that victory for his opponent, Keiko Fujimori, means “the return of dictatorship, corruption and lies”, as he put it in the final campaign debate on May 29th. “I am convinced that freedom is at serious risk in Peru,” he declared. That claim is based mainly on heredity. Ms Fujimori’s father, Alberto, ran the country as an elected autocrat for ten years. In 1992 he sent troops to shut down Congress. He is serving long prison sentences for corruption and human-rights abuses.

In a country with almost no real political parties, “anti-Fujimorismo” has become the most powerful political ideology. That is why Mr Kuczynski has a chance in the run-off ballot, despite having won only 21% of the vote in the first round in April, when Ms Fujimori secured 40%. He has other electoral disadvantages: he is 77, and he has spent long periods working in the United States, as an investment banker and businessman. He is fit—he goes to the gym most days. “It’s age versus lack of experience,” he says of the contest. He has a deep-rooted commitment to public service: he set up an NGO to campaign for drinking water for all, and his father ran a leper colony in the Peruvian Amazon.

Ms Fujimori insists she is her own woman. In person, she displays both charm and sharper political instincts than her opponent. She has pledged to rule as a democrat. After narrowly losing the election in 2011, she has spent the past five years campaigning incessantly, visiting remote Andean villages and urban shantytowns. Her pitch is that she is a truer representative of Peruvian society and that she alone can offer effective government. Her party, Popular Force, is better established than most. It has won a majority of the seats in Congress. Her aides portray Mr Kuczynski and his team of advisers as desk-bound and naive. “He can do a good government for big companies,” says José Chlimper, Ms Fujimori’s running-mate. She stresses a need for government to help small business.

Underlying the campaign are Peru’s cleavages of race and class. Fujimorismo represents more than just nostalgia for Mr Fujimori’s achievements of vanquishing the terrorism of the Shining Path and launching economic growth. It is also in part a rejection of Peru’s traditional “white” elites. It stands for popular capitalism and an emerging middle class, though Ms Fujimori’s opinion-poll lead among poorer Peruvians also stems from her father’s clientelism.

Fujimorismo represents Peru’s vast informal economy, too, and the values of a society where growth has brought higher incomes but not (yet) widespread adherence to the rule of law. In May a television programme aired a report in which an official of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) said that the agency was investigating Joaquín Ramírez, the general secretary of Popular Force, apparently for laundering drug money. A former bus-fare collector who now possesses a business empire spanning property and football clubs, Mr Ramírez is the chief financier of Ms Fujimori’s campaign. Peruvian prosecutors have been investigating Mr Ramírez, who denies wrongdoing, since 2014. Ms Fujimori waited for three days after the DEA story broke before asking him to “step aside”.

This revelation would have doomed many a candidate. Yet in the next fortnight Ms Fujimori opened up a small but probably decisive lead of four to six points in the opinion polls. Either many Peruvians don’t care about Mr Ramírez’s conduct, or they accept his claim that he is maligned as a self-made cholo con plata (a man of mixed race with money). But if Ms Fujimori is to provide Peru with the more effective state it needs, not least to fight rising crime, she must choose aides who are above suspicion.

The main reason for believing that her victory, assuming it happens, would not entail political regression is not just that she is not her father. Peruvian democracy is stronger than it was in the 1990s, and both the media and civil society are less biddable than they were. But Peruvians will need to be alert.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21699825-split-imperatives-perus-presidential-election-fujimori-versus-anti-fujimorismo/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Japanese politics: Postpone and be damned

Africans in India: They don’t love us

Banyan: Dialogue of the deaf





Articles Sections Next

Japanese politics

Postpone and be damned

Doubts about the prime minister’s economic record are growing

Jun 4th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



ALL things considered, the month of May ended well for Shinzo Abe, Japan’s prime minister. He hosted his fellow leaders from the rich world’s club, the G7, at a summit at Ise in Mie prefecture last week. It went well. He welcomed them at a Shinto shrine founded 1,300 years ago. Just after the summit Barack Obama became the first sitting American president to visit Hiroshima, which an American atom bomb levelled on August 6th 1945. Japanese of all ages and backgrounds were moved by his speech, and by his embrace of a survivor. Mr Abe basked in the reflected political glow.

That gave the prime minister ample cover to announce, on June 1st, that he would put off raising Japan’s consumption tax from 8% to 10% from April of next year to October 2019. This marks the second such dodge; the previous one occurred in November 2014. Mr Abe’s advisers would have preferred to postpone it indefinitely, but settled for a point after his term as president of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) is currently due to end, in September 2018.

Economically, the postponement looks prudent. Japan’s economy is struggling. Many worried that a second tax increase would knock it flat. When Mr Abe raised the rate from 5% to 8% in April 2014, the economy tipped back into recession.

But politically it carries risks. Mr Abe had promised that the rise would be carried out “without fail”. He said that nothing short of a massive natural disaster or an economic cataclysm similar to the global crisis sparked in 2008 by the collapse of Lehman Brothers, an investment bank, would prevent it from going ahead. Neither kind of calamity has materialised. At the G7 summit Mr Abe tried to persuade his fellow leaders that the global economy could be on the brink of a Lehman-scale crisis, in a vain effort to justify the postponement. He found no takers.

The precedent that Mr Abe set after the first delay, when he called a snap general election to seek voters’ approval, seemed to demand another poll. It could have coincided with one that will be held for half of the seats in the upper house of parliament on July 10th. The possibility of such a rare “double” election prompted fevered speculation for weeks.

But in the end Mr Abe decided to hold off, despite his approval rating having risen above 50% (see chart) after the summit and Mr Obama’s visit to Hiroshima. The LDP and its coalition already hold just over two-thirds of the lower house, with 326 out of 475 seats. Party strategists reckoned the risks were all on the downside. Tax rises, of course, are never popular, but neither are leaders who fail to keep their promises.



The delay adds to voters’ impression that Mr Abe’s economic policies are going astray. On May 31st the main opposition parties—the Democratic Party, the Japan Communist Party, and two smaller groups—filed a no-confidence motion against the government, citing its failure to enact the promised tax rise as evidence that “Abenomics” is failing (thanks to the government’s majorities in both houses, it was swiftly voted down).

Quantitative easing, which the Bank of Japan (BoJ) began in 2013, weakened the yen while boosting corporate profits and share prices. But an uptick in the currency, even as the central bank introduced negative interest rates from January onwards, has sunk the stockmarket. A recent BoJ survey showed that businesses are gloomier than they have been for three years. Mild deflation has returned. Fears that Japan had recently fallen into recession were assuaged by the news that, in the first quarter, GDP expanded by an annualised 1.7%. But the extra day of activity provided by a leap year contributed to the figures. Underlying private demand remains weak.

To reverse these trends Japan must hack through the web of regulations hindering growth. The latest “Japan Revitalisation Strategy” proposed by Mr Abe’s government falls well short of the task. With such woolly goals as restoring consumer confidence and bringing about a “fourth industrial revolution” through IT and artificial intelligence, it has been roundly criticised.

Meaningful reforms—such as preventing Japan’s vast, quasi-statist system of farm co-operatives from gouging hard-up farmers with high prices for farm supplies—are stalling. Resistance is also building to liberalisation of the electricity market, a long process that began on April 1st. Structural reform has been painfully slow, says Yoichi Funabashi, chairman of the Rebuild Japan Initiative Foundation, a think-tank, because the vested interests of the LDP still hold sway.

Meanwhile, shelving the tax increase will leave Japan’s finance ministry less able to convince markets that Japan will tame its swelling debt—now more than 240% of GDP, more than in any other rich country. Mr Abe pledged to keep a longstanding goal of eliminating the primary budget deficit by the fiscal year 2020. Economists doubt he can do this.

Even so, in the election for the upper house due in less than two months, the LDP is expected to do well. Mr Abe’s ultimate goal—winning a coalition to give him two-thirds of the seats, enough to let him rewrite Japan’s pacifist constitution—may prove elusive. But the LDP could still win a majority on its own, allowing it to govern more independently of Komeito, a Buddhist-backed party that sits to its left in several policy areas. Not since 1989 has the LDP held majorities in both chambers. For all the doubts surrounding Mr Abe’s handling of the economy, voters seem unconvinced that the opposition could do better.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21699938-doubts-about-prime-ministers-economic-record-are-growing-postpone-and-be-damned/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Africans in India

They don’t love us

The murder of a Congolese migrant makes Africans in India nervous

Jun 4th 2016 | DELHI | From the print edition

Disgruntled in Delhi

YANN, a 31-year-old student from Kinshasa, does not wish to be seen speaking with a white foreigner. He fears attracting crowds of Indians, angered at the prospect that he might be complaining about India (he worries that similar, perhaps even angrier, crowds would appear if he were seen speaking to an Indian woman). He lives in one of the crowded villages that sprawl south through India’s capital, and the drive back to his windowless one-room flat happens to wind down Nelson Mandela Marg and cross Africa Avenue, official names given in a spirit of post-colonial camaraderie. Also on the way he passes the brick-strewn gully where an acquaintance, another Congolese named Masonga Kitanda Olivier, was beaten to death by three Indian men on May 20th.

Yann came to India three years ago to study IT networks. “On my second day here,” he says, “that’s when I realised, ‘I am black.’” People laughed at him, and called him “kalu” (“blackie”). Children point at him and treat him like a monster. Officials are no better: when he brought his documents to the foreigner-registration office, “They say, first thing, ‘When are you leaving? When are you leaving my country?’”

Until recently, though, he had felt physically safe. Then Mr Olivier was killed, and just days later four separate groups of Africans were publicly beaten in villages in the south of Delhi. Each attack has its own proximate cause (Yann thinks Mr Olivier was mistaken for an Ivorian friend of his who had made someone cross), but no one doubts that India’s resident African population has gone from feeling unwelcome to endangered.

Except, maybe, the government. V.K. Singh, a minister of state and retired general, tweeted complaints that the press were “blowing up [a] minor scuffle as [an] attack”. The foreign minister, Sushma Swaraj, clarified that the attacks were “criminal acts”, but were “not racial”. Goa’s minister for tourism chose this moment to opine that Nigerians make trouble in India and ought to be deported. African diplomats are outraged—not just at the attacks, but at what they see as official indifference. A statement on behalf of envoys from 42 African countries lamented the lack of “diligent prosecution”.

Africans have a long history on the Indian subcontinent. Ethiopians traded with south India in Roman times. African cavalrymen came to serve Islamic rulers; one of them, Malik Ambar, became a sultan in his own right. And the Portuguese brought slaves from east Africa, including some who escaped to form communities sprinkled along India’s west coast, adopting Indian language and dress while preserving elements of their earlier cultures.

But the current wave of globalised migrants is new, as are stereotypes that have followed them—that they are all drug dealers or prostitutes. In fact most Africans in India are middle-class; they come for higher education and medical care. In 2014 an estimated 20,000 Nigerians visited for medical treatment. According to the Association of African Students in India, around 25,000 Africans study in Indian public universities, attracted by high standards, low prices and the prevalence of English. In all, experts believe at least 40,000 Africans study and work in India, mainly in the large cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore and Pune.

Some Indians argue, absurdly, that as fellow victims of Western prejudice, they cannot be guilty of racism. Priyanka Chopra (now a star on American television) decries double standards in Hollywood—complaining that Indian actors are made to speak in stereotypical accents. But she herself played a character in a Hindi film whose descent to rock bottom is confirmed when she falls into bed with a black man. Last February, after a Sudanese driver hit an Indian woman with a car in Bangalore, a group of Tanzanian students were attacked; one was stripped and frog-marched through the streets. When she complained to a policeman, she says he told her, “You all look alike,” and implied that because they were both African she must know the man who hit the Indian with his car.

Anti-African prejudice may be linked to India’s stubborn, caste-related bias in favour of lighter skin. (Potential brides are advertised as having “rosy” or “wheatish” complexions.) The problems faced by Africans are not so different from those borne by light-skinned Indian nationals from the north-east. Other Indians sometimes call them “chinky”. Landlords sometimes refuse to rent to them; thugs occasionally attack them in the streets.

Money provides some insulation to professionals of African descent. Nelson Igunma, a Nigerian-American from New York who worked for internet start-ups across southern India, said he experienced some “micro-aggressions”—like being asked at a dinner party whether he plays basketball—but nothing worse. Now back in New York, he is looking for a way to return to India. Like Mr Igunma, Yann says he admires Indians for their intelligence and the richness of their culture. Still, he wakes up afraid every day: “I love India, but they don’t love us.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21699936-murder-congolese-migrant-makes-africans-india-nervous-they-dont-love-us/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

Dialogue of the deaf

As China and America continue to talk past each other, Asia frets

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



IN EAST ASIA, relations between China and America make the strategic weather. “When they are stable, the region is calm; when they are roiled, the region is uneasy,” noted Bilahari Kausikan, a Singaporean diplomat, in a recent lecture. In truth, ever since Richard Nixon went to China in 1972 and opened the modern era in Sino-American relations, the sky has rarely been entirely clear; but nor has it often been clouded by so many disparate disagreements as now. As the two countries’ bureaucrats from a range of ministries gather in Beijing on June 5th for their eighth annual mass date, the “Strategic and Economic Dialogue” (S&ED), rivalry is trumping co-operation. The best that can be expected this year is that the dialogue helps stem a slide into something more dangerous.

An implicit challenge by China to the American-led world order has become explicit, as will be apparent at this year’s Shangri-La Dialogue, an annual high-level powwow on regional security to be held in Singapore from June 3rd to 5th. The venue China has chosen for this contest is the South China Sea, where its territorial claims overlap with those of Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines and Vietnam (and are mirrored by those of Taiwan). That is where it has been throwing its weight around most alarmingly.

China’s building over the past three years of artificial islands on some much-disputed rocks and reefs has perturbed the littoral states and exposed the hollowness of America’s naval predominance. American might has not deterred the construction spree; and it is hard to see how, short of full-blown war, the new islands will ever be either dismantled or snatched from Chinese control. America and China accuse each other of “militarising” the sea. Having insisted its island-building in the Spratly archipelago was for purely civilian purposes, the Chinese defence ministry used a row last month over its fighter-jets’ dangerous buzzing of an American reconnaissance plane to argue for “the total correctness and utter necessity of China’s construction of defensive facilities on the relevant islands”.

In fact, despite sending warships on “freedom-of-navigation operations” near Chinese-claimed features, and having an aircraft-carrier group on patrol in the sea, America seems to be trying very hard not to provoke China too much. China is also anxious to avoid conflict. The prime concern of the ruling Communist Party is to retain power. As a way of losing it, fighting a war with America might be the most certain as well as the most catastrophic. Yet, at a time of slowing economic growth, the party increasingly relies on its appeal to Chinese nationalism. In this sense, as Mr Kausikan noted elsewhere in his lectures, “the very insignificance of the territories in dispute in the South China Sea may well be part of their attraction to Beijing.” Nobody expects America to go to war over a Spratly.

What alarms America is that Chinese behaviour in the South China Sea seems to fit a pattern. In a speech on May 27th Ash Carter, the defence secretary, made a point belaboured by American leaders: that “On the seas, in cyberspace, in the global economy and elsewhere, China has benefited from the principles and systems that others have worked to establish and uphold, including us.” What, Americans wonder, is China’s problem? No country has gained more from the current order. Yet now, said Mr Carter, “China sometimes plays by its own rules, undercutting those principles.” The result: a “Great Wall of self-isolation”. Chinese analysts counter that America, too, plays by its own rules. A foreign-ministry spokeswoman accused Mr Carter of being stuck in “the cold-war era”, and implied his officials were typecasting China as a Hollywood villain.

Indeed, as Mr Carter suggested, it is not just in its maritime adventurism that China is at odds with America. Old differences widen, as new ones crop up. It is hard for American leaders to ignore human-rights lobbyists, at a time when China is conducting one of its harshest crackdowns on dissent in recent years. Nor is American business brimming with enthusiasm for China. Rather, it grumbles about cyber-espionage, the theft of intellectual property, the stalling of negotiations on a bilateral investment treaty and a general perception that the trajectory of economic policy in China is no longer towards gradually increasing openness, but towards greater autarky and protectionism. It does not help that massive Chinese overcapacity in industries such as steel is generating trade disputes and fuelling anti-Chinese tirades in America’s election campaign.

It used to be argued that, despite manifold areas of tension between China and America, the relationship was so complex and multilayered there would always be mitigating areas of mutual benefit. One of the reasons why relations are so fraught now is that such bright spots are so few. Most hopeful are shared commitments to move to cleaner energy and limit carbon emissions. Last year’s S&ED saw a “breakthrough”, on curtailing the ivory trade to protect elephants. The two countries are also co-operating for now in trying to curb North Korea’s nuclear ambitions. But the suspicion lingers that China worries more about the enforcement of sanctions that might topple the odious regime in Pyongyang than about North Korea’s weapons of mass destruction.

One no-trump

A final reason for scepticism about the S&ED’s prospects is the leadership politics of the two countries. It is a forum for bureaucrats. But China’s have to some extent been sidelined under the presidency of Xi Jinping, who has grabbed power for small party groups that he heads. So, in Beijing, the Americans may be talking to the wrong people. And, on their own side, Barack Obama’s presidency is ending. China may have taken his cautious foreign policy into account in pushing its claims in the South China Sea. It doubtless suspects that under either Donald Trump or Hillary Clinton, America is likely to be less of a pushover.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21699915-china-and-america-continue-talk-past-each-other-asia-frets-dialogue-deaf/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Education: The class ceiling

Remembering Tiananmen: Squaring off





Articles Sections Next

Education

The class ceiling

China’s education system is deeply unfair

Jun 4th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



NO CAR may honk nor lorry rumble near secondary schools on the two days next week when students are taking their university entrance exams, known as gaokao. Teenagers have been cramming for years for these tests, which they believe (with justification) will determine their entire future. Yet it is at an earlier stage of education that an individual’s life chances in China are usually mapped out, often in ways that are deeply unfair.

To give more students access to higher education, the government has increased its investment in the sector fivefold since 1997. The number of universities has nearly doubled. In 1998 46% of secondary-school graduates went on to university. Now 88% of them do. About 7m people—roughly one-third of those aged between 18 and 22—now gain entry to some form of higher institution each year.

China’s universities offer more opportunity for social mobility than those in many other countries, says James Lee of Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. But the social backgrounds of those admitted have been changing. Until 1993, more than 40% of students were the children of farmers or factory workers. Now universities are crammed with people from wealthy, urban backgrounds. That is partly because a far bigger share of young people are middle-class. But it is also because rural Chinese face bigger hurdles getting into them than they used to.

The problem lies with inequality of access to senior high schools, which take students for the final three years of their secondary education. Students from rural backgrounds who go to such schools perform as well in the university entrance exams as those from urban areas. But most never get there. Less than 10% of young people in the countryside go to senior high schools compared with 70% of their urban counterparts. The result is that a third of urban youngsters complete tertiary education, compared with only 8% of young rural adults.

One reason is that junior high schools in the countryside are far weaker academically than urban ones. Local governments invest less in them per student than they do in cities. Urban parents tend to be better educated and thus better able to help children with their studies. Rural pupils often suffer from a “poverty of expectations”, says Jean Wei-Jun Yeung of the National University of Singapore: they are not encouraged to think they can succeed, so they do not try to.

Expense is a huge deterrent for many. Governments cover the costs of schooling for the nine years of compulsory education up to the age of around 15. But at senior high schools, families must pay tuition and other expenses; these outlays are among the highest in the world (measured by purchasing-power parity). Many students drop out of junior high school—which is free—because rising wages in low-skilled industrial work make the prospect of staying at school even less attractive. Millions enter the workforce every year who are barely literate or numerate. Poor nutrition is also a handicap. Stanford University’s Rural Education Action Programme has found that a high incidence of anaemia and intestinal worms in rural areas affects educational performance.

Since the 1990s more than 200m people have moved from the countryside to work in cities. Many have left their children behind because of the difficulty of getting them into urban schools: the country’s system of hukou, or household registration, makes it hard for migrant children to enjoy subsidised education in places other than their parents’ birthplace.

But migrant children who do attend schools in cities usually get a worse education than their city-born counterparts. State schools that accept migrant pupils often operate what Pei-chia Lan of National Taiwan University refers to as “apartheid school models”. In these, migrant children are taught separately from urban ones in the same school, and are even kept apart from them in the playground. Since they are forced to take senior high-school exams in the hometown of their hukou, many have little choice but to return to the countryside to attend junior high school.

Unnatural selection

Children from poor backgrounds who do make it as far as the gaokao face another difficulty: competition with better-prepared candidates from 700 or so feeder (usually known as “keypoint”) schools. These receive more funding per student than average schools, have better teachers and plusher facilities. They are supposed to train the brightest students, but many get in with the help of money and connections. Hoping to make the system fairer, some feeder schools now allocate places on the basis of pupils’ proximity. Inevitably, this has sent local house prices skyrocketing, reinforcing the schools’ privileged intake by a different means. Hua Ye of Sun Yat-sen University in the southern city of Guangzhou found that those who are fortunate enough to attend a keypoint school are 3.5 times more likely to enter tertiary education than those who go to an ordinary senior high school.

Some of the feeder schools channel their pupils into the best universities via an alternative route to the gaokao. The Ministry of Education introduced this in 2003 to reward people with “special talents” that are tricky to assess through standardised tests, such as innovative thinking, creativity, or skills in sport or art. This was supposed to make the types of students attending university more varied. Instead it has increased inequality, by giving advantages to those who have benefited from the superior facilities of keypoint schools.

Elite universities often make agreements with such schools to take a large share of their best graduates. Some of the 90 institutions qualified to do so recruited over 30% of their intake this way in 2010 (the most recent year for which figures are available); Fudan University in Shanghai took almost 60%. Many of those admitted are genuinely bright, but the families of some bribe universities with sums equivalent to many years’ wages for the average urban worker. Last year Cai Rongsheng of Renmin University in Beijing admitted to selling university places for a total of 23.3m yuan ($3.27m) between 2005-13 (ironically, the university was the first to offer an MA in anti-corruption studies). In 2015 the government made recruitment from keypoint schools more difficult. Quotas for university recruitment using non-gaokao qualifications were capped at 5%. Places may be offered only after students have taken the entry exams.

The government is trying to reduce other unfairnesses, too. But it has been tough going: those who benefit from unequal opportunities are unsurprisingly reluctant to cede their privileges. This was evident from the outcry that followed an announcement last month that 12 provinces and cities would have to reduce quotas for local students at their universities. These allow universities to accept local students even though they may have lower gaokao scores than those from elsewhere. The news triggered protests in three cities by parents who worried about losing a precious advantage for their children.

In China meritocratic exams have been revered since imperial times, when any man could sit them to enter the civil service. For centuries they enabled the poor but talented to rise to high office. The gaokao is similarly intended to be a great leveller. But society has become increasingly divided between those with degrees and those who never even went to senior high. That will mean growing numbers for whom social advancement will remain a distant dream.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21699923-chinas-education-system-deeply-unfair-class-ceiling/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Remembering Tiananmen

Squaring off

A museum of China’s democracy movement in 1989 is in trouble

Jun 4th 2016 | HONG KONG | From the print edition

Time to move along

OUTSIDE China, the bloodshed in Beijing on the night of June 3rd 1989 and the morning after was a defining moment in the country’s modern history. The word “Tiananmen” instantly evokes those horrific hours, when hundreds of pro-democracy protesters were gunned down or crushed by tanks in the streets around the vast central square. Inside China, however, most people have only a hazy notion of what happened. That is because the Communist Party allows barely any mention of the massacre. On the anniversary four years ago censors even blocked internet searches for the term “Shanghai stock exchange”, because the index that day fell 64.89 points, the digits oddly coincidental with those of the date most associated with the killings.

The only large-scale commemorations in China are in Hong Kong, which was not under Chinese rule when the bloodshed occurred, and still enjoys some autonomy. But even in the former British colony there are some who side with the party and prefer to airbrush the event. An umbrella group of pro-democracy organisations, known as the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China, believes that a “June 4th Museum” it opened two years ago—the world’s first relating to the unrest of 1989—has fallen victim to such people’s concerns.

The cramped, mazelike display, on the fifth floor of a nondescript office building in Hong Kong’s Kowloon district, includes a bullet-pierced helmet that was worn by a student who was taking photographs of the army’s assault. There is also a two-metre replica of the “Goddess of Democracy”, a plaster statue that was erected by student demonstrators on Tiananmen, opposite the portrait of Mao that hangs at the entrance to the Forbidden City (see picture).

The building’s owners are clearly unhappy with the museum and the stream of visitors to it. In the middle of last year they deployed security guards at the entrance to the building, who began keeping records of visitors’ identity cards. This scared some people off. Mainlanders once made up half of the trickle of visitors. Their proportion fell to a quarter.

Now the landlord is taking legal action against the alliance, accusing it of violating the terms of the lease by using the space for an exhibition. The alliance’s chairman, Albert Ho, says he believes that the Chinese government and other “pro-China enterprises” with “infinite resources” are behind these moves. Rather than fight a costly and protracted battle, the alliance is looking for new premises to house the exhibits. It plans to sell the existing space after an annual vigil on June 4th marking the crushing of the unrest in 1989.

About 130,000 people took part in that event last year, but organisers say there may be fewer this time. Interest among young Hong Kongers is waning. In the past two years several student unions have withdrawn their support, saying their priority is to fight for democracy in Hong Kong, not the rest of China. Students who took part in the city’s “Occupy Central” protests in 2014 are preparing to contest elections to the legislature in September. One group, Demosisto, wants a referendum on whether Hong Kong should be independent. Hong Kong’s refusal to forget Tiananmen irks the Communist Party. These days, however, it is the territory’s small but increasingly vocal separatist movement that alarms it far more.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21699926-museum-chinas-democracy-movement-1989-trouble-squaring/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Railways in Africa: Puffed out

Crimes against humanity: One dictator down

Nigeria’s life coaches: Yes you can!

Palestine: A museum without exhibits

Syria’s war: Never-ending horror

Western Sahara: A forgotten leader of a lost cause

Innovation in the Arab world: From zero to not much more

Qatar: The other Wahhabi state





Articles Sections Next

Railways in Africa

Puffed out

Africa’s new railways risk going the way of the old ones

Jun 4th 2016 | LUBUMBASHI | From the print edition



THE railway station at Lubumbashi, the Democratic Republic of Congo’s second city and the centre of its mining trade, has seen better days. Outside the 1920s Belgian-built whitewashed station, hawkers sell bus tickets south to Zambia and South Africa. Travellers would do much better buying one than going inside—trains in Congo are not for the faint-hearted.

In the ticket hall, standing by a timetable on a blackboard, Baudouin Kalubi, the station master, explains that the next train will depart the following morning to Kindu, about 1,600km (1,000 miles) north. From there passengers can get on buses towards the Congo river. The train is, Mr Kalubi proudly explains, an express, with a new Chinese locomotive. That means it should go at an average speed of 15kph. “It is not the TGV,” he admits, referring to France’s high-speed trains. Yet in Congo there are so few roads that if you can’t afford to fly, the train is all that is left.

Over the past half-century, Africa’s mostly colonial railways have mostly atrophied. According to the International Union of Railways, in 2014 sub-Saharan African trains carried about 158 billion tonne-kilometres of freight, or roughly half of what Australia’s railways carried. Of that, 84% was in South Africa, which has a modern network. Elsewhere, railways that built nations carry a fraction of what they did even in the 1980s.

To remedy this, many African countries are investing vast sums of money—and hope—in new lines. In Kenya a Chinese firm is building one roughly alongside the route of the old track. Another project connects Djibouti’s port to Addis Ababa in Ethiopia. Still more are proposed. Rwanda wants one going through Tanzania; Uganda wants one going to Sudan; others are planned in Nigeria, Guinea and Ghana. Yet there is reason to worry that the new lines will end up much like the old.

The Kenyan project is perhaps the most ambitious. Unlike the old line, which is on a 1,067mm gauge, the new railway is built to a modern “standard gauge” (1,435mm), which ought to increase capacity. Travellers on the ancient British-era passenger trains, which run three times a week from Nairobi to Mombasa, now have their view of the elephants of Tsavo National Park impeded by an enormous embankment for the new line. The idea is that it will carry as much as half of the cargo unloaded at the port of Mombasa, or about ten times as much as the current railway shifts.



Drivers on the main road to the capital ought to cheer if the line results in fewer smoke-spewing trucks coming out of the port, but the business case for it is shaky. The new track is costing Kenya about $4 billion, mostly funded by a loan from the Chinese ExIm bank, but how it will be repaid is unclear.

Although only a year remains before completion, not only are tariffs and rates undecided, but it is not even clear who will run the railway. Kenyan officials have apparently taken to skipping trade conferences of late to avoid answering questions.

Could this be because the new railway is a dud investment? Its fastest trains will do a fairly mediocre 80kph. Much as with the old railway, parts of the new line will be single-track, forcing trains to stop, often for hours, to let others pass. Most absurdly, it is built to a lower standard of load-bearing than most other new freight railways. Some fret it may not be possible to load four full containers onto each wagon, as is done on other new lines. “They’re getting a third-rate railway for the cost of a very expensive one,” says a consultant.

Repaying the loans taken out to build the line will require hefty fees or huge volumes of traffic. But truckers—who now handle more than 95% of the freight moved from Mombasa port—will compete fiercely on price, and shipping companies may look for other ports if levies rise.

Rehabilitating the older line might have cost just 5% as much as building a new one on a new right of way, reckons Pierre Pozzo di Borgo of the International Finance Corporation, part of the World Bank. But efforts to mend rather than buy have generally not gone well either. Since the 1990s many African railways have been handed over to private concessions to boost investment and improve management. But the reality has been disappointing. Competition from truckers (who don’t have to pay their share to maintain roads, even though they do the most damage to them) has shifted cargo from rail to tarmac, shredding the business plans of concessionaires. Many are struggling to cover their running costs, never mind invest.

When the railway that runs from Dakar in Senegal to Mali was first put into private hands, the average age of track was 37 years on the Senegalese side and 51 years on the Malian side. When Tanzania’s network was concessioned in 2001, over half of the network still had the original colonial rails—more than 90 years old. And new lines, too, become old. In the 1970s, in a spirit of socialist co-operation, China built a brand-new line connecting Dar es Salaam, Tanzania’s commercial capital, to Zambia and its copper fields. It has since fallen into disrepair as bad as that of Tanzania’s colonial-era lines. If the latest generation of railways cannot make money either, the temptation then will be to skimp on maintenance.

If only governments were as enthusiastic about maintaining infrastructure as they are about building it. On a continent where almost everything is reused, from mobile-phone parts to plastic bags, governments seem to prefer to buy shiny new things, however expensive.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21699919-africas-new-railways-risk-going-way-old-ones-puffed-out/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Crimes against humanity

One dictator down

Chad’s former president has been convicted. Who’s next?

Jun 4th 2016 | LAGOS | From the print edition

Nicer than what you did to the opposition

HISSENE HABRE sat shrouded in sunglasses, a turban and a big white boubou on May 30th, as a court in Senegal found him guilty of crimes against humanity, rape and torture. Victims cheered after judges sentenced Chad’s ex-dictator (pictured) to life imprisonment. He raised his fists and shouted: “Down with France-Afrique!”—hinting absurdly that his conviction was a French colonial plot.

Perhaps 40,000 people died in Chad during Mr Habré’s reign of terror between 1982 and 1990. Armed by America (and supported with hundreds of millions of dollars in aid because of his opposition to Muammar Qadaffi’s regime in Libya), his political police crushed any tribe they deemed a threat to his rule. Simply belonging to one was enough to have you locked away in one of his prisons, the most sinister of which was a swimming pool covered in concrete. Torture was routine: a favourite technique was to tie all four limbs behind the back to induce paralysis; another was to force a victim’s mouth around the exhaust pipe of a running vehicle.

Prosecutors had little difficulty linking such crimes back to Mr Habré. One woman testified that he had raped her himself. One underling recalled how prisoners’ paperwork was sent to the president and returned with annotations. “E” stood for “exécuter”, he said. The dictator showed no “compassion” or “regret”, one of three judges concluded. Now 73, he will almost certainly die in a Senegalese jail.

This is a landmark for African justice, and a coup for the victims who have pursued it with help from Human Rights Watch, a watchdog. Mr Habré grabbed $11m from public coffers in the last days of his regime and has lived in cosy exile in Senegal for most of the 26 years since.

The court that finally tried him, known as the Extraordinary African Chambers (EAC), is the first in Africa to sentence an African leader following due process. And it is the first anywhere in which a national court has used the principle of universal jurisdiction (meaning it can hear a case regardless of where the crimes took place) to convict an ex-head of state for human-rights abuses.

Lawyers hope it will not be the last. Usually war crimes are investigated by international tribunals such as the International Criminal Court (ICC), rather than national courts. In 2012, a special tribunal in The Hague sentenced Charles Taylor, a former president of Liberia, to 50 years in jail for supporting hand-chopping rebels in neighbouring Sierra Leone. But the ICC is unpopular with African governments, which (wrongly) accuse it of racism. It also costs a fortune (the annual budget is more than $100m) and has a dismal record for convictions (two so far). If more African courts could try human-rights abusers, either in their home countries or in those where they have taken refuge, then perhaps fewer tyrants would escape justice.

There is reason to hope this may be happening. Laurent Gbagbo, the ex-president of Côte d’Ivoire, is currently on trial in The Hague for abuses committed after he refused to relinquish power in 2010. His wife Simone faces judges at home, where she is accused of organising abuses against the opposition. Hers is the first human-rights trial to take place in the country.

Yet not all courts are created equal. Mrs Gbagbo’s case is already riddled with allegations of irregularities and incomplete investigations. Côte d’Ivoire has ignored the ICC’s request that she be extradited to Europe. In other respects, the continent’s appetite for accountability is rather light. The African Union, for instance, wants its own court for human-rights abuses but thinks it ought to offer immunity to heads of state. Mr Habré would no doubt agree.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21699871-chads-former-president-has-been-convicted-whos-next-one-dictator-down/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Nigeria’s life coaches

Yes you can!

Help for hopeful Nigerians

Jun 4th 2016 | LAGOS | From the print edition



FROM the young hawker offering to sell motorists a toilet seat as he snakes through the never-ending jam that is normal traffic in Lagos, to the legions of scammers who make their living writing thousands of e-mails in the hopes of conning a few people out of some cash, Nigerians cannot be said to lack optimism. Yet in a country where poverty is rife, even the world’s most diligent transformers of lemons into lemonade need some help to see a nearly empty glass as half-full.

The pastors of Pentecostal mega-churches promise their congregations God-sent fortunes in return for a 10% tithe. If that sounds a bit dear, then a cut-price option is to subscribe to a service that sends inspirational text messages to your phone. This includes pearls such as: “Changing a face can change nothing, but facing a change can change everything.”

Bookworms can read their way to success. Jumia, an online retailer, says that motivational and self-help books are its bestsellers. In the tiny airports of the north, vendors offer such handy literature as “Fat-Proofing your Children”; in Lagos street vendors hawk the same. “Everyone wants to become the big man,” says a taxi-driver, as he crams a “Guide to the Corporate Machiavelli” and “The Power of Self-Discipline” into the seat pockets of his old SUV. “I want words that inspire me.”

But the kings of this trade are the motivational speakers. “You come to me if you want to get stuff done,” says the suavely-suited Steve Harris from a coffee spot in one of Lagos’s smarter corners. “I’m the guy who’s going to make it happen.”

Over the past few years a handful of life coaches like him have won semi-celebrity status, often trading on their own rise through the social ranks. Mr Harris says he briefly tried his hand at 419, a kind of fraud, after dropping out of university. “It’s not what you don’t have that limits you,” he preaches to captivated audiences in a crisp American accent. “It’s what you have but don’t know how to use.” Ogbo Awoke Ogbo, another speaker, spent two unemployed years squatting in a Lagos slum; eventually, he earned big bucks in oil. He tells his clients that shoddy schools should not stop them. “Self-development is a choice,” he says from a steamy office.

As well as inspirational quotes, such gurus offer practical advice on money management or health. Mr Harris turns away private clients if he thinks their problems cannot be solved in 90 days. Romantic assistance is popular too. Around Valentine’s Day, life coaches lecture women depressed by their lack of luck in love. Sam Adeyemi, a pastor, attracts hundreds of thousands of online hits when he preaches about how to find a spouse (“To find the right mate, you need to become the right mate,” is one of his gems). Popular coaches can command thousands of dollars for a speech, but bigger rewards come when they write books, set up online courses or start consultancies. Businesses pay handsomely for lessons in teamwork or customer care. “Nigerians are searching for answers, but they haven’t been given them,” Mr Ogbo says. “Through us they see a way out.” And what of those Nigerians so inspired by their idols that they, too, want to become motivational speakers? Well, there’s a book for that too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21699934-help-hopeful-nigerians-yes-you-can/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Palestine

A museum without exhibits

For a people without a state

Jun 4th 2016 | BIRZEIT | From the print edition



THE Palestinians’ new national museum is a striking monument to the state they don’t yet have. Designed by a firm in Dublin, the museum itself is angular and modern, with glass curtain walls topped by smooth white limestone. From afar it looks almost like a low-slung bunker perched on a hill north of Ramallah; inside, though, it is light and airy. A terraced garden stretches out below, filled with dozens of local species: almond and fig trees, mint and za’atar.

Only one thing is missing—the exhibits. When the first visitors arrive in June, they will tour an empty building. The curators had spent years planning an inaugural exhibition, “Never Part”, about the personal effects that Palestinian refugees took when they fled their homes. But the museum’s director, Jack Persekian, resigned in December, citing “disagreements” with management, and the show was postponed.

The saga of the $24m museum feels like a microcosm of Palestine’s broader problems. The idea of building it was first conceived in 1997, but the plans were soon suspended amid the violence of the second intifada, or Palestinian uprising. The organisers did not break ground until 2013, and the project, which they aimed to complete within a year, was plagued by a series of cost overruns and delays.

The museum blames many of those on Israel, which controls the border between Jordan and the occupied West Bank. The Austrian-made emergency-exit signs were inexplicably delayed by Israeli customs authorities; so were light fixtures from Germany. The Jordanian landscaper, meanwhile, has not been able to get a visa, so he supervises the grounds via video chat.

These are common complaints among developers in the area. Bashar al-Masri, a wealthy businessman who is building Palestine’s first planned city, keeps six months of inventory on hand to cope with the inevitable delays at the border. The need for vast warehouses, filled with everything from cement to marble, adds to the cost and the logistical challenges.

The museum is run by a private organisation, which at least spares it from the West Bank’s incessant political feuding. Mahmoud Abbas, the unpopular president, is in the 11th year of a four-year term, and is increasingly paranoid about his grip on power. Last year he sacked Yasser Abed Rabbo, a vocal critic who was, in effect, the number-two man in the Palestine Liberation Organisation. In an added fit of pique, Mr Abbas also booted him from his job as director of the Mahmoud Darwish Foundation, which runs a museum dedicated to Palestine’s national poet.

Over the past decade the Palestinians have built many of the trappings of a state: a police force, a central bank. At the inauguration ceremony on May 18th, Mr Abbas called the museum another important step. “The only thing left is declaring independence, which you will all declare soon,” he said. Yet the peace process is comatose, Israel’s government is unyielding and the Palestinians are hopelessly divided between Mr Abbas and the Islamist group Hamas, which controls Gaza.

Few believe him—including, it seems, the museum’s directors. Without an independent state, the 1.8m people in Gaza cannot visit, nor can the 3m refugees who live in neighbouring countries. So the curators are planning a series of satellite shows. The first exhibition in Palestine’s national museum, about the history of local embroidery, will be in Beirut.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21699935-people-without-state-museum-without-exhibits/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Syria’s war

Never-ending horror

The conflict has become ever more intractable

Jun 4th 2016 | BEIRUT | From the print edition



SYRIA’S war is now into its sixth year. Even when it seems it could not get any worse, it does. On May 31st air strikes around the national hospital in Idlib, a rebel-held part of north-western Syria, destroyed one of the few remaining health-care facilities in opposition territory. At least 23 people died and scores were injured in strikes allegedly carried out by Russia, which joined the war last year to prop up Bashar al-Assad, the country’s blood-spattered dictator.

The strikes occurred despite the declaration of a ceasefire that supposedly came into force on February 27th, and in the face of unconvincing Syrian and Russian claims that their bombs are aimed only at extremists. In fact Mr Assad and his allies appear to be intensifying a strategy of squeezing the moderate opposition and deliberately targeting civilians who live in rebel-held areas. Human-rights groups protest that the rules of war are being brazenly flouted.

As worrying is an offensive by jihadists of Islamic State (IS), who have been closing in on Azaz and Marea, two towns north of Aleppo close to the Turkish border. These bastions of the opposition are now being threatened by two factions: IS on one side and the regime and its Kurdish allies on the other. The UN says thousands of Syrians are trapped, and that civilians have been denied safe passage away from the fighting by Syrian and allied Kurdish forces.

This is bad news for America and its Western allies, who had hoped to train and support moderate Syrian Arab opposition groups to fight IS. The last such outfit funded by a $500m Pentagon programme is now in danger of being obliterated by IS in the east of the country. All the other so-called moderate Arab groups that had received American help have disappointed. Some have been taken over by jihadists. Others have seen their members defect to groups such as IS and the local affiliate of al-Qaeda—or be kidnapped by them.

A newer American plan to support the Syrian Democratic Force, a group made up largely of Kurds, is faring somewhat better. This week the group occupied nine villages along the Euphrates close to Manbij (see map). But it is unlikely that it can take the Arab city of Raqqa, the capital of the self-proclaimed IS caliphate.

Attempts to stop the fighting through diplomacy are also in disarray. On May 29th Muhammad Alloush, a member of the Syrian opposition’s High Negotiations Committee, gave up, saying the talks were a “failure”. Staffan de Mistura, the UN envoy, has said negotiations, which fell apart yet again in April, will not restart for at least another three weeks.

For civilians trapped by the fighting there is little respite. On April 17th the International Syrian Support Group, a club of 20-odd countries including Britain and Russia, said they would carry out air drops of food and medical supplies to 1m Syrians in besieged towns, starting on June 1st, if Mr Assad continued to refuse access to aid convoys. Yet those hopes appear to have been dashed: Mr Mistura said recently that air drops could take place only with the co-operation of the government that is trying to block them. Unfortunately, the long charade of talks followed by broken ceasefires suits Mr Assad only too well. While Syria burns, he keeps his crown.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21699940-conflict-has-become-ever-more-intractable-never-ending-horror/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Western Sahara

A forgotten leader of a lost cause

Muhammad Abdelaziz has died, but his people’s grievances still fester

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR forty years Muhammad Abdelaziz led his exiled people in the wilderness, promising to take them across the 1,600-mile-long Morrocan wall that bisects their homeland, and onwards to an independent Western Sahara. He died on May 31st as far from his goal as when he began. Neither 15 years of guerrilla war nor 25 years of UN-mediated talks reversed their exodus. Mr Abdelaziz leaves behind 100,000 refugees encamped in the world’s harshest desert, and perhaps four times that number under a repressive Moroccan thumb.

For most of his time as leader of the Sahrawis, the world ignored their plight. Western Sahara, a former Spanish colony, had never been a state. The UN first promised the Sahrawis a referendum on self-determination in the 1960s and has often repeated that promise, but never kept it.

Morocco sent 300,000 settlers into Western Sahara after the Spanish withdrew in 1975, chasing out large numbers of Sahrawis and annexing the territory. A UN peacekeeping mission was established in 1991 to count voters, but otherwise outsiders have largely looked the other way. For Europe, Morocco’s assistance in suppressing terrorism and migration out of Africa has made it too important an ally to risk a showdown over a forgotten cause. Its buoyant economy and the inclusion of Islamists in its political system have earned it praise, too. And who wants to revive one of the Middle East’s few dormant conflicts?

Mr Abdelaziz was an old-fashioned Marxist who, like Muammar Qaddafi of Libya, took power while only in his 20s. American admirers hailed him as a Sahrawi George Washington, but his ten successive election victories started to look about as credible as the fictional Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic he professed to lead: even Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe has not lasted as long in office.

Mr Abdelaziz’s armed force, the Polisario Front, has not fought in a generation. His people are in camps where for half the year the temperature exceeds 50 degrees; other elements batter them for the rest. Rains in October 2015 washed away 18,000 tents and mud huts. Now that he is dead, Morocco hopes that a steady trickle of Sahrawis back to Western Sahara from exile in Algeria may yet become a flood.

In this they will probably be disappointed. Frustrated, resentful and now rudderless, a third generation of Sahrawi refugees are again rattling sabres.

Some refugees resort to smuggling drugs and fuel to get by; and in the Sahara the line between smugglers and jihadists is often blurry. A man called Abu Walid al-Sahrawi has declared his allegiance to Islamic State (IS), and threatened to attack Morocco’s tourism industry, the last in north Africa that has so far escaped this fate. Morocco’s ongoing spat with Algeria, which continues to harbour Polisario, increases uncertainty. Both states face a common threat from IS, but they detest each other too much to join forces against it.

For the first time in years, Western powers sound unnerved. In March Morocco’s King Muhammad expelled much of the UN’s Saharan mission after Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary-general, described Western Sahara as occupied territory. The UN Security Council responded by giving him 90 days to let the UN mission return. Morocco is celebrating the death of Mr Abdelaziz, a man it called a mercenary, a traitor and a terrorist. But his cause will not die with him.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21699943-muhammad-abdelaziz-has-died-his-peoples-grievances-still-fester-forgotten/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Innovation in the Arab world

From zero to not much more

How to be creative in a stifling region

Jun 4th 2016 | BEIRUT | From the print edition



MANY people try to keep a poker face when playing cards, but not when looking at adverts. Hamzeh al-Fuqha, an Emirati, turned this simple fact into a money-spinner. SmartAd, founded in 2012, uses facial recognition technology to tell businesses how people respond to their marketing. The software, used by Burger King among others, can also tell the age and sex of the viewer. It is a rare example of real innovation coming from the Arab world.

The region was once famed for its science and mathematics (including the invention of the zero). Yet it has fallen badly behind on measures of creativity, such as patents filed or academic papers published. Its rulers say they want to encourage more research and development (R&D), but few seem to try very hard.

Arab countries produce 5.9% of the world’s GDP, but the region’s governments account for less than 1% of total global R&D spending, according to UNESCO. Bahrain spends just 0.04% of GDP; Egypt spends 0.7% (see chart). By contrast India spends about 0.8% and Britain 1.6%.

Much of this is wasted. In Egypt government officials and scientists don’t talk much, so money is poorly allocated. Incentives are skewed, too. Promotions for professors depend on whom they know rather than what they discover.

The bigger deficit, however, is that private companies barely spend on R&D, which accounts for much of the cash elsewhere, says Nazar Hassan of UNESCO. Chinese companies, for instance, spend almost four times more than their government, and American ones more than two and a half times. Israeli firms are global leaders, contributing at least three-quarters of the country’s total R&D outlay. By contrast, in much of the Arab world the private sector’s contribution is less than 5%.

Rana Dajani, a Jordanian scientist, reckons the biggest problem is “the lack of an environment that encourages freethinking and exploration”. Schools emphasise rote learning. Rulers stifle political debate.

Many areas of research are hampered not only by oppressive politics, but also by a perceived clash between Islam and science. Medicine is one area that can be controversial, particularly in fields of research that involve embryos. Yet such barriers are not insurmountable.

After years of consultation with scientists and theologians Jordan passed a law in 2014 allowing stem-cell research. Among its provisions was that embryos could only be created from the sperm and eggs of married couples. To allay concerns that it might lead to abortions (which are banned in the kingdom) only state institutions may do such research.

Others are also making progress. Morocco’s technology parks and incubators have helped it become the Arab world’s leading exporter of high-tech products and software. It applies for the second-largest number of patents, after Egypt, despite its much smaller population.

And private innovators are trying their hand at tech startups, albeit in low-risk niches such as online retailing or Arabic versions of apps developed elsewhere. Careem, for instance, is the Saudi version of Uber, an American car-hailing app.

Ms Dajani notes that Arab scientists and innovators achieve far more abroad than at home. (For example, Steve Jobs, the founder of Apple, was half-Syrian.) To foster creativity, the Middle East needs to allow more critical thinking. Such freedom might have other benefits, too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21699955-how-be-creative-stifling-region-zero-not-much-more/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Qatar

The other Wahhabi state

A kinder, gentler puritanism (for some)

Jun 4th 2016 | DOHA | From the print edition



MIGHT soccer fans yet cheer a Wahhabi state? Qatar, the World Cup’s hosts in 2022, adheres to the same puritanical creed as its overbearing neighbour, Saudi Arabia. But nightclubs on hotel rooftops loom above the national mosque of Ibn Abdel Wahhab, the 18th century zealot who gave Wahhabism its name. Bars advertise happy hours on its beaches and a state-owned distribution centre supplies not just liquor but pork.

Like the Al Sauds, Qatar’s ruling clan, Al Thani, originates from the peninsula’s Nejd interior, whence the Wahhabis sprung. Qatar once offered a refuge for Wahhabi preachers whom even Saudi Arabia considered extreme, and Osama bin Laden is said to have stopped by. But with the dawn of a new millennium Qatar has entered a different league. Women drive and there are no religious police forcing businesses to shut during prayer times.

The emirate has opened branches of American universities and a “Church City”—unthinkable in Saudi Arabia—where priests count their congregations of migrant workers in thousands. And unlike Saudi literalism, Qatar’s serene Museum of Islamic Art portrays Islam in all its manifold forms: its current exhibition, “Qajar Women”, breaks three conservative Sunni taboos, portraying the unveiled female figure, Iranian culture and enlightened Shias.

Such is his embrace of global culture that some locals worry that Qatar’s emir, Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, has forsaken his own in a country whose 300,000 citizens are less than 15% of the population (although most migrants are still treated like serfs). “We’re not an Islamic state,” complains a Qatari cleric in a state-funded Islamic centre, who says his ilk are oppressed. Qatar foolishly imagines that un-Islamic practices can be shut away in gated communities like embassies, he says.

Other signs of a backlash are evident. The education ministry has reinstated Arabic as the language of science tuition in schools. Plans to offer co-ed lectures at Qatar’s segregated public university (to cut costs, mind you) have been shelved, after conservatives threatened a boycott. Qataris are still banned from the country’s bars and from its liquor stores, but many sneak in after shedding their national dress. And though Church City lies far beyond Doha’s horizon, its churches cannot erect crucifixes on their domes. “Religious complex”, reads the innocuous sign at its gates.

This cosmopolitan version of Wahhabism is largely a product of the current emir and his family. Although frowned on by puritans, it has caused few open ructions. A more tolerant Wahhabism might yet take root in the desert. Even conservative women now drive.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21699960-kinder-gentler-puritanism-some-other-wahhabi-state/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




France on strike: Aux barricades

Turkey’s Kurds: War of attrition

Germany and the Armenian genocide: Name and shame

Corruption in Romania: Death of an antiseptic salesman

Russia’s empty elections: United Russia, divided Putin

Charlemagne: For the love of pizza





Articles Sections Next

France on strike

Aux barricades

France tries to end its strikes before Europe’s football championship starts

Jun 4th 2016 | GRANDPUITS | From the print edition



AN ERUPTION of steel piping in the middle of wheatfields, the Grandpuits refinery is the chief petrol supplier to the Paris region. But no crude has flowed in, and no petrol tanker driven out, since unions began a strike there on May 17th. On a weekday, striking workers in lemon-yellow jackets from the Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT), a hardline French union, huddle on the picket line in a show of masculine solidarity, defiantly cooking sausages despite the beating rain. A little fridge, under a canvas awning, is stocked with beer. A brazier, in an old oil drum, is flaming. “We’ve got fresh baguettes, and all the meat sauces,” declares one striker. “We’ll hold out to the very end.”

For the past two weeks a battle over the survival of a reformist French government, and with it the future of the Socialist Party, has been playing out at refineries, oil depots and on the transport network. Last week strikes and oil blockades brought petrol shortages. Some 2,300 petrol stations—a fifth of the total—either ran dry, or rationed sales at the pump. This week, after riot police cleared most of the blocked refineries, petrol distribution eased. But work stoppages spread to the railways and ports, with Air France pilots also voting to join the strikes.

France is no stranger to the theatre of industrial action and political stand-off. But this conflict, unusually, pits the left against the left. On one side stands President François Hollande’s Socialist government, now friendlier to business under Manuel Valls, the reformist prime minister, and with it the pragmatic unionists of the Confédération Française Démocratique du Travail (CFDT). On the other is the CGT, the country’s biggest union, historically tied to the Communist Party, along with parliamentary rebels from the governing Socialist Party.



The central grievance is Mr Valls’s attempt to inject flexibility into France’s 3,280-page labour code. This began as a bold effort to loosen the labour market and encourage job creation in a country with 10% unemployment. But, after protests, the final bill was more modest. It will ease redundancy rules and partly decentralise collective bargaining, making it simpler for firms to negotiate working time directly with their staff and undercut sector-wide agreements. Because Socialist rebels rejected even the softer version, Mr Valls used an express procedure to push the bill through parliament without a vote, surviving a motion of no-confidence that this triggered.

For the CGT this was a mobilising moment, a sort of last gasp for a movement nostalgic for glorious victories of the past. The union may look fierce, but it has drawn ever-fewer protesters on to the streets. Less than 3% of workers are paid-up members. Its new leader, Philippe Martinez, a former Renault technician who sports a Mexican moustache and is nicknamed Zapata, spotted a chance to make his mark. He was photographed histrionically throwing a tyre on a barricade outside a blocked oil depot. The showdown is turning into a battle of wills between two men—Mr Valls and Mr Martinez, both of Spanish origin—and two competing visions of the left. Mr Valls’s behaviour was anti-democratic, said Mr Martinez, for whom the labour law marks a “return to the 19th century”.

Past centre-right governments have ceded to paralysing French strikes and protests, notably in 1995 and 2006. But this is the first time a Socialist government has clashed over economic reform with those who helped to bring it to power. Which makes it both more symbolic, as a test of what sort of left France wants, and more complex to manage. Mr Hollande, the most unpopular modern president, has already shelved a bill to strip citizenship from terrorists because of opposition on the left. He can ill afford another climb-down. His woes have dragged down the once-popular Mr Valls, who nonetheless seems determined to prove that France can reform and is mindful of his place in history. “I don’t want to join the list of all those who have backed down and cost France wasted time,” he says, insisting that the CGT cannot “hold France hostage”.



Pressure to end the conflict, however, is building. The labour law moves to the Senate on June 14th, when a national strike is planned. Four days earlier the European championship, an international football tournament, kicks off in France. The country is still under a state of emergency, and there were already worries about security. The government is betting on popular impatience to squeeze the CGT. Although there is a lingering romantic sympathy for resistance, public support for strikes tends to ebb with time. Fully 63% say they have a poor opinion of the CGT. More worrying, the government is meddling in unrelated labour disputes, including on the railways, in order to contain discontent.

There is an underlying lesson in all this. For years in opposition, the French Socialist Party shied away from critical self-examination. It never made a choice between traditional tax-and-spend socialism and a more moderate German or Scandinavian social democracy. For 11 of those years, Mr Hollande was the party leader. Yet he embraced ambiguity, and campaigned for election in 2012 vowing to squeeze the rich and fight high finance, before converting to more market-friendly economics halfway through his term.

Little wonder Mr Hollande’s voters feel betrayed. The CGT may be unrepresentative, misguided and bloody-minded, but it has a point. On the Grandpuits picket line, the strikers fume when they hear the president’s name. “In the past, each time we had a Socialist government, it improved conditions for the workers,” says David Picoron, a CGT rep. “But this is a government for the bosses. We never voted for that.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21699946-france-tries-end-its-strikes-europes-football-championship-starts-aux-barricades/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Turkey’s Kurds

War of attrition

The HDP, once the hope of Turkey’s Kurds, has been cornered

Jun 4th 2016 | ANKARA AND DIYARBAKIR | From the print edition

Destroying the souk to save it

ASKED how he is feeling these days, Selahattin Demirtas forgoes the pleasantries. “I’m trying to be doing well, given the circumstances,” he says, taking a seat at his office in the Turkish capital, Ankara. Amid unrelenting bloodshed in the Kurdish southeast, Mr Demirtas’s mood has darkened. Only last June, his People’s Democratic Party (HDP) pulled off a major election upset, denying the ruling Justice and Development (AK) party the parliamentary majority it had held for 12 years. Today, the man once hailed as the Kurdish Obama and the saviour of Turkey’s hapless opposition faces spurious terror charges from the government and dwindling support among both Kurds and Turks. If Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, were to call a snap vote, say pollsters, the HDP would probably miss the 10% threshold needed to make it into parliament.

This is largely Mr Erdogan’s doing. He has marched Turks back to the ballot box to reclaim his majority, unleashed mortars and tanks against militants in Kurdish cities, locked the HDP out of the mainstream media and stripped its MPs, including Mr Demirtas, of their parliamentary immunity from prosecution. At least 50 of the group’s 59 MPs face charges of supporting the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party, or PKK. (They have asked the constitutional court to restore their immunity.) Mr Erdogan has pledged to wipe out the PKK, which Turkey labels a terrorist group but which many Kurds consider a champion of their national cause. Having already left over a thousand dead since last year, the violence now threatens to spiral into a civil war, warns Mr Demirtas.

Yet the HDP also has itself to blame. In urban areas across the southeast, it has ceded ground to militants linked to the PKK. It has also alienated many of its sympathisers in Turkey’s west. In December, amid a diplomatic crisis after Turkey shot down a Russian jet, Mr Demirtas came in for some flak for paying an official visit to Moscow. In February another HDP deputy attended a wake for a PKK suicide bomber who killed 29 people.

In the southeastern city of Diyarbakir, the destruction wrought by months of clashes is easy to see from an aeroplane window. Swathes of what was once a residential neighbourhood are now empty fields. Officials claim that the area, having been rigged with explosives by the insurgents, had to be razed to the ground. Human-rights groups blame disproportionate force by Turkish troops. Many locals are as disappointed with their HDP politicians as they are livid with Mr Erdogan. “They entrusted Kurdish autonomy to young kids with guns,” complains a businessman.

Uncharacteristically for a Turkish politician, Mr Demirtas admits to making mistakes. “People know who destroyed all these towns,” he says, referring to Mr Erdogan, “but it was our duty as a party to protect them.” Mr Demirtas says the HDP will continue to push for a negotiated solution to the Kurdish conflict, now in its fourth decade, but rules out a deal with Mr Erdogan.

None of this bodes well for the southeast. The army has cleared the insurgents from most cities, but deadly blasts rock the region each day. Outside Diyarbakir, a PKK truck packed with explosives killed at least 16 villagers last week. Allegations of atrocities are galvanising young Kurds: in the town of Cizre over 100 people were killed in February while hiding from Turkish forces in basements. (The circumstances are unclear, but many were burnt to death.) Seeing their representatives evicted from parliament “would put people in a position where they can no longer tell the PKK to put down their arms,” says Mehmet Kaya, head of the Tigris Communal Research Centre, a Diyarbakir think-tank. Whatever the HDP’s mistakes over the past year, disenfranchising the millions of Kurds who voted it into office will only make matters worse.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21699949-hdp-once-hope-turkeys-kurds-has-been-cornered-war-attrition/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Germany and the Armenian genocide

Name and shame

Deciding what to call a century-old Turkish atrocity

Jun 4th 2016 | BERLIN | From the print edition

The past is present

TURKEY considers the Ottoman Empire’s mass murder of well over a million Armenians and other Christians in 1915-17 a tragedy. But “genocide”? Armenia and many historians say it was. Turkey insists it was not—and berates any country, from France to the Vatican, that uses the word. Nonetheless, more than 20 countries have officially recognised the killings as genocide. On June 2nd it was Germany’s turn, when its Bundestag passed a resolution calling the killings “genocide” no fewer than four times.

That vote could not have come at a worse time for Angela Merkel, the German chancellor. She is the main architect of a deal reached in March between Turkey and the European Union, under which Turkey promised to take back refugees who cross to the Greek islands; in return, the EU will pay Turkey €6 billion ($6.7 billion) in aid, allow Turks to enter without visas and revive talks to accept Turkey as a member state one day. Mrs Merkel, more than any other EU leader, needed this deal: she wants an orderly and “European” solution to the refugee crisis, rather than brute border closings by individual member states.

But Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, clearly interpreted Mrs Merkel’s efforts as weakness. Since the deal he has pressed ahead in his quest to become an autocrat, rejecting European criticisms with threats to scupper the refugee deal and let hundreds of thousands of refugees make their way to Greece again. This has exposed Mrs Merkel to criticism in Germany that she has sold out to a dictator. Even members of her own coalition accuse her of kow-towing. Voters share the misgivings. In a poll in April, 68% opposed Turkish membership of the EU, and 79% said that Turkey “cannot be trusted”.

Some see the souring of the relationship as retribution for Mrs Merkel’s past diplomatic mistakes. She “showed zero point zero interest in Turkey until she rediscovered it in the refugee crisis”, says Cem Özdemir, a son of Turkish immigrants and co-leader of the Green Party who is also the driving force behind the genocide resolution. In 2007 Mrs Merkel, along with other European leaders, in effect slammed the door shut for Turkey’s ambitions to join the EU. At that time Mr Erdogan, then prime minister, was still claiming to modernise Turkey and bring it into line with EU norms on civil liberties. Stung by Mrs Merkel’s rejection, Mr Erdogan turned against the West and decided to become a neo-Ottoman sultan instead, thinks Joschka Fischer, a former foreign minister.

That psychology explains much of the recent German-Turkish antics. Mr Erdogan went ballistic in May after a German comedian ridiculed him (see article). An orchestra in Dresden has been performing a series of concerts called “Aghet”, Armenian for “catastrophe” (referring to the genocide). The European Commission gave the project €200,000; after Turkish protests, the commission removed advertisements for “Aghet” from its website. Many Germans are enraged that Turkey tries to muzzle free speech abroad.

Turkey will respond to the Bundestag’s resolution with its usual sound and fury. In late May, three groups in parliament, including Mr Erdogan’s ruling Justice and Development (AK) party, condemned the draft as a “distortion of historical facts”. Turkey withdrew its ambassadors to Austria, Luxembourg, and the Vatican last year after similar pronouncements about the 1915 killings. Mr Erdogan has warned of a deterioration in ties with Berlin, albeit without mentioning the refugee deal.

Mr Özdemir originally meant to put the genocide resolution to a vote on April 24, 2015, the centenary of its start. Anxious to avoid provoking Turkey, Mrs Merkel kept delaying, he says, even though the new timing looks even worse. This spring Mr Özdemir pushed ahead again. The resolution is necessary to acknowledge Germany’s complicity in the genocide as the Ottoman Empire’s main ally at the time, he says. As for Turkey, he thinks, if it had dealt honestly with its past and its minorities, it might already be an EU member.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21699952-deciding-what-call-century-old-turkish-atrocity-name-and-shame/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Corruption in Romania

Death of an antiseptic salesman

Romania’s latest scandal features watered-down disinfectant in hospitals

Jun 4th 2016 | BUCHAREST | From the print edition

Something smells bad

UNTIL a month ago Dan Condrea was, to all appearances, a successful Romanian businessman. His company, Hexi Pharma, made a healthy income supplying disinfectant to Romanian hospitals. That was before a team of journalists revealed that Hexi Pharma had been diluting its products, possibly causing patients to die from antibiotic-resistant infections. On May 22nd Mr Condrea drove his car into a tree. Witnesses said he was going over 60mph, and police said there were no signs of an attempt to brake. It took over a week to confirm that the badly damaged body was his.

The public reaction since the scandal broke in late April has been furious. The health minister was forced to resign on May 9th after he tried to play down the seriousness of the situation. The health ministry has withdrawn all Hexi Pharma products from hospitals.

Journalists began looking into hospital supplies after another scandal, a fire in Bucharest last October at a nightclub that violated safety regulations. The fire left 27 dead at the scene; a further 37 died later, and doctors said many had succumbed to infections picked up in hospital. Reporters at Gazeta Sporturilor, a sports newspaper, found that disinfectant supplied by Hexi Pharma had been diluted, in some cases to just one-tenth of the concentration on the label.

“People here didn’t realise what a killing machine many Romanian hospitals are,” says Alina Mungiu-Pippidi, a Romanian corruption expert. Over the past nine years Hexi Pharma has had contracts to supply more than 350 hospitals across Romania, including two of Bucharest’s biggest emergency hospitals. The disinfectant it sold was often heavily marked up in price.

Hexi Pharma was indicted last month, and Mr Condrea had been due to be questioned by prosecutors the day after the crash. Many have asked how a small company managed to win so many public contracts. A report by the same group of journalists accuses hospital directors of taking a 30% cut of contracts with Hexi Pharma, and suggested that this practice is widespread in the Romanian health-care sector.

Romania ranks near the bottom in Europe on Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, yet recently the country has been trying to clean up its act. Last year Romania’s National Anti-corruption Directorate (DNA) prosecuted more than 1,250 people, including a former prime minister, five ministers and 16 members of parliament. The DNA’s director, Laura Codruta Kovesi, says the health-care sector is a priority target. For many in Romania, however, the Hexi Pharma scandal is proof that change is not happening fast enough.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21699880-romanias-latest-scandal-features-watered-down-disinfectant-hospitals-death-antiseptic/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Russia’s empty elections

United Russia, divided Putin

The president has crushed the opposition, but technocrats and security hawks are fighting for his favour

Jun 4th 2016 | MOSCOW | From the print edition

Puny liberals, you cannot defeat me

WITH three months left until parliamentary elections, United Russia, Russia’s ruling party, has come up with a new slogan: Vazhno Vybrat’ Pravil’no. The message (“It is vital to choose correctly”) is an ominous reminder to voters that some choices may be “wrong”, and its acronym—VVP—hints at the correct one: Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin. The party is not using his image in its campaign, for fear of dragging down his popularity.

In the last parliamentary elections in 2011, when a majority voted against United Russia, the Kremlin tampered with the results. This sparked mass protests in large cities. More than 100,000 people took to the streets of central Moscow clamouring for “Russia without Putin”. Alexei Navalny, a popular blogger, was transformed into a viable opposition leader. Mr Putin’s hold on power never looked shakier.

Since then, the Kremlin has been doing everything in its power to prevent a repeat. Anyone with an independent position has been “sent a signal that it will end badly”, says Maria Lipman, editor of Counterpoint, a journal. Opposition leaders have been systematically trashed by the state media. Russian nationalist movements that once opposed the government have been co-opted or crushed. NGOs, including election-monitoring groups, have been declared “foreign agents” and forced to close. The remains of the independent media have come under attack. Many of the activists of the protests in 2011 and 2012 have been pushed out of the country. Some will watch the vote from prison. Boris Nemtsov, the most respected and recognised Russian liberal, has been murdered.

The screws are being tightened everywhere. The Duma passed a law last year allowing the police to open fire on crowds. Pro-government vigilantes have stepped up attacks on opposition leaders. (Mr Navalny was recently beaten up by thugs dressed as Cossacks.)

Ideologically, Mr Putin’s expansionist nationalism, expressed in the annexation of Crimea and the war in Ukraine, has trumped the demands for modernisation voiced by the protesters five years ago. Many of those who once cheered for reform have embraced the new imperialism. “There is no doubt that our support base has been reduced,” says Mr Navalny.

Pick a candidate, any candidate

The Kremlin has also learned the risks of blatant rigging. To give these elections a veneer of respectability, Mr Putin replaced Vladimir Churov, the too-obviously-loyal head of the election commission (nicknamed “the magician”, for his ability to make troublesome results disappear) with Ella Pamfilova, a more respected human-rights ombudsman. Ballot-stuffing will be unnecessary: the only serious opposition, Mr Navalny’s Progress Party, has been barred from registering.

Big protests are unlikely. Polls show Russians are unhappy with the faltering economy but are less willing to wave placards than they were five years ago, when growth was solid. “Dissatisfaction is breeding apathy,” says Lev Gudkov, head of the Levada Centre, an independent pollster.

But although elections have been rendered meaningless, a real fight for Russia’s future is unfolding in the corridors of the Kremlin. Technocrats are trying to win Mr Putin over by persuading him that their economic reforms will help him hold on to power. Mikhail Dmitriev, a former deputy economics minister, notes a strong demand within the Kremlin for deregulation and reduction of bureaucracy.

The technocratic camp took heart when Mr Putin appointed Alexei Kudrin, a former finance minister, to head the Centre for Strategic Research, a think-tank charged with devising reforms. Mr Kudrin’s influence, says Mr Dmitriev, is greater than any minister’s. The technocrats also include German Gref, a former minister who now heads Sberbank, Russia’s largest state-owned bank.



Oil price and Russian politics: a history

The economic downturn may have created an impetus for change from within. Russia’s notoriously corrupt customs department is being improved. The country has moved up 73 places in the World Bank’s ease-of-doing-business index over the past few years. The strategy of the technocrats, says Kirill Rogov, a political analyst, is to convince Mr Putin that he is a reformer at heart—and that the reforms made so far are working.

Most liberals, however, see the technocrats’ optimism as wishful thinking. Russia’s lack of property rights, the arbitrary power of its security services and the geopolitical tension created by its imperial adventures outweigh any reforms. In April Mr Putin announced the creation of a new “National Guard” that will absorb the country’s riot-control units and answer to his former bodyguard. The new force is seen as an insurance policy against unrest.

The replacement of open politics with Byzantine court manoeuvring is nothing new in Russia. Even during the presidency of Boris Yeltsin in the 1990s, the real struggle was not between Mr Yeltsin and the Communists who challenged him in the presidential elections. Rather it took place inside the Kremlin, between economic liberals and security types, including Mr Yeltsin’s bodyguard, who struggled to gain the president’s ear. The fight for Mr Putin’s favour is all the more important, since few liberals believe he will step down when his current term expires in 2018. The question is not whether Mr Putin will run, but which incarnation of Mr Putin will win.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21699944-president-has-crushed-opposition-technocrats-and-security-hawks-are-fighting-his/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

For the love of pizza

Italy’s pride in “genuine” food reveals much about its economic woes

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



CALL it pizza, pitta or fougasse: when Europe’s holidaymakers head for the Mediterranean this summer, they will feast on some type of flatbread with condiments. Such dishes have age-old roots. In the “Aeneid”, Virgil’s heroes forage for a meal of forest fruit laid on pieces of hard bread on the grass. Famished, they eat the bread, too: “See, we devour the plates on which we fed.”

Of all these edible platters, it is pizza that has become the world’s favourite fast food, plain dough onto which each country bakes its own flavours: mussels in the Netherlands, Teriyaki chicken and seaweed in Japan. Born in Naples, the modern pizza was the poor man’s meal. One 19th-century American visitor, Samuel Morse (inventor of the telegraph), thought it “like a piece of bread that had been taken reeking out of the sewer”. For Alexandre Dumas, it was “the gastronomic thermometer of the market”: if fish pizza was cheap, there had been a good catch; if oil pizza was dear, there had been a bad olive harvest.

These days pizza is a gastronomic mirror, reflecting Italy’s anxiety about globalisation. Italians are rightly proud of their food, yet dismayed at its bastardisation by the rest of the world. They fear that the best in Italian civiltà is being looted by others. It is America, not Italy, that has turned everything from pizza to cappuccino into profitable global franchises; Domino’s and Starbucks are even trying to penetrate Italy.

Now Naples is fighting to reclaim “real” pizza. Last month hundreds of red-capped pizzaioli gathered to bake the world’s longest pizza, 1,853.88 metres of it, snaking along the waterfront with the city’s fabled vistas of Mount Vesuvius and Capri. It was all in support of Italy’s bid to have the art of Neapolitan pizza recognised by UNESCO as a treasure in the world’s “intangible cultural heritage”, alongside Mongolian knuckle-bone shooting and Brazil’s capoeira dance. A ruling is expected next year.

In 2010 the European Union registered Neapolitan pizza as a Traditional Speciality Guaranteed (TSG) product. It stipulates that certified “Pizza Napoletana TSG” must consist of a base of twice-leavened, hand-shaped dough (no rolling pin), no wider than 35cm. It must be 0.4cm thick at the centre and 1cm-2cm around the rim. It may be garnished in just three ways: with tomatoes and extra-virgin olive oil, or with certified mozzarella from either buffalo’s or cow’s milk. It must be baked in a wood-fired oven and eaten on the spot, not frozen or vacuum-packed.

This is culinary dogmatism. European food-inspectors surely have better things to do than take a ruler to pizza. The pizzaioli say they want only acknowledgment of their tradition. One oft-heard fear is that, Heaven forfend, America might try to gain recognition for its own inferior pizza. Should Hamburg then copyright the hamburger, or Crimea steak tartare? Tellingly, Italy is the most assiduous state in claiming EU “geographical indications” (GI), be they the stringent Protected Designation of Origin (eg, Chianti Classico), the looser Protected Geographical Indication (eg, Cantucci Toscani) or the weakest appellation, TSG. Excluding TSGs, Italy has secured protection for 924 food products, wines and other drinks, more than France (754) or Spain (361).

Chefs and farmers, pizza-makers included, have every right to brand their dish and set their own standards. The state must obviously ensure that food is safe. Governments have an interest, too, in guaranteeing the quality of some premium appellations—Champagne, say. But the profligate use of state-enforced GIs smacks of producers trying to gouge consumers. Italy betrays an innate protectionism: rather than compete on global markets, producers want to enshrine “heritage”, ask for Europe’s help and maximise the rents they can extract from “quality” products. They complicate trade deals as the EU seeks to stop others from using terms such as “feta”. Hosuk Lee-Makiyama, a fellow of OPEN, a new British think-tank, says the value of geographical indications in trade deals is unproven; they are mostly a sop to farm lobbies to compensate for cuts in subsidies.

Above all, the name-craze limits scale, productivity and innovation. Take Roberto Brazzale, whose family has made Parmesan-style “grana” cheese for generations. He shifted part of his work to the Czech Republic where, he argues, the milk is superior and costs are lower. His “Gran Moravia”, made by Italian methods and aged in Italy, is indistinguishable from the official “Grana Padano”, yet may not be identified as such. The Po valley cannot produce enough milk to satisfy the potential global demand for Italian grana, he argues; and decreeing the use of animal rather than vegetable rennet means official cheesemakers struggle to sell to vegetarians and observant Muslims and Jews.

Slow food, slow economy

At its best Italy’s love of tradition makes for idyllic holidays, wonderful wines and delightful Slow Food. Italians like to think that their art, culture and way of life will lift them out of economic torpor. But the sacralisation of heritage is a millstone. Italy has seen almost no productivity growth in more than a decade, in part because its firms remain small: on average they count seven employees, about the size of a family-run pizzeria. Artisan products offer no salvation. Italy has no global food chains to speak of (or even big retailers, such as France’s Carrefour). It may be home to espresso, but the next-door Swiss invented Nespresso.

If pizza embodies Italy’s woes on a plate, it also offers hope. Look closely at a Neapolitan pizza: the succulent tomatoes came from the New World; the best mozzarella is made from the milk of the buffalo, an Asian beast that may have arrived in Italy with the barbarian tribes who conquered Rome; the aromatic basil originates from India. Neapolitan migrants carried pizza across Italy and America. The genius of Italy lies in its inventiveness and adaptability—not in a hallowed land, nor in an imagined tradition canonised by the state. That way lies paralysis and cultural fossilisation.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21699922-italys-pride-genuine-food-reveals-much-about-its-economic-woes-love-pizza/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




Brexit and the union: Tug of war

Retail: Modesty sells

Brexit brief: If it were done

Policy-making: Lost in transit

Public services: Pay up

Agriculture: Casting asparagus

Teaching assistants: Help needed

Bagehot: Pity the Brexpats





Articles Sections Next

Brexit and the union

Tug of war

Brexit could lead to a second Scottish independence referendum. But the place to fret about most is Northern Ireland

Jun 4th 2016 | BELFAST AND EDINBURGH | From the print edition



IT IS ironic that Brexiteers who yearn for British independence from the European Union are often fervently against any nation’s independence from the United Kingdom. Yet Brexit would have big repercussions for Scotland and Northern Ireland, and to some extent Wales. In all three the debate has been more subdued than in England, perhaps because majorities of voters look likely to back the Remain side (unlike the 1975 referendum, when they were all less keen than England on Europe). But this means that Brexit, were it to happen, would be imposed by English voters against the wishes of many along the Celtic fringe.

It would certainly rile the Scots, who see Brussels as a sort of alternative power centre to London. A recent debate in the Scottish parliament found all five main parties there backing Remain. Opinion polls suggest that as many as 75% of Scottish voters might agree. Remainers have tried to use the Scottish card to strengthen their hand in England by warning that Brexit would trigger a second independence referendum which (despite losing the first one in 2014 by 55-45%) a resurgent Scottish Nationalist Party (SNP) might win.

Nicola Sturgeon, the SNP leader and first minister of Scotland, has declared Brexit would be a “material change” that could lead to unstoppable demands for another referendum. Yet there are reasons to doubt it would happen soon. The SNP remains dominant in Scotland, after sweeping 56 of the 59 Scottish seats at Westminster in the 2015 general election. But a month ago it lost its overall majority in the Scottish parliament, when the Conservatives leapt into second place. And even if she were able to call a second referendum, Ms Sturgeon cannot risk it unless she is certain of winning. The example of Quebec suggests that two lost votes can sink hopes of independence for decades.

Moreover, the uncertainties that defeated independence in 2014 remain. Oil prices are half as high as then, so an independent Scotland would face even bigger economic and fiscal difficulties. After Brexit, the EU might be more welcoming to a Scotland seeking membership, but it would still object to its keeping the pound instead of adopting the euro. And if a post-Brexit United Kingdom ended free movement of people from the EU, that might mean erecting a border between north and south. England is by far Scotland’s largest trading partner. Any border (or customs) controls along Hadrian’s Wall could be very damaging. Such considerations will surely lead Ms Sturgeon to think hard before pressing for a second independence referendum. She certainly will not move fast.

In contrast, Brexit would create immediate headaches for Northern Ireland, starting with the economy. Farming matters more in Northern Ireland than on the mainland, and it depends more on EU subsidies. Links to Ireland are crucial: it takes 34% of Northern Irish exports. Brussels has provided massive support to Northern Ireland since the Good Friday Agreement of 1998. Many in Belfast are sceptical of Leavers’ promises to make up for any money lost by Brexit. Claire Hanna, a member of the Social Democratic and Labour Party in the assembly, points out that, unlike Britain overall, Northern Ireland is a substantial net beneficiary from the EU budget.

Ireland is the EU country most worried about Brexit. Irish ministers regularly state their opposition. Relations between the two nations are better than at any time in their history, and economic links have become closer. Travel and trade across the border are easier than ever. Britain is Ireland’s biggest export market, and Britain exports more to Ireland than to China, India and Brazil combined. Dublin to London is the world’s second-busiest international air route (after Hong Kong to Taipei).

Don’t shake it all about

Leavers say there is no reason why any of this should be affected by Brexit. Trade would continue. The common travel area between north and south began in 1922, not 1973. The Good Friday Agreement and the Northern Irish peace process did not rely on the EU. Most Northern Irish voters, especially nationalists who want a united Ireland, back Remain, though Arlene Foster, leader of the Democratic Unionists and first minister, supports Leave as, more vocally, does the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, Theresa Villiers.

Yet many in Belfast and Dublin find this attitude irresponsible. The common travel area worked only when both countries were either out of or in the European project, not when one was in and the other out. If a post-Brexit Britain restricted free movement or left the EU’s single market, there would be consequences for its only land border with another EU country, the 300-mile (480km) line dividing Northern Ireland from Ireland. Britain and Ireland might still not want to restore a hard border with customs and passport checks, but, as Cathy Gormley-Heenan of the University of Ulster points out, the other 26 EU countries would also have a say, because it would be their border, too.



INTERACTIVE: The Economist's “Brexit” poll-tracker

Nationalists in the north have already said that, post-Brexit, they would demand a referendum to redraw the border with the south. Memories of a hard border are unhappy. Even the British army found smuggling hard to stop; post-Brexit, that might include people-trafficking. Any suggestion of imposing passport controls on travellers from Northern Ireland to mainland Britain in order to prevent a back door for Europeans into the UK would be anathema to unionists in the north. But the biggest concern over Brexit concerns the peace process itself.

Edward Burke at the University of Portsmouth says it is wrong to claim the EU played no role in peace in Northern Ireland. The Good Friday Agreement of 1998 relied heavily on Britain and Ireland both being members and signatories to the European Convention on Human Rights (which some Brexiteers want to leave). But even more important was the psychological factor. As Ms Gormley-Heenan puts it, the EU gave cover to both nationalists and unionists to accept a compromise that fell short of unification but gave Ireland, via Brussels, a disguised say in the province. Would a post-Brexit Britain concede a bigger role to Dublin instead?

That does not mean Brexit would bring a return to the troubled years of violence. Yet the situation in the province remains tense, as west Belfast’s intimidating “peace walls” between such places as the (Protestant) Shankill and (Catholic) Ardoyne estates show. Brexit could trigger a backlash from nationalists who, as in Scotland, have become strong supporters of the EU as a counterweight to London.

Destabilising Northern Ireland would be a high price to pay for Brexit. But even if Remain won, doubts over the union’s future would persist. A new House of Lords report into the union argues that today’s constitutional settlement is unstable, and criticises the government for having no strategy for the future. The ultimate irony, says John Curtice of Strathclyde University, would be if, in an extremely tight vote, Britain ended up remaining in the EU only because nationalists in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales outvoted the English. That would surely rekindle English nationalism in virulent form, creating the biggest threat of all to the United Kingdom.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21699972-brexit-could-lead-second-scottish-independence-referendum-place-fret-about-most/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Retail

Modesty sells

British Muslims are a growing market

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition

Summer fashions

THE aisles of many Tesco supermarkets are undergoing a rapid transformation this week. Ramadan, the most holy period in the Muslim calendar, begins on June 6th, and the shelves of Britain’s biggest grocer are filling up with halal meat, dates and soft drinks, to help the country’s 3m Muslims break their daily fast with opulent sundown dinners.

Ramadan is now big business for Britain’s supermarkets; it is probably the third-biggest sales period for them after Christmas and Easter. Tesco has led the way in targeting the Muslim consumer market in recent years and is reaping the benefit. It sells about half of all halal food in Britain’s supermarkets, and expects to make about £30m ($43m) this year on Ramadan sales.

Yet for all this, argues Shelina Janmohamed, vice-president of Ogilvy Noor, an Islamic branding agency, the growing Muslim retail market remains woefully underserved by mainstream shops. There are an estimated 10,000 Muslim millionaires in Britain. Overall the spending power of the country’s Muslims is thought to be over £20 billion.

But for a people of whom 90% say their faith affects their consumption, many complain that the high street still largely ignores them, particularly when it comes to fashion and fun—things like entertainment, travel and cosmetics. So young Muslim entrepreneurs, who believe, as Ms Janmohamed puts it, that “faith and modern life can go hand in hand”, have been starting up their own businesses to fill the gap.

Nazmin Alim, a Londoner, used to work in an accountancy firm, so had to look smart, as the profession demanded, and modest, as did her religion. Yet, due to the vagaries of fashion, the ready availability of long skirts, for instance, could not be guaranteed. So she decided to make her own stylish, but modest, clothes. Aab, as she called her company (derived from the Persian word for water), started online but has grown rapidly; she opened two shops last year, now has about 60,000 names on the customer database and is launching a new collection every two weeks. Nazia Nasreen, a young mother from Birmingham, struggled to find well-made Islamic toys and books to teach the faith to her children, so she commissioned her own to sell. She started two years ago with four products, and now has 200. For these smaller businesses, too, Ramadan is the peak sales period. Aab’s website has already crashed once because of the high demand.

Many of these startups appeal to a relatively new cohort of young, affluent Muslims, second- or third-generation immigrants who want to maintain the values of their faith while participating in the consumer culture in which they have grown up. Ms Janmohamed calls them Muslim futurists. Others, like Navid Akhtar, use the phrase global urban Muslims, or “gummies”, as most of them live in cities such as London. A filmmaker, Mr Akhtar launched a video-on-demand service last year called Alchemiya, which offers Islamic-themed documentaries. The biggest interest has come from schools, he says, to teach children about positive aspects of Islam.

Another feature of this new Muslim market is that it is driven strongly by women. As they bear most of the burden of the faith in terms of modesty, so they have the greatest incentive to look for products that preserve it but offer them some style and luxury at the same time. As well as clothes there is a burgeoning market for cosmetics without alcohol-based ingredients, and for upmarket holidays for Muslims at hotels with private swimming-pools.

There is a flourishing crossover market as well. The London Beard Company was started by Abrar Mirza last year to exploit the fashion for the hipster beard in trendy parts of east London. He sells premium organic oils for grooming beards that appeal to Muslims and to customers of all faiths, hipster or not. Mr Mirza says that sales could triple over Ramadan and that about half of his customers are women buying his concoctions as gifts for their men.

Many of these startups have attracted interest abroad. Businesses in Muslim countries like Dubai and Turkey, for instance, are interested in franchising Aab. There is nothing modest about the potential of this new British export.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21699971-british-muslims-are-growing-market-modesty-sells/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit brief

If it were done

There is some dispute over the mechanics of how to leave the EU

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



WHAT would happen after a vote for Brexit on June 23rd? The short answer is that nobody can be sure, because there is no precedent. Greenland voted to leave the club in 1982, but it is part of Denmark, has only 50,000 people and fishing was the only big issue. Even so it took three years to establish a new relationship.

If there is a Brexit vote, David Cameron has promised that Britain would “straightaway” invoke Article 50 of the Lisbon treaty, which sets a two-year timetable to agree the terms of departure. The other 27 EU countries would decide (by majority vote, without British participation) what offer to make. There would almost certainly be parallel negotiations on a new trade deal, which would need unanimous approval by all 27 countries and their national parliaments. The European Parliament would have to endorse both deals. If no agreement is struck within two years, the timetable can be extended, but only by unanimity—if that is not done, Britain would have to leave with no deal at all.

If this seems designed to give more bargaining power to the EU than to a post-Brexit Britain, that was part of the intention of article 50. Worse, the EU in its current fragile state would not wish to be generous, for fear that others might follow. The argument that the big British trade deficit makes the EU more dependent on Britain than the other way round might carry some weight with big German or Dutch exporters, but not with countries like Romania or Slovenia that export little to Britain.

Given all this, some Brexiteers have been searching for an alternative to the immediate use of article 50. One idea is to put it off and negotiate a new relationship informally. Most diplomats reckon the EU would simply refuse to negotiate until Britain invokes article 50. Another proposal is not to use the article at all but instead repeal the 1972 European Communities Act that gives effect to EU laws, or pass a new act taking Britain out of the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice. But unilateral action would put Britain in breach of European and international law. As Alan Renwick at the UCL constitution unit adds, it would not be conducive to a friendly climate for further negotiations.

Greenland did it

The fact is that article 50 is the only legal way to leave the EU. It might not have to be invoked instantly, but Britons who had just voted to leave would expect it to be done quickly. And, once invoked, the two-year clock starts ticking. So some Brexiteers have raised another possibility: that a vote for Brexit could produce a new offer of better membership terms, including the ending of free movement of people, that could lead to a second referendum. Many point to Denmark and Ireland, which each had to vote twice before ratifying EU treaties.



INTERACTIVE: The Economist's “Brexit” poll-tracker

Mr Cameron has ruled out a second referendum. Yet nothing in Brussels is wholly predictable, EU lawyers can be versatile and Mr Cameron might no longer be prime minister. On the face of it, an invocation of article 50 cannot be withdrawn. But a political event such as a new government could change that. Even so, European politics militates strongly against a new deal. A Brexit vote would mean the withdrawal of the reforms to the EU negotiated by Mr Cameron in February. And other EU leaders are unlikely to offer a better deal to a new Eurosceptic leader for fear of seeming to give in to blackmail, especially since several face tight elections next year.

How long might withdrawal take? Trade negotiations are increasingly complex and time-consuming. The EU/Canada deal, favoured as a model by some, has taken seven years and still not been ratified. The white paper on withdrawal says a vote to leave “would be the start, not the end, of a process” and suggests the process could take up to ten years. In a sour post-Brexit atmosphere, those ten years would feel long and painful for everybody—but the pain is likely to be worse for Britain.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21699969-there-some-dispute-over-mechanics-how-leave-eu-if-it-were-done/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Policy-making

Lost in transit

Chaos in government research

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



EXPERT advice is crucial in shaping and improving policy. The government spends about £2.5 billion ($3.6 billion) each year commissioning expert advice, internally and from outside academics. Yet a new report has found that only four out of 24 government departments (plus the Environment Agency and Public Health England) were able to provide a full list of the studies they had funded.

The inquiry by Sense about Science, a charitable trust, was led by Sir Stephen Sedley, a former judge, who sent Freedom of Information requests to ministries and interviewed government officials and politicians. It found that millions of pounds of “ghost research” is simply being lost because it is not published, and no records of its commissioning are kept.

The report finds plenty of examples where publication of evidence is delayed for political reasons. In one case, a 200-page report on mental health, which found links between the recession and depression, was delayed because its publication coincided with a politician’s speech on the economy. Another report for the government, which showed that a 45p minimum price for alcohol would cut significantly the number of deaths and crimes caused by drinking, was not published until the day of the policy announcement (when the Home Office rejected the idea).

But the main gripe is the sheer disorganisation of it all. The report’s afterword states that “Sir Stephen looked for suppression and found chaos”. It recommends that research should be published before policy announcements to allow for open debate, unless doing so would endanger the public in some way. A register of all externally-commissioned studies should be set up, and contracts with researchers should include a clause to publish work promptly. Any delays should be explained.

Though the findings suggest a cavalier attitude to evidence in Whitehall, just last year the World Wide Web foundation ranked Britain’s government as the most transparent in the world, ahead of America and France, suggesting other countries may be equally adept at “forgetting” inconvenient facts. Mounting piles of ghost research are likely to feed the public’s cynicism and low regard for politicians. They may also mean poorer government policies.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21699974-chaos-government-research-lost-transit/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Public services

Pay up

Payment by results is much criticised. But it is wrong to conclude it has failed

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS supposed to be one of the coalition government’s most radical policies. In 2012 David Cameron, the prime minister, promised to put “rocket-boosters” under a scheme of public-service provision called “payment-by-results” (PBR). Under the scheme, the government pays a provider to deliver a public service, but only if it achieves a successful outcome. With £1 ($1.44) in every £3 the government spends on services going to a private firm, putting in the right incentives makes a big difference. There is, however, a groundswell of opposition to the move.

Such schemes are not new—in the Napoleonic wars sailors were remunerated if they captured an enemy ship—but the government is now using them more widely, including in welfare, housing and criminal justice. A report in 2015 by the National Audit Office (NAO), an independent watchdog, identified 52 programmes worth about £15 billion.

It may seem obvious to pay providers by results, rather than upfront. It means the state pays for services only if they work. If they don’t work, the private sector bears the consequences, helping to cut wasteful public spending. PBR is also supposed to encourage innovation, since it focuses only on ends, not means.

In reality, things have not always worked out so well. PBR can create strange behavioural incentives, including a phenomenon known as “creaming”. Given the emphasis on meeting targets, providers are often tempted to focus on the easiest-to-help people, says Russell Webster, an expert on PBR. Take the case of the “work programme”, a policy to help the unemployed where 80% of the budget is linked to PBR. Despite higher payments for certain groups, it has proved most lucrative to target youngsters, who pick up skills quickly. In 2011-15 a third of 18- to 24-year-olds in the programme moved into work for a “sustained” period (at least three or six months, depending on the person), compared with a quarter of 25- to 49-year-olds.

In addition, the economics of PBR can work against innovation. Providers of public services must pay their employees and suppliers. It is difficult, especially for small firms, to wait around for a payment based on how they have done. Over 80% of providers report concerns about financial risk from PBR, according to the Institute for Government (IFG), a think-tank, which says such firms are unwilling to take on further risks by doing things differently.

Toby Lowe of Newcastle University Business School argues that all this means that payment-by-results is “doomed to fail”. Yet, in spite of its problems, PBR shows promise. A report by the NAO found performance in the work programme was similar to past schemes, but cost 2% less. Performance has improved further since. In 2015 the government claimed that, thanks to its “troubled families” programme, where households with complex needs are supported by local authorities, 100,000 had been “turned around”. That is a self-serving and vague claim, but those who work on the programme tend to view it positively. The NAO noted that the “outcomes focus” of the programme led to more integrated local services (eg, police and social services) for helping families.

In a criminal-justice programme known as “transforming rehabilitation”, in which ex-prisoners are supervised, users of the service were generally positive about the help they received compared with what they had been offered before, according to the NAO. Another scheme is the “new-homes bonus”, under which the government rewards councils with a payment equivalent to six years’ council tax for each additional new home they build. An independent report found that it was “perceived to have helped push housing up the policy agenda” of planning officers.

The question, then, is not whether to get rid of PBR, but how to make it work better. It is not inevitable that it should create odd incentives, but this is made more likely by poor contracting between the government and the provider, says Julian McCrae of the IFG. The NAO has complained that public-sector bodies that commission PBR projects, lacking a common source of shared expertise, have had to “reinvent the wheel” with each new project. It is small wonder that mistakes have been made.

Happily, that is changing. New Economy, an organisation which works with Manchester’s local government, published data last year for a range of costs within government (the average cost of an ambulance call-out, for instance, is £223). With these data to hand, deciding the level of payouts for projects that reduce such expenses gets easier. Meanwhile, the Cabinet Office, which is responsible for making PBR work, has teamed up with Oxford University to form a research centre to generate data on PBR projects. The centre will also offer training to local-government staff, helping them to strike better deals with the private sector.

To alleviate the big-business bias of PBR, the government is also pushing “social-impact bonds”. SIBs work by using private investors to fund social programmes, with the investors paid back from public funds, plus a return on top, if targets are met. With investors funding programmes for longer, providers struggle less with cashflow. There are now 32 social-impact bonds in Britain, according to the Cabinet Office. The most famous, a scheme in Peterborough where ex-prisoners are given support, seems promising: reoffending fell by 8%, according to preliminary analysis. At the spending review in November the government pledged £105m towards developing SIBs. Payment-by-results may not be the revolutionary force that Mr Cameron had hoped, but it is helping the state gradually to become leaner.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21699970-payment-results-much-criticised-it-wrong-conclude-it-has-failed-pay-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Agriculture

Casting asparagus

A British vegetable enjoys a boom

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition

Quintessentially English

“ASPARAGUS”, wrote Marcel Proust, “transform[s] my humble chamber-pot into a flask of perfume.” The fragrance of success has also clung to the elegant vegetable in recent years. While farming in Britain is a shadow of its former self, the asparagus industry has boomed (see chart). For none of the other 20 or so vegetables tracked by official government figures has the increase in home-grown production been so dramatic over the past decade (indeed, production of many crops, like cauliflowers and leeks, has fallen).

A few factors explain the boom. Growers and suppliers have worked out how to get the vegetable to the buyer in perfect condition, says Chris Chinn of the Asparagus Growers Association. A marketing gimmick has also helped to fix home-grown asparagus in the minds of consumers as quintessentially English: farmers like to start the harvest of their crops on April 23rd, St George’s Day.

The asparagus industry may also have been an inadvertent beneficiary of Britain’s measly pay growth. Real wages are still 4% lower than in 2008. Low pay has encouraged farms to shift away from activities that need expensive machinery to those that require more labour. Asparagus is one of the most labour-intensive crops around, says Mr Chinn. One asparagus farmer in Suffolk says he often tries to employ locals, but finds their working attitude suboptimal compared with eastern Europeans.



Although the past decade has been good to them, things have been tougher for asparagus farmers recently. They usually begin harvesting in April, yet chilly weather (temperatures were 0.9°C below the average for that month) meant that many could not start until May. Now farmers face the opposite problem: with warm temperatures in May, yields will shoot up, creating an asparagus glut and lower prices. Overall, though, it is a success story not to be sniffed at.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21699973-british-vegetable-enjoys-boom-casting-asparagus/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Teaching assistants

Help needed

English schools are filled with teaching assistants—but too many are poorly used

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition

No assistants required then

BY MOST measures, English schools are good, if not top of the class. In the influential Programme for International Student Assessment, or PISA, rankings, for example, England sits just above mid-table, alongside France and Iceland, though far below heavyweights such as Singapore and Finland. But there is at least one measure in which English schools lead the way: the number of teaching assistants. They make up one-quarter of the English schools workforce. No other country has such a high proportion.

Assistants provide support to children most in need of help, often those with conditions such as dyslexia or ADHD. Wages are low and many work part-time. In 2000 there were 79,000 of them in English schools. There are now 255,000.

What explains the growth? The move to include disabled children in mainstream education provided the initial impetus in the 1990s. A compact made with unions in 2003 to reduce the workload of teachers by hiring more support staff added to the growth. The “pupil premium”, a policy introduced in 2011 to divert funding to schools with more children from low-income families, cemented it, since many use the funds to employ additional teaching support staff.

“There had, reasonably, been a long-standing assumption”, says Rob Webster of the University College London Institute of Education (IOE), “that if you gave struggling children more one-to-one and group help that would boost their progress.” That assumption was, however, overturned by a study carried out by the IOE in 2003-09. It found that although assistants helped to reduce stress among teachers and improved classroom discipline, they did little to improve pupil attainment—in fact, they reduced it. This was largely because the pupils they spent the most time with were the ones most in need of interaction with teachers. The assistants were often doing little more than “babysitting”, says one educationalist, and that was encouraging dependency.



Do shorter hours or higher wages make better teachers?

But further research has shown that assistants can have a positive impact. Short, snappy sessions, with assistants following strict guidelines, can work, says Jonathan Sharples of the Education Endowment Foundation, a charity. One literacy programme, which involved daily 20-minute sessions over a ten-week period, led to three to four additional months’ progress compared with pupils who continued to work with assistants as before. Other studies found similar results. “It’s by far the most consistent positive evidence I’ve seen from randomised control trials,” says Mr Sharples.

Some schools have rethought their approach. St Mary’s Church of England primary school in Barnet, north London, now ensures teaching assistants are present before and after school, allowing them to discuss lessons in advance and assess their success afterwards. As a result, they no longer end up just echoing the teacher or doing work for struggling pupils. “There is no tolerance for going into lessons blind,” says Maria Constantinou, the deputy head.

Longer hours and stricter responsibilities are part of a trend towards a more professional approach to the role. Increasing numbers of schools invest in developing the skills of assistants; others are hiring assistants with a view to them becoming teachers later, which brings in more highly-qualified staff.

Despite such improvements, most education experts reckon that the majority of schools probably do not use their assistants wisely. That may begin to change. Falling budgets may mean that head teachers become cannier in how they use these extra pairs of willing hands.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21699975-english-schools-are-filled-teaching-assistantsbut-too-many-are-poorly-used-help-needed/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

Pity the Brexpats

Britain’s diaspora could pay a high price for a vote to leave the European Union on June 23rd

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



“OF THOSE British expats in this room, how many are considering applying for German citizenship?” comes a voice from the crowd. Nervous laughter ripples around the packed basement bar near the Reichstag in Berlin, then most of those present raise a hand. “We keep on being asked about that,” responds Jon Worth, the British Berliner hosting this meeting for expatriates worried about Brexit. “It’s become a matter of the head rather than the heart. If having a German passport makes it easier to stay here, then it’s a no-brainer to apply.”

That is a measure of the uncertainty among Britain’s continental expats, estimated by the UN to number about 1.3m. Questions for a panel of experts at the event—including a Briton who recently obtained a German passport, partly as insurance against Brexit—are detailed and urgent. When would postal votes be sent out? Would self-employed Britons have to apply for a German work permit after Brexit? “At the moment we have plenty of questions, but far too few answers,” observes Mr Worth, who has organised similarly popular gatherings in Hamburg and Cologne (others have followed in Munich and Copenhagen).

The confusion comes in two varieties. The first, more immediate sort concerns the mechanics of voting in the referendum. Unlike, say, the Netherlands, Britain has no central office recording where expats are, sending out ballots, then collecting and distributing them to the right local authorities in time. It shows. British embassies have publicised the wrong deadline for registration (the correct one is June 7th); postal votes have been sent abroad with too little postage; expat voter details have been mislaid by local councils. Small wonder that, of the roughly 5m Britons around the world, only about 200,000 are registered.

Then there is the more long-term source of uncertainty: what would Brexit mean for Britons on the continent? As the Leave and Remain campaigns have traded lurid claims—comparing the EU to Hitler, claiming that a vote for Brexit would embolden Islamic State—the practical implications for the hundreds of thousands of expats in other EU states have been largely ignored. The Leave campaign, in particular, belittles them and their livelihoods with its assertions (breathtaking in their misplaced breeziness) that they “have nothing to fear” from Britain leaving the EU.

Brexiteers point to the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, under which “vested” (acquired) rights are deemed to outlive the treaty conferring them. They note it applied when Greenland withdrew from the EU in 1985. Yet there is no certainty about how it would be interpreted in Britain’s case. Lawyers retort that the convention refers to state rights, not individual ones, so offers no post-Brexit guarantee of a Briton’s freedom to reside, work, trade and use public services in another EU country. The convention is not mentioned in Article 50 of the Lisbon treaty (which codifies the process of leaving the union), nor is France even a signatory. On June 1st Spain’s prime minister warned that leaving the EU could cost Britons the right to live and work in his country. And the Greenland precedent? “Scarcely relevant,” says a House of Commons report, because of the tiny number involved.

That means protections for expats need to be secured as part of Britain’s exit negotiations. But will they be? If the country sought an arrangement similar to Norway’s, whereby it kept the trade benefits of EU membership in exchange for preserving freedom of movement, this might well be possible. But the Leave campaign is increasingly defining a pro-Brexit vote on June 23rd as a mandate for a draconian clamp-down: on June 1st Vote Leave, the official Out campaign, proposed slamming the door on all EU citizens except those with particular skills. If this happened, reciprocal restrictions would presumably apply to Britons planning to move to the continent. How it would affect those who have already done so is unclear. In the event of Brexit, European leaders are likely to try to discourage copycats by pointedly restricting the full benefits of EU citizenship to full EU citizens.

Don’t let’s be beastly to the Anglo-Germans

All this is part of a wider story: Britain tends to disregard its diaspora. The country limits its expats’ voting rights (which are withdrawn after 15 years abroad) and certain welfare payments. It freezes their pensions and makes relatively little effort to find out where they are, what they are doing or even how many of them exist. And this in a technological age when other governments are going to new lengths to engage their emigrants. Ireland is building a giant database of its diaspora, to help nurture and woo it; New Zealand runs a social network for far-flung Kiwis. Mexico, India and China see their emigrants as soft-power warriors and try to lure high-flyers, with their international experience and connections, back home. France and Italy both have overseas parliamentary constituencies and let their expats vote in embassies.

Overlooked and poorly represented, perhaps Britain’s expats can blame their image problem. In the popular imagination at home they are the bacon-and-eggs brigade: witness “Benidorm”, a cheesy television comedy about ageing, lobster-skinned dipsomaniacs on the Spanish Costas. Yet why should such Britons, many of whom have paid into the welfare state for decades before moving abroad, be treated as second-class citizens?

And in any case the profile of the British diaspora is evolving: improvements in technology, cheap travel and the high cost of living in Britain are propelling highly skilled workers overseas in search of opportunities. Statistics show that British emigrants are increasingly likely to be university-educated and to hold a professional job. Thus the typical expat is becoming more like those scientists, entrepreneurs and lawyers with whom Bagehot mingled in Berlin. Such folk are not deserters. They are stimulants to trade, promoters of British culture and values, and vessels of worldly contacts and knowledge. All of which Britain will need more than ever if, on June 23rd, it votes for Brexit.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21699967-britains-diaspora-could-pay-high-price-vote-leave-european-union-june-23rd-pity/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




Free speech: The muzzle grows tighter

Free speech in Bangladesh: Muted by machetes

Campus protests and free speech: The colliding of the American mind

A youthful trend: Don’t be so offensive





Articles Sections Next

Free speech

The muzzle grows tighter

Freedom of speech is in retreat

Jun 4th 2016 | BEIJING, CAIRO, MADRID, MEXICO CITY AND PARIS | From the print edition



IN JULY 2012 a man calling himself Sam Bacile posted a short video on YouTube. It showed the Prophet Muhammad bedding various women, taking part in gory battles and declaring: “Every non-Muslim is an infidel. Their lands, their women, their children are our spoils.”

The film was, as Salman Rushdie, a British author, later put it, “crap”. “The Innocence of Muslims” could have remained forever obscure, had someone not dubbed it into Arabic and reposted it in September that year. An Egyptian chat-show host denounced it and before long, this short, crap film was sparking riots across the Muslim world—and beyond. A group linked to al-Qaeda murdered America’s ambassador in Libya. Protests erupted in Afghanistan, Australia, Britain, France and India. Pakistan’s railways minister offered a $100,000 bounty to whoever killed the film-maker—and was not sacked. By the end of the month at least 50 people had died.

Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton condemned both the video and the reaction to it. General Martin Dempsey, then chairman of America’s joint chiefs of staff, contacted Terry Jones, a pastor in Florida who had previously burned a Koran in public, and asked him not to promote the video.

“Consider for a moment: the most senior officer of the mightiest armed forces the world has ever seen feels it necessary to contact some backwoods Florida pastor to beg him not to promote a 13-minute D-movie YouTube upload. Such are the power asymmetries in this connected world,” writes Timothy Garton Ash in “Free Speech”, a fine new book on the subject. The story of “The Innocence of Muslims” illustrates several points about how freedom of speech has evolved in recent years.

First, social media make it easy for anyone to publish anything to a potentially global audience. This is a huge boost for freedom of speech, and has led to a vast increase in the volume of material published. But when words and pictures move so rapidly across borders, conflict often results. Different nations have different notions of what may and may not be said. If the pseudonymous Mr Bacile had made his video in the early 1990s, Muslims far away would probably never have heard of it, and no one would have died.

Second, technology firms are having to grapple with horribly complex decisions about censorship. The big global ones such as Facebook and Twitter aspire to be politically neutral, but do not permit “hate speech” or obscenity on their platforms. In America the White House asked Google, which owns YouTube, to “review” whether “The Innocence of Muslims” violated YouTube’s guidelines against hate speech. The company decided that it did not, since it attacked a religion (ie, a set of ideas) rather than the people who held those beliefs. The White House did not force Google to censor the video; indeed, thanks to America’s constitutional guarantee of free speech, it had no legal power to do so.

In other countries, however, governments have far more power to silence speech. At least 21 asked Google to block or consider blocking the video. In countries where YouTube has a legal presence and a local version, such as India, Malaysia and Saudi Arabia, it complied. In countries where it did not have a legal presence, it refused. Some governments, such as Pakistan’s and Bangladesh’s, responded by blocking YouTube completely.

Shut up or I’ll kill you

The third recent change is that, whereas the threats to free speech used to come almost entirely from governments, now non-state actors are nearly as intimidating. In the Mexican state of Veracruz, for example, at least 17 journalists have disappeared or been murdered since 2010, presumably by drug-traffickers. The gangs’ reach is long: one journalist fled to Mexico City, where he was tracked down and butchered. And their methods are brutal: in February the body of a reporter was found dumped by the roadside, handcuffed, half-naked and with a plastic bag over her head.

Globally, the willingness of some Muslims to murder people they think have insulted the Prophet has chilled discussion of one of the world’s great religions—even in places where Muslims are a minority, such as Europe. Radical Islamists are attempting to enforce a global speech code, in which frank discussion of their beliefs is punishable by death.

This began in 1989 with a threat from a state: Ayatollah Khomeini, Iran’s leader, issued a fatwa condemning Mr Rushdie to death for a novel that he thought insulted Islam. He invited devout Muslims everywhere to carry out the sentence. It was almost certainly one of them who murdered Mr Rushdie’s Japanese translator in 1991, though the killer was never caught.

Since then, the notion that individual Muslims have a duty to defend their faith by assassinating its critics has spread. Most Muslims are peaceful, but it takes only a few to enforce what Mr Garton Ash calls “the assassin’s veto”. The Islamist who murdered Theo Van Gogh, a Dutch filmmaker, for making a film about the abuse of Muslim women, said he could not live “in any country where free speech is allowed”. In 2015 two gunmen stormed the offices of Charlie Hebdo, a French paper which had published cartoons of Muhammad, killing 12 people. Many speakers and writers across the world are terrified of offending Islamists. A satirical musical called “The Book of Mormon” is an international hit; no theatre would dare stage a similar treatment of the Koran.

Islamist intimidation is the most extreme example of a broader, and worrying, trend. From the mosques of Cairo to the classrooms at Yale, all sorts of people and groups are claiming a right not to be offended. This is quite different from believing that people should, in general, be polite. A right not to be offended implies a power to police other people’s speech. “Taking offence has never been easier, or indeed more popular,” observes Flemming Rose, an editor at Jyllands-Posten, a Danish paper. He should know. After his paper published cartoons of Muhammad in 2005, at least 200 people died.

The zealots who hack atheists to death in Bangladesh (see article) are far more frightening than the American students who shout down speakers with whom they disagree (see article). But they are on the same spectrum: both use a subjective definition of “offensive” to suppress debate. They may do this by disrupting speeches they object to; Mr Garton Ash calls this “the heckler’s veto”. Or they may enlist the power of the state to silence speakers who offend them. Politicians have gleefully jumped on the bandwagon, and are increasingly using laws against “hate speech” to punish dissidents.

This article will argue that free speech is in retreat. Granted, technology has given millions a megaphone, and speaking out is easier than it was during the cold war, when most people lived under authoritarian states. But in the past few years restrictions on what people can say or write have grown more onerous.



Freedom House, an American think-tank, compiles an annual index of freedom of expression. This “declined to its lowest point in 12 years in 2015, as political, criminal and terrorist forces sought to co-opt or silence the media in their broader struggle for power”. The share of the world’s populace living in countries with a free press fell from 38% in 2005 to 31% in 2015; the share who had to make do with only “partly free” media rose from 28% to 36%. Other watchdogs are similarly glum. Reporters Without Borders’ global index of press freedom has declined by 14% since 2013.

Uncle Xi is watching you

Among big countries, China scores worst. Speech there has hardly ever been free. Under Mao Zedong, the slightest whisper of dissent was savagely punished. After he died in 1976, people were gradually allowed more freedom to criticise the government, so long as they did not challenge the party’s monopoly on power. Digital technology accelerated this process. By the time Xi Jinping came to power in 2012, hundreds of millions of Chinese were happily sharing their views on social media.

Mr Xi found this unnerving, so he cracked down. China’s thousands of censors have ramped up efforts to block subversive online messages. Hundreds of lawyers and activists have been harassed or jailed. Liberal debate on university campuses has been suppressed (students and teachers are being urged to pay more attention to Marxism-Leninism). According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, a watchdog in New York, at least 49 journalists were in prison in China in December 2015. In April that year Gao Yu, an elderly reporter, was given a stiff sentence for “leaking state secrets”—namely, a party document warning against “Western” ideas such as media freedom.

Many Chinese stay one step ahead of the censors, using software to jump over the Great Firewall of China and reach foreign websites. Nonetheless, Mr Xi’s crackdown will surely weaken his country. If information does not flow freely, it is hard to innovate or make sound decisions. In recent months, as the stockmarket has wobbled, the party has pressed economists to put on a happy face. Analysts who predict turmoil are warned to shut up or recant. How policymakers are to understand the economy when no one is allowed to discuss it honestly is anyone’s guess.

In China the state is the source of nearly all censorship. Private organisations play a role, but largely at the party’s behest or to avoid upsetting it. Baidu, the Chinese answer to Google, blocks potentially subversive search results. Google refuses to do so, and is therefore unable to operate in China. Wikipedia, YouTube, Facebook and Twitter are also blocked.

In the Muslim world, by contrast, speech is under attack from state and non-state actors in roughly equal measure. The assassin’s veto is exercised keenly in such places as Bangladesh, Iraq, Nigeria, Somalia and Syria. In several Arab countries, after a brief flowering of free debate during the Arab spring, regimes even more repressive than the old ones have taken charge.

Consider Egypt, the Arab world’s most populous country. In 2011 mass protests led to the overthrow of Hosni Mubarak, a dictator. For a while, Egyptians were free to say what they wanted. But a Muslim Brotherhood government elected in 2012 curbed secular speech, and the coup that toppled it in 2013 made matters worse, says Muhammad Abdel-Salam of the Association for Freedom of Thought and Expression, an Egyptian pressure group.

Media outlets supportive of the Muslim Brotherhood, which Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt’s present ruler, has branded a terrorist organisation, have been closed down. A new law makes it illegal for journalists to publish “untrue news or data” (ie, anything that contradicts the official line). “Don’t listen to anyone but me,” warned Mr Sisi in February. “I am dead serious.”

Foreign reporters have been branded as spies and run out of the country. Local reporters have it much worse. Mahmoud Abou Zeid, a photographer, was arrested while snapping the authorities gunning down Islamist protesters in 2013. He has been in jail ever since, accused of “damaging national unity”. He has been beaten, tortured and denied medical care.

On May 7th an Egyptian court recommended the death penalty for three journalists it accuses of spying. They deny the charges; one says he is being punished for publishing an embarrassing leaked document. The regime is incompetent as well as oppressive: in May an internal memo on how to squash the press was accidentally sent to the press.

Claiming to act as Egypt’s father, Mr Sisi is anxious that his children not be exposed to adult material. Saucy writers are jailed. Rights groups say that the number of prosecutions involving “contempt of religion” and “debauchery” (often used to prosecute homosexuals) are at all-time highs.

The authorities mine Facebook and Twitter for information on future protests, which are illegal, and for evidence against dissidents. Amr Nohan, a student, was sentenced to three years in prison for posting a photo of Mr Sisi with Mickey Mouse ears. Others are locked up for running websites without a licence. Asked why someone would need one, an assistant minister said: “You cannot drive without a licence. You cannot administer a website without a licence. It’s the same.”

All over the world, the spread of organised violence has prompted governments to curb speech they think may foster terrorism. Even in liberal democracies they are starting to punish not only those who deliberately incite violence, but also speakers who are merely intemperate or shocking.



In February, for example, two puppeteers were arrested in Madrid. Their show, “The Witch and Don Cristóbal”, was provocative: a nun was stabbed by a crucifix; a judge was hanged with a noose. What upset the police, however, was a scene where a puppet policeman accused a witch of supporting terrorism and shoved a sign reading “Up Alk-ETA” (a reference to al-Qaeda and ETA, a Basque separatist group) into her hands. The puppeteers are now awaiting trial and face up to three years in prison for “glorifying terrorism”. They are said to be surprised.

In much of Europe anti-terror laws are being used more zealously than before. This is partly because governments are more scared of terrorism, but also because they have started to police social media, where words that might reveal extremist sympathies are easily searchable. ETA laid down its arms in 2011; yet the number of Spaniards accused of glorifying terrorism has risen fivefold since then.

France criminalised “the defence of terrorism” in 2014 and has enforced the law more aggressively since the attacks on Paris last year. In the days after the Charlie Hebdo massacre, prosecutors opened 69 cases for “defence of terrorism”. One man was sentenced to a year in prison for shouting in the street: “I’m proud to be Muslim. I don’t like Charlie. They were right to do it.”

Many countries have introduced or revived laws against “hate speech” that are often broad and vague. In France Brigitte Bardot, an actress, has been convicted five times of incitement to racial hatred because, as an animal lover, she complains about halal slaughter methods. In India section 153A of the criminal code, which was introduced under British rule, punishes with up to three years in jail those who promote disharmony “on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever”.

Such laws are handy tools for those in power to harass their enemies. And far from promoting harmony between different groups, they encourage them to file charges against each other. This is especially dangerous when cynical politicians get involved. Those who rely on votes from a certain group often find it useful to demand the punishment of someone who has allegedly insulted its members, especially just before an election. For example, when an Indian intellectual called Ashis Nandy made a subtle point about lower castes and corruption at a literary festival in 2013, local politicians professed outrage and he was charged under India’s “Prevention of Atrocities Act”.

Many countries still have laws against blasphemy, including 14 in Europe. Rita Maestre, a left-wing Spanish politician, was convicted in March of insulting religious feelings during a protest in a Catholic chapel, during which women bared their chests, kissed one another and allegedly shouted “Get your rosaries out of my ovaries!” She was fined €4,320 ($4,812).

Islamic governments such as those of Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, which punish blasphemy against Islam ferociously, are keen for a ban on insulting religion to be written into international law. They argue that this is a natural extension of the Western concept of “hate speech”. Some Western authorities agree: Danish police in February filed preliminary charges against a man for burning a Koran, thus, in effect, reviving a law against blasphemy that had not been used to convict anyone since 1946.

Europe is full of archaic laws that criminalise certain kinds of political speech. It is a crime to insult the “honour” of the state in nine EU countries; to insult state symbols such as flags in 16; and to say offensive things about government bodies in 13. Libel can be criminal in 23 EU states. Bulgaria, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Portugal all punish it more harshly when it is directed at public officials. Some of these laws are seldom invoked, and France got rid of its law against insulting the head of state in 2013, five years after a protester was arrested for waving a banner that said “Piss off, you jerk” to President Nicolas Sarkozy. (The banner was merely quoting Mr Sarkozy, who had said the same thing to a different protester.)

In Germany, however, Jan Böhmermann, a comedian, is awaiting charges for insulting a foreign head of state, after he recited a scurrilous poem about Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president of Turkey, and some frisky livestock. Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, is now considering repealing the law. Poland and Portugal, among others, have similar laws against insulting foreign heads of state. Icelanders can in theory get six years in prison for it.



“These are the kinds of provisions we are constantly fighting in countries where freedom of expression is not as open,” says Scott Griffen of the International Press Institute. Autocratic regimes are quick to borrow excuses from the West for cracking down on free speech. China and Russia accuse dissidents of “promoting terrorism”, “endangering national security” or “inciting ethnic hatred”. This can mean simply expressing sympathy for Tibetans on social media—for which Pu Zhiqiang, a Chinese lawyer, was locked up for 19 months. Rwanda’s government, borrowing from European laws against Holocaust denial, brands its opponents as apologists for the 1994 genocide and silences them. Europeans may laugh at Thailand’s lèse-majesté laws—a Thai was recently prosecuted for being sarcastic about the king’s dog. But when 13 European democracies also have laws against insulting the head of state, it is hard to avoid charges of hypocrisy.

A determined regime can usually think of ways to muzzle a voice that annoys it. Khadija Ismayilova, a journalist in Azerbaijan who revealed scandalous details about the ruling family’s wealth, received photos in the post in 2012 showing her having sex with her boyfriend. A secret camera had been installed in her flat. A letter threatened to post the video online if she did not stop investigating corruption. She refused, and it was posted on a website purporting to belong to an opposition party. When this did not silence Ms Ismayilova, she was charged with tax evasion and driving a colleague to attempt suicide. No evidence supported these charges, but she was sentenced to seven years in jail.

However, after an appeal to international law and a campaign to persuade donors, such as America, to take notice, Ms Ismayilova was released on May 25th. Even oppressive governments can sometimes be shamed into behaving better.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21699906-freedom-speech-retreat-muzzle-grows-tighter/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free speech in Bangladesh

Muted by machetes

Where the state sits by as Islamists murder secular speakers

Jun 4th 2016 | DHAKA | From the print edition



ON APRIL 14th the police prevented Xulhaz Mannan, the editor of Roopbaan, a gay-rights magazine, from organising a “rainbow rally” and arrested several of his supporters. Mr Mannan had argued that if more gay people in Bangladesh were open about their sexuality, their neighbours would learn to accept them. Eleven days later half a dozen men posing as couriers knocked on his door, carrying a parcel full of machetes. They slashed him and a friend to death. A local group affiliated to al-Qaeda claimed responsibility. Promoting tolerance of homosexuality was “American imperialism”, they said.

Bangladesh has become one of the most dangerous places on Earth to suggest in public that gay people might have rights or that Islam might not have all the answers. Since April eight people deemed anti-Islamic have been slaughtered. Rezaul Karim Siddique, a professor who celebrated indigenous music and literature, was all but beheaded on his way to work. Nazimuddin Samad, a young blogger who criticised Islamism, was hacked and shot to death on the street by men shouting “Allahu akbar!”

Bangladesh’s supposedly secular government seems keener to denounce the dead than to catch their killers. “Our society does not allow any movement that promotes unnatural sex,” said the home minister, Asaduzzaman Khan Kamal, after Mr Mannan’s murder. Sheikh Hasina, the prime minister, has likened the slain bloggers’ writing to “porn”. Those who silence secular voices with steel are seldom caught. Liberals complain of a culture of impunity. “We are very worried about our lives. Things are not getting better,” frets a surviving colleague of Mr Mannan. “If the government doesn’t support us, naturally the police won’t support us, either.”

The killers are highly motivated and well organised. Some appear to have been inspired by the triumphal snuff videos of Islamic State. The government accuses opposition parties of being behind the campaign of terror, but offers little evidence to support this charge.

Maruf Rosul, a blogger and secular activist, says he gets death threats all the time. They say things like: “You are an atheist pig. We will kill you.” Those making the threats cannot be identified since they use fake Twitter accounts or make phone calls from encrypted sources over the internet. “Last night I got a threat on [my] mobile [phone] from a Middle East number. This is common.” Mr Rosul admits to feeling afraid, but says he is determined to keep “fighting for a society based on pluralism and equal rights”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21699904-where-state-sits-islamists-murder-secular-speakers-muted-machetes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Campus protests and free speech

The colliding of the American mind

University protesters believe they are fighting for justice; their critics think free speech is imperilled

Jun 4th 2016 | PRINCETON AND YALE | From the print edition



VISITING some American universities these days feels like touring the scene of an earthquake, or a small war. Though administrators insist the protests that dominoed across campuses in the past year were therapeutic, grievances seethe. Fears for jobs, and of harm—both reputational and physical—endure. “The campus is traumatised,” says Reuben Faloughi, one of the leaders of the protests which, last November, forced the University of Missouri’s president to resign.

As Mr Faloughi knows, some external observers “just think the kids got upset and had a fit”: that these disturbances conform to the old quip about academic quarrels being so vicious because the stakes are so low. That view is mistaken, and not only because of the impact on the participants. As Eshe Sherley, an activist at Yale, says, “Things that happen in the university don’t just stay there.” Rather, the people and ideas they produce ripple across the country. And just as the energy and issues involved are bound to spread beyond campus, they did not originate there either.

The protesters believe they are pursuing social and racial justice, in part by changing the way America remembers its past—debates that are convulsing the country at large. For others the right at stake is freedom of speech, a principle imperilled around the world. As Nicholas Christakis, a Yale professor caught up in the turmoil, puts it: “If we can’t get that right at our elite universities, we’re doomed.” How far these values are compatible, and whether their advocates can listen to each other, are quandaries these events have dramatised.

The students are revolting

New-wave feminists and sexuality campaigners have added to the ruckus. So too have supporters and opponents of Israel, in a row that typifies how protecting one group’s rights can allegedly impinge on another’s. The Amcha Initiative, for example, aims to combat anti-Semitism at American universities, a job Tammi Rossman-Benjamin, its director, thinks the authorities are often unwilling to do. She wants them to decry prejudice against Jews as they would other forms of bigotry. Yet the initiative has been accused of stifling free expression. Official disapproval of the kind she seeks is, for some, tantamount to censorship; in the overlap between criticism of Israel and anti-Semitism, the line between legitimate and hateful opinion is contested.

Still, the main grievance racking American campuses is alleged racism. Several student groups demand more pluralistic curriculums, cultural-awareness training for staff, more diverse faculties and extra facilities for minorities. The flashpoints have sometimes been ugly. At Yale, after Erika Christakis, who is Dr Christakis’s wife and was then a residential college’s associate master, suggested in an e-mail that students might be allowed to pick and police their own Halloween costumes, the couple were cruelly harassed. In Missouri student protesters barracked and obstructed journalists; some professors lent a hand. Demonstrators at Princeton occupied the office of its president, Christopher Eisgruber. “They took quite good care of it,” he says, adding that threats to the students led the university to consult the FBI.



Some of these tactics are thuggish; thuggery, moreover, committed over seemingly piffling complaints. For instance, with its hammocks strung between blossoming trees, the courtyard of Yale’s Silliman College—where students claiming to feel endangered jeered Dr Christakis—is idyllic, despite its proximity to gritty bits of New Haven. Taken in isolation, these incidents can seem the lamentable fruit of modernity’s least appetising traits: mollycoddling parenting, a sub-Freudian narcissism, a hypochondriacal sense of entitlement and a social-media ecosystem that reinforces insularity and cultivates an expectation of instant response. As Mr Eisgruber says, recent demands “often involve an expectation of immediacy” that a slow college bureaucracy is ill-equipped to satisfy.

Those YouTube highlights, however, are a caricature. Clumsy and excitable as these demonstrations have sometimes been, dismissing them all as trivial is lazy. Peter Salovey, Yale’s president, notes that within a week of the Halloween kerfuffle, students were discussing broader concerns. Belittling them all as “crybullies” or “snowflake” protesters (for their exquisite fragility) ignores the breadth of their outlook, which is generally more historical than parochial. This wave of student activism coincides with the Black Lives Matter phenomenon, and they evince a shared rage at racialised political rhetoric and police abuses, to which even Ivy League students, or their families, can be exposed.

“We feel unsafe here,” says Ms Sherley at Yale, “like we feel unsafe everywhere.” Last year, for example, a black student at Yale, who happened to be the son of a New York Times columnist, was detained at gunpoint outside the library. Even the gripe about Halloween costumes is tangentially related: the stereotypes they reinforce—of black people as gangsters, say—can contribute to real-world injustice, the students argue. They know that today’s biases do not match up to full-blown segregation. Still, as Brea Baker, head of the Yale chapter of the NAACP, a black lobby group, says, “Better doesn’t mean good.”

Woodrow must wobble

Students and their sympathisers think that free speech is sometimes invoked to deflect these claims; or, so Princeton’s Black Justice League maintains, as a “justification for the marginalisation of others”. Echoing debates over memorials across the nation, many students have demanded that the slavery-tainted names of college buildings be changed. Some Princetonians want the public-policy school to honour someone other than Woodrow Wilson, a president who was a segregationist, albeit an idealistic promoter of world peace. Some Yalies object to Calhoun College commemorating a pro-slavery ideologue and statesman.

These requests are regarded by others as efforts to sanitise history. Announcing its recent decision to retain Calhoun’s name, Yale said that doing so would serve as a teaching aid. Princeton, too, has chosen to keep Wilson’s name, though a dining-hall mural of him, smiling and holding a baseball, has been scrubbed out. Both made compensating offers of explicatory artwork and exhibitions, while Yale promised to name a new college after Pauli Murray, a civil-rights leader. Whatever the merits of these demands—stronger in the case of Calhoun—they are not an infringement of free speech but an exercise of it. After all, whom institutions choose to celebrate and how they depict the past are choices to be debated, not immutable facts.

For all that, free speech is hardly a red herring. One ominous turn lies in the claim made by some protesters for the supremacy of their subjective judgments. Ms Baker argues that black people know best when they are being racially demeaned in the same way that women can best distinguish between a compliment and harassment. That may often be true. White, middle-aged deans would be rash to secondguess the experiences of black youngsters.

The powerful riposte is that, to function, society relies on impartial adjudication of wrongs, especially in an era of multiculturalism, with its attendant frictions. Prejudice may indeed abound, but for officials to intervene it must be proven, not merely alleged. In any case, the idea that any group’s experience is inaccessible to others is not just pessimistic but anti-intellectual: history, anthropology, literature and many other fields of inquiry are premised on the faith that different sorts of people can, in fact, understand each other.

Next consider the swelling range of opinion deemed to fall outside civilised discourse. To be sure, some opinions do, and the boundary shifts with time. The trouble now, says Zach Wood, a student at Williams College in Massachusetts, is that many people want to banish views that remain widely held among their compatriots, believing that, on neuralgic topics such as homosexuality, “It’s all said and done.” He runs a campus group that hosts challenging speakers. “Silence does nothing,” he reasons. Two of its invitations—to Suzanne Venker, author of “The War on Men”, and John Derbyshire, a racist provocateur—have recently been rescinded: Ms Venker was disinvited under pressure from other students, Mr Derbyshire by the college’s leadership. Mr Wood has been insulted, ostracised and (he is black) told he has “sold out his race”. Other prominent figures deterred or blocked from addressing university audiences include Condoleezza Rice, a former secretary of state, Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a former Muslim, and Jason Riley, an African-American journalist who wrote a book called “Please Stop Helping Us: How Liberals Make It Harder For Blacks To Succeed”.

Activists are entitled to their protests. But when, as at Williams, they decry counter-arguments as tantamount to violence, they stray into censorship. On campuses across America not only have speakers been disinvited or shouted down for espousing assorted heresies (a practice known as “no-platforming” in Britain); administrators have also been urged to dismiss staff who, like the Christakises, are held to have transgressed. Dissenters, and those who simply worry about saying the wrong thing, are increasingly inclined to keep their mouths shut. Much to their bafflement, the targets are often themselves left-leaning.

This creeping intolerance chimes with the paternalism of “trigger warnings”, whereby students are alerted to potentially upsetting passages in novels or other texts, as if solidarity in suffering were not one of art’s chief purposes. Theoretically, if not yet in practice, trigger warnings may oust great literature in favour of socialist-realist tedium. Then there are “safe spaces”, dedicated sanctuaries in which minorities can recuperate. Sebastian Marotta, a student who is part of a Princeton free-speech group, reckons a movement avowedly committed to diversity may perversely result in “self-segregation based on beliefs and identity”. As Ms Christakis summarised in her ill-fated Halloween e-mail, others fear that, with the connivance of teachers and their overlords, America’s universities “have become places of censure and prohibition”.

At the heart of this dispute is the role of the university itself. Should it shield youngsters from the fraught world they will soon enter or, by exposing them to its affronts, prepare them for it? This has a corollary: whether a student is an adult, or an in-betweener needing special protection and privileges (such as the right to spend a lot of time in the library and getting drunk). All of the above, say diplomatic university bosses. Some students, though, seem to emphasise incubation over preparation; hence their requests for more reprimands and intrusion, for supposedly improving bans and rules. What really distinguishes them from their predecessors, say their critics, is not solipsism, impatience or a certainty that can slide from admirable passion into self-righteousness, but the expectation that all their problems should be magicked away. Whereas, as Dr Christakis says, universities “cannot readily deliver utopia, much as we might want to”.

The new activism thus illustrates what, beyond the groves of academe, may be America’s biggest political problem: opponents’ rising tendency to talk past each other, so that disagreement escalates into conflict. Nevertheless, beyond the viral clips, for those who care to notice there are signs this divide can partially be bridged.

The students’ new-fangled vocabulary, such as the perpetual admonition of “privilege” and “micro-aggressions”, often mystifies their elders. Yet buried within the jargon are old-fashioned values that the most conservative fogey could embrace. Cultural “re-education” sounds Maoist, but helping staff to cope with students from different backgrounds is common sense. Campus Jewish centres are well-established “safe spaces”, to which no one much objects; places where minorities are able to feel inconspicuous or comfortable are perfectly sound ideas, provided people do not spend all their time in them. If sparingly deployed, trigger warnings, too, can be benign. A gentle alert to the impending description of rape, for example, may be less liberal craziness than good manners.

In the aftermath of the nastiness towards journalists at the University of Missouri, Mr Faloughi and others distributed flyers around campus urging students to respect the media and the First Amendment. “We’re students, we don’t know everything,” Mr Faloughi acknowledges. Yet sometimes, when they identify injustices that society has blithely tolerated, or opportunities for progress it has missed, angry students can turn out to be right.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21699905-university-protesters-believe-they-are-fighting-justice-their-critics-think-free/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

A youthful trend

Don’t be so offensive

Young westerners are less keen than their parents on free speech

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition

STRIDENCY on campus is not only an American problem. Throughout the West it is the young who are most ambivalent about free speech. A recent survey found that two-thirds of British students endorsed the National Union of Students’ “no-platform” policy. Speakers “no-platformed” in Britain include Peter Tatchell, a gay-rights activist who was a hero on campuses in the 1990s but has upset some of today’s students by favouring free speech even for homophobes.

Academics who think education requires the free flow of ideas are appalled. “A university is not a ‘safe space’,” tweeted Richard Dawkins, a biologist at Oxford. “If you need a safe space, leave, go home, hug your teddy & suck your thumb until ready for university.”

According to a survey last year by the Pew Research Centre, 47% of British 18- to 29-year-olds think the government should be able to stop people from saying things that offend other people’s religious beliefs, compared with 32% of those over 50. Fully 55% of French youngsters think that the government should intervene to prevent people from saying offensive things about minority groups, compared with 43% of their compatriots aged 30-49. In Germany 21% of 18- to 29-year-olds think the government should be able to stop the media from publishing information about large political protests, compared with only 9% of 30- to 49-year-olds. Young Americans are less likely to favour unfettered free speech than their elders are, but they are less censorious than young Europeans.

Overall, the global trend in academia is towards muzzling opinions deemed offensive. Students these days grow up “in a rough-and-tumble world on the internet”, notes another Oxford professor, “where abuse is universal”. Social-media sites such as Facebook and Twitter now make it possible to report offensive speech or images (this week they agreed to a code in Europe whereby they would block “illegal hate speech”). Years of clicking “report spam or abuse” may now have normalised the idea of silencing speech one disagrees with rather than debating it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21699903-young-westerners-are-less-keen-their-parents-free-speech-dont-be-so-offensive/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Walmart: Thinking outside the box

Digital celebrities: From smartphone to silver screen

Price-fixing: No truck with cartels

French manufacturers in Morocco: Factories in the sun

Apple in India: Forbidden fruit

Schumpeter: The evolution of Mr Thiel





Articles Sections Next

Walmart

Thinking outside the box

As American shoppers move online, Walmart fights to defend its dominance

Jun 4th 2016 | BENTONVILLE, ARKANSAS AND SAN BRUNO, CALIFORNIA | From the print edition

Business is picking up

THERE is little outward sign that Walmart’s “supercentre” in Rogers, Arkansas differs from any other of the giant retailer’s outlets. Walmart conquered America with such “big box” stores—vast concrete blocks in an ocean of parking spaces. Inside stretches aisle upon aisle of merchandise, from Patti LaBelle sweet-potato pies to Ruger rifles and ScentSationals Wax Warmers, shaped like owls. But this particular store, near Walmart’s headquarters in Bentonville, is different. It is where the world’s biggest retailer hones some of the new ideas which, it hopes, will help it keep its crown.

Recently the company has had lots of such brainwaves, from vegetables in plastic bins etched to look like wood, to wands that let customers scan items as they shop, thereby speeding up check-out. They are part of a multibillion-dollar bid to keep thriving as America’s retail industry is upended. And for the first time in decades, it is not Walmart that is doing the upending.

Since April share prices for some of America’s best-known retailers, including Macy’s and Gap, have plunged by more than 25%. Some of their problems are fleeting, but one is not. Rather than driving to a big box, many Americans are shopping online instead. American e-commerce accounted for 10.4% of retail sales last year, up from 9.3% in 2014, according to Morgan Stanley, a bank. Amazon is the force behind this, with sales in North America rising by nearly 30% in 2015. The choice for bricks-and-mortar retailers is clear: evolve or decline.

Amid this tumult Walmart remains a titan. It is not just the world’s biggest retailer but also its largest private employer and company, measured by revenue. Last year it raked in $482 billion. Walmart’s empire is global, but America is its particular dominion, accounting for three-quarters of its sales. And on home turf Walmart still towers above Amazon, accounting for 10.6% of America’s retail sales, more than twice Amazon’s share, according to Cowen, a financial-services firm (see chart 1). Yet Amazon is still growing fast, and Walmart may be past its peak. In 2009 Walmart commanded 11.6% of American retail sales. By 2018 Cowen reckons its share will be stuck at 10.6%, whereas Amazon’s will have jumped.



Walmart is spending furiously to fight back against Amazon’s online onslaught. “We will win with a strategy that only Walmart can execute,” Doug McMillon, its chief executive, said in his annual letter to shareholders, shoppers and staff. To that end, Walmart is spending $2.7 billion to raise workers’ wages, which should improve service in its shops. It will devote more than $1 billion to e-commerce this year. Last year it poured a staggering $10.5 billion into information technology, more than any other company on the planet, according to an estimate by the International Data Corporation, a research firm.

These investments have squeezed profits, but the firm is banking on growth. Walmart’s leaders aim to prove that an old-fashioned retailer can continue to dominate in the age of e-commerce. Walmart may show how to merge physical and online retail. It is sure to boast of its progress at its annual meeting on June 3rd: it was one of the few American retailers to post cheering first-quarter results in May. Yet its reign as undisputed retail champion is over.

Since Sam Walton opened his first shop over five decades ago, the firm has thrived with a simple strategy, zealously executed: operate with the lowest costs, sell at the cheapest prices and watch sales grow. The success of this formula has given Walmart a unique place in America’s economy as well as its psyche.

Value proposition

Walmart is ubiquitous. Some 90% of Americans now live within ten miles of one of its stores. Nearly four out of five of them shopped at Walmart last year. That means its customers outnumber the voters in America’s presidential election in 2012 by almost two to one. Each week 140m Americans march through its doors in search of “everyday low prices” on a vast array of goods. For the products that Americans use as freely as air—food, toothpaste, soap, paper towels—Walmart is king, ringing up sales worth about twice what its closest rivals take.

Walmart’s scale has changed not just how Americans shop but also how companies in its supply chain do business. Walmart is such an important buyer that consumer-goods companies such as Procter & Gamble have offices near Bentonville. When Walmart sets a goal, companies usually find ways to meet it. In its bid to promote sustainability, for example, Walmart wanted General Mills, a big food company, to fit its Hamburger Helper noodles into a smaller box. General Mills replaced curved noodles with straight ones, which lie flatter. The switch took 500 lorries off the road each year and freed shelf space for other goods. Walmart worked with makers of detergent to develop concentrated versions, in smaller bottles. Over three years the switch saved more than 57,000 tonnes of cardboard, 43,000 tonnes of plastic resin and 400m gallons of water.

The company has its detractors. In a ranking of shoppers’ satisfaction with big retailers, Walmart has usually come last, according to the American Consumer Satisfaction Index. Unions and other critics have accused Walmart of obliterating small businesses, denuding towns of local shops and encouraging suppliers to manufacture abroad. One study estimates that Walmart brought 11% of Chinese imports into America in 2013 and helped displace over 400,000 American jobs between 2001 and 2013. But China was sure to be a manufacturing powerhouse, regardless of Walmart’s existence. Walmart points out that two-thirds of its products are “sourced” in America and says the study’s methods are flawed.

In its home town of Bentonville Walmart seems a very American company, its culture a blend of sunny encouragement and hard-nosed capitalism. Sam Walton’s legacy looms large. American town squares are often ghostly, but Bentonville’s centre is cheerful, with a Walmart museum in Walton’s original five-and-dime shop. At its headquarters, many employees still refer to him as “Mr Sam”. Giant quotes from Walton are painted on office walls—“Get involved. Get serious. Get exercised. Get involved in what we’ve got going.”

Bentonville believers

When staff do good work, they may berewarded with the company cheer, wiggling their hips to signify the hyphen that originally punctuated “Walmart”. Saturday meetings are no longer weekly, as they were in Walton’s day, but are nevertheless “like going to church”, according to one employee. Walton’s obsessive focus on efficiency remains. Most meetings begin at least two minutes early; on time is considered late. They end with each employee sure of his or her tasks, or “go-dos”.

This culture has sustained Walmart’s reign. Nevertheless, the low prices and broad range that made Walmart distinctive for so long seem less of an advantage these days. A growing band of competitors threaten to match or beat its prices, notes Matthew Fassler of Goldman Sachs. Aldi, a German discounter, offers rock-bottom deals by selling mostly private-label goods in bleak stores. As for choice, Amazon offers about 1.8m items of women’s clothing alone, which makes a supercentre’s range of 120,000 goods look paltry.

Amazon competes not only on price and range, but also on convenience. As customers shop for millions of products from the comfort of their homes, the allure of a trip to a shop that stocks both firearms and underarm deodorants is waning. What Walmart did for Americans’ wallets, Amazon is doing for their time. For a $99 annual fee, Amazon Prime guarantees free shipping in two days. Once shipping is fast and costs nothing extra, customers tend to start buying more online.

Amazon has many more ways to lure customers. It is rolling out Prime Pantry, delivering a box of household goods for a flat shipping fee of $5.99, as well as same-day shipping or even home delivery within two hours. Amazon Dash lets consumers hit a button placed wherever they like, to buy common items, like razors or soap, eliminating the hassle of visiting Amazon’s website or app. Consumers can also use a new piece of technology to scan and order items already in their cupboard. Amazon shopping could become almost as easy as flicking a light switch.

That is a dark thought for all retailers. Pharmacy chains such as Walgreens and CVS face the threat of consumers turning to Amazon for bleach, shampoo and other household supplies. Department stores are floundering as shoppers buy more dresses, shoes and jackets online. Cowen expects Amazon to overtake Macy’s as America’s biggest clothes seller next year.

Walmart appears less vulnerable to this assault than other retailers. Groceries account for more than half of its revenue in America. Food is hard to sell online—margins are low and logistics complex—and so far Amazon is testing grocery sales in only a few parts of the country. Nevertheless, Amazon and Walmart increasingly compete for the same customer.



Amazon customers are still on average wealthier than Walmart’s, but that gap is narrowing (see chart 2). As Amazon reaches a broader swathe of consumers, the company will increasingly serve the type of shopper who goes to Walmart. In the second quarter of 2014 some 8% of those who bought household goods at Walmart also bought them from Amazon, according to Cowen. By last year 12% shopped at both. Amazon recently said it would let shoppers pay $10.99 a month for Prime, rather than a one-off annual fee of $99. That may help it win customers with a wider range of incomes.

Clicks versus bricks

The challenge for Walmart, and for all other retailers in the e-commerce era, is to protect both sales and profits. But these goals nay be mutually exclusive. Retailers face pressure to offer both free shipping and competitive prices, which generally makes selling a product online less profitable than doing so in existing stores. To expand sales online, retailers must spend on technology, which squeezes margins further. Making matters even worse, retailers are often not gaining new customers but simply selling the same item to the same person online for less profit. “You pour from one bucket into a less profitable bucket,” explains Simeon Gutman of Morgan Stanley.

This makes stores themselves less productive, creating yet another dilemma. America has more retail space per person than any other country and double the amount of Australia, the next-closest market (see chart 3). As e-commerce sales rise, some retailers may need to cut their networks down to size. Yet stores still account for the vast majority of retailers’ sales. Closing underperforming shops may end up sending consumers to competitors’ shops—or to Amazon.



Walmart itself is bolting some doors for the last time. In January it said it would shut 269 shops worldwide, including 154 in America. That is a small fraction of the total. Most closures were not of supercentres but of “express” shops, an ill-fated try at running small convenience stores. Companies specialising in smaller formats, such as Aldi and Dollar General, are growing quickly. Walmart is keeping its medium-sized grocery stores but dumped its express shops this year.

Its plans, to the surprise of some investors, include opening up to 60 supercentres and 95 grocery stores this year. The addition of another 10m square feet of retail space is a slower pace of expansion, but is still almost as much as the combined additions planned by the 23 other big American retailers that Morgan Stanley monitors. Faced with a rapidly changing market, Walmart is trying to do what it has always done best: grow.

It is building more stores because, instead of reinventing itself, it wants to carry on offering more goods at low prices to more consumers, more conveniently. “The best thing you can do is always something that makes what you already do better,” explains Neil Ashe, head of Walmart’s e-commerce effort. That means making its operations more expansive and efficient by combining Walmart’s growing number of physical assets, including its logistics network and more than 5,200 American stores, with a growing e-commerce business and array of new digital and analytical tools.

To that end its e-commerce hub is not in Bentonville but San Bruno, California, which has more tech talent. Walmart has built a new technology platform, changing everything from how its website works to how the company manages customer payments and analyses data. The flurry of activity in San Bruno has helped Walmart.com’s selection rise from 2m items less than four years ago to over 10m today.

Walmart is scrutinising the minutiae of e-commerce as closely as it monitors every aspect of its business. For example, in the past year Walmart has combed through data to learn how to pack its boxes more efficiently. Using 27 different boxes rather than the 12 they use now, the company has concluded, would lower the total volume of boxes shipped by about one-third. Packing more into each lorry could save fuel and 7.2m cubic feet of space taken up by cardboard boxes, enough to fill about 82 Olympic swimming pools.

Walmart’s main differentiator online, however, may be its stores. It is combining sales figures from its shops and data from its website to discern which goods to keep where; its algorithms weigh up billions of variables. Like Amazon before it, the company is building large warehouses to serve its e-commerce business, but it is also shipping products from store distribution centres and from stores themselves. It is letting customers buy online, then collect from stores at no charge.

Some of these strategies are not unique to Walmart, but its scale and logistical skills help the company implement them better than others. For example, Walmart is already expert at the complexities of handling perishable items. It has tried delivering groceries, but is expanding a pickup service instead, betting that this will be both convenient for shoppers and profitable for the company. Such a service may work especially well in America’s sprawling suburbs, where delivery would be expensive. In Rogers, online shoppers park in special bays and their Walmart app signals their arrival. Staff roll out crates of groceries, load them briskly into the waiting vehicles and send shoppers on their way.

As for the stores themselves, Walmart is trying to boost sales by making them more attractive, easier places to visit. The company raised its minimum wage to $10 this year, as part of an effort to improve customer service. In Rogers, signs for different departments are easier to read. Customers can use an app to pinpoint this salsa or that pram, view an expanded selection online and, as of this summer, pay for them.

Store operations continue to get better. Staff are armed with hand-held devices with apps to simplify common tasks, like managing inventory. The company fretted that bakers were leaving too much icing at the bottom of tubs, so Walmart gave them new scrapers. The company reckons this will save more than 35 lorryloads of buttercream icing each year.

These efforts are likely to intensify but may not do enough to keep it in the lead. Walmart says that customers who shop both in stores and online spend more than those who shop only in stores. Yet the e-commerce business is not growing as quickly as the company would like. Its sales in the first quarter of this year rose by 7% globally. American online sales were slightly better, but the company will not say by how much. Meanwhile, Amazon’s North American e-commerce sales jumped by 27%.

Get serious

Even as Walmart pushes forward, it is in the unfamiliar position of trying to catch up. As Amazon Prime offers more functions, Walmart is still testing a $49 annual fee for free delivery. The shipping costs and technology investments required by e-commerce may make Walmart less profitable in the long term. So would the decline of the mighty supercentre, which is showing signs of age. In the most recent quarter sales at Walmart’s medium-sized, less profitable grocery stores rose seven times as fast as the broader American business.

The most troubling change would be if the company’s virtuous cycle of scale and low prices were to start breaking down. In October Walmart said it would cut its prices, beginning this year. The company is confident that this will propel sales higher—as low prices have for more than 50 years. However, Mr Fassler of Goldman Sachs argues that competitors’ low prices and shoppers’ preference for convenience may mean that its familiar trick will not boost market share as it once did. Walmart conquered America with its big boxes. It must now contend with millions of small ones, piled high on America’s doorsteps.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21699961-american-shoppers-move-online-walmart-fights-defend-its-dominance-thinking-outside/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Digital celebrities

From smartphone to silver screen

Stars of social media are trying to break into the mainstream

Jun 4th 2016 | LOS ANGELES | From the print edition

Famous, for six-and-a-half seconds

THE conceit of a new film, “Airplane Mode”, is clever enough. Put some of the biggest stars of YouTube, Vine, Snapchat, Facebook and Instagram on a plane to Australia without internet access. Faced by a few hours without the views, loops and likes that connect them with the outside world, madness follows. But will their millions of young fans follow the digital hotshots offline, to the cinema?

Over the past decade each new social-media platform has given rise to a subculture of celebrities, worshipped by teenagers and children but largely unknown to anyone else. Once YouTube was the main stage for this new type of star. Now every platform has them, including an array of new apps unfamiliar to grown-ups (ask a child about musical.ly, for example). Through projects like “Airplane Mode”, which recently finished shooting on a budget of more than $2m, these digital stars are trying to convert their massive online followings into mainstream fame.

The numbers alone make that seem a reasonable ambition. The low-brow escapades of these digital luminaries have earned them each millions of fans. Logan Paul, a co-writer and star of “Airplane Mode”, has 10m likes on his Facebook page. Amanda Cerny, a former Playboy model, has 4.5m followers on Instagram, and says her Snapchat videos get up to 2m “opens”, making her one of the world’s most-snapped women not named Kardashian (Snapchat does not disclose such data). Andrew “King Bach” Bachelor (pictured) is the most-followed individual on Vine with 16m acolytes and Lele Pons, 19, is the most-viewed woman on Vine, with 189m loops of her videos in April, according to Tubular, a social-media rankings service.

The attention is lucrative. These stars earn most of their money through “branded content” deals with large companies—the biggest names can earn over $100,000 for a single campaign. Talent agencies have taken note. Mr Bachelor studied as an actor and says he turned to Vine after repeated rejection for roles because he was not famous enough: “Oh, I’ll be famous, just you wait,” he thought then. He signed with United Talent Agency in 2013 and has appeared in a couple of minor roles, including a comedy film that flopped at the box office. Creative Artists Agency represents Ms Cerny and Mr Paul. Ms Cerny has been cast in a scripted virtual-reality series and Mr Paul appeared in an episode of a popular television series.

But turning the adulation of all those fans into a long career will be tough. The videos these fledgling personalities have thrived on until now—snippets as short as six-and-a-half seconds (the maximum on Vine)—appeal to the adolescent sensibilities of their fans. In a recent 53-second Facebook video, Mr Paul and Ms Cerny demonstrate things girls do that “guys should be cool with” (like taking hours to get dressed). Though no masterpiece, it has been watched 15m times. But the lifespan as a digital big shot can be short—a few years at most before their audience ages and moves on. “Airplane Mode” is assured a high-flying social-media campaign but that may not be enough to get the next stage of its stars’ careers off the ground.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21699958-stars-social-media-are-trying-break-mainstream-smartphone-silver-screen/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Price-fixing

No truck with cartels

Expensive times for companies accused of collusion

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



MARGRETHE VESTAGER, the European Union’s competition commissioner, has taken a forceful stance on mergers and market dominance, as lawyers at Google and other big firms in her sights can attest. Now she has trained her eye on corporate cartels, too. Her office is working on a case against truckmakers that could result in the largest-ever fine for collusive behaviour. The looming penalty provides the latest evidence that policing price-fixers, once an enforcement backwater, has become a priority for trustbusters.

Six truckmakers—DAF, Daimler, Iveco, MAN, Scania and Volvo-Renault—are suspected of having fixed prices in several ways between 1997 and 2011, including by delaying the introduction of new emissions technologies. They face fines well above the previous EU record of €1.4 billion ($1.8 billion), levied on makers of television and computer-monitor tubes in 2012. The truck companies have already set aside $2.6 billion between them.

While this remains a mainly European case, several alleged conspiracies are being probed simultaneously on both sides of the Atlantic, with European regulators co-ordinating their assaults with counterparts in America in some cases. These involve, among others, car parts, air freight and financial benchmarks, such as LIBOR and foreign-exchange rates. The LIBOR case alone, in which banks are accused of manipulating the reported rate at which they borrow in money markets, has resulted in $9 billion in penalties so far. America’s Department of Justice has led the car-parts investigations: as of mid-May it had charged 40 firms and extracted more than $2.7 billion in criminal fines.

Europe’s national competition watchdogs have grown busier, too. In May Germany’s cartel office fined several supermarket chains, including Lidl and Metro, €90.5m for fixing the prices of beer, sweets and coffee in cahoots with manufacturers. Britain’s competition authority has recently announced probes in sectors ranging from water tanks to model agencies. Those caught colluding on catwalks or elsewhere face fines of up to 10% of their turnover.

With evidence hard to spot from the outside, regulators are doing more to encourage whistle-blowing. Firms that expose price-fixing rings can expect leniency: in the truck case, MAN was the first to step forward and may avoid a fine altogether.

For individuals, too, the stakes have risen. America in particular has gone after managers it suspects of participating in price-rigging. Some 59 have been charged in the car-parts case (though around 20 of them have avoided prosecution by staying put in Japan). In April a senior executive at Nishikawa Rubber, which makes sealing products, pleaded guilty and is expected to serve 18 months in prison. The average sentence in American price-fixing cases has risen from eight months in the 1990s to more than two years.

Government probes often set off further attacks, from private litigants. Europe’s thousands of hauliers will be watching the truck case closely. The rewards can be rich. After America and the EU slapped penalties of $3 billion on airlines for suspected collusion in air-freight surcharges, plaintiffs’ lawyers pursued 28 carriers for damages. All have now settled (without admitting wrongdoing), agreeing to pay a combined $1.2 billion. This, minus lawyers’ fees, will be shared among thousands of freight-forwarding firms.

Such cases tend to be long and painful. The air-cargo litigation rumbled on for a decade. Hausfeld, one of the plaintiffs’ representatives, says its lawyers spent 35,000 hours on the case, in which 18m pages of documents were filed. Not that they will go unrewarded: the lawyers’ cut is expected to be 25%. Class-action lawyers can be so persistent that firms will cough up just to get rid of them, in some cases even after being cleared by multiple government probes (as was the case with Air New Zealand, which is paying $35m into the pot).

The air-freight case shows that firms that refuse to settle quickly are gambling. The first airlines to settle got away with paying 2% of relevant sales in the period in question. That rose as the case went on. The last holdout, Air India, agreed last month to pay over 10% of relevant sales despite India’s competition commission having found no evidence of wrongdoing.

Private lawsuits against alleged colluders, long common in America, are catching on in Europe, encouraged by legal reforms. The EU’s antitrust-damages directive, which member states are to implement by the end of 2016, will make it easier for companies and citizens to bring claims for breaches of EU competition law in national courts. Anticipating more business, Hausfeld opened a Berlin office in January.

The biggest private settlements are likely to be in finance. They already top $2 billion in foreign-exchange cases. Plaintiffs got more good news in May, when an American appeals court overturned a lower-court ruling which had dismissed a batch of private lawsuits alleging that big banks including Bank of America and HSBC had illegally manipulated LIBOR.

It is not all one-way traffic. In December the EU’s General Court overturned nearly €800m of air-cargo fines against 11 airlines. But although the court ruled that the European Commission’s arguments had been “contradictory”, it did not find that there was insufficient evidence to prove a conspiracy. The commission may bring the case again if it can work out a way to deal with these objections. Ms Vestager is not the type to be fazed by setbacks.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21699957-expensive-times-companies-accused-collusion-no-truck-cartels/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

French manufacturers in Morocco

Factories in the sun

European firms bring carmaking and an aerospace industry to north Africa

Jun 4th 2016 | CASABLANCA | From the print edition



CONSIDERING the help provided to big foreign manufacturers in Morocco over the past few years, it would have taken a serious effort by them to fail. Renault, a French carmaker, for example, is thriving: of 2.8m cars it made globally last year, one in ten trundled out from its two shiny assembly plants in Tangier and Casablanca. It hopes eventually to make 400,000 cars a year. The government provided land, excellent roads and power supply, tax advantages and a dedicated railway line to get the vehicles to an enormous port in Tangier. Official efforts to snip red tape and make it easier for firms to operate, and a penchant for signing free-trade deals, help to explain why foreign-direct investment is soaring, even as it shrivels for its neighbours.

One of Morocco’s main draws is a supply of cheap labour. But it has also spent heavily on infrastructure, and not only for Renault. Its road network, railways, airports and ports are modern and well-maintained. It is handily close to the European home of many of the firms that have invested. But most of all, unlike Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt, which to varying degrees can match these other advantages, it offers political stability. The king, Mohammed VI, has championed a plan to industrialise quickly and create jobs for young Moroccans. “We are trying to do in ten years what Britain or France took 80 years to do,” says a Moroccan businessman working with Safran, a French industrial group.

The country’s welcome mat has brought jobs. Four years ago Renault invested €1.6 billion ($2.1 billion) in its main car plant, Africa’s largest, and it now employs nearly 10,000 staff locally. The firm is one of Morocco’s biggest companies. It produces vehicles such as the Lodgy, an entry-level people-carrier sold in Europe. Rapid growth proved possible partly because the king ordained it (his decrees get otherwise languorous civil servants to jump)—for example, in providing generous subsidies for training. Other firms are being lured by Morocco’s largesse. PSA Peugeot Citroën will open an assembly plant in Kenitra, on the Atlantic coast, in 2019, and plans to make 200,000 cars a year.

Domestic sales account for a modest part of production. Marc Nassif, general manager for Renault in Morocco, says locals bought 125,000 cars last year, about two-fifths of them from his firm. More important are car exports that earned Morocco a hefty €4.8 billion last year, making them the country’s biggest single export. That is not a bad record for a country that, until recently, relied mostly on textiles and tourists for hard currency.

Shifting production to lower-cost countries is an old strategy for European carmakers. Renault already has “huge facilities” in Slovenia, Romania, Turkey and Russia, as well as Spain, says Mr Nassif. As wages rise there, cheaper north Africa is more tempting. By one estimate monthly labour costs for Renault workers in Romania or Turkey are around €950, compared with €350 in Morocco.

Other factors also help to explain Renault’s expansion. Carmakers are relying on sales in new markets to keep growing. African consumers are a long-term bet. To make vehicles that will appeal to their customers, carmakers like to keep production close so they can tweak to satisfy local tastes. “The main point is you must manufacture where you sell,” says Mr Nassif.

Cheap and well-trained locals and official munificence explain a boom in another manufacturing industry, aerospace. Its growth was also ordained by Morocco’s king just over a decade ago. Now some 100 firms, including Bombardier, Safran, UTC, Hexcel and Eaton, employ 11,500 people, mostly in a tax-free zone by Casablanca airport. An industry veteran says the goal is to double that workforce, at least, by the end of this decade.

Hamid Benbrahim el-Andaloussi, who heads the industry’s trade body, says a starting monthly salary in aerospace is equivalent to $400 or less, rising to $800 for middle managers. Fitting wiring is more akin to craft than mass production, so high-quality workers are crucial, too. Morocco’s government funds a facility run by the firms—similar to support for the car industry—to train some 800 workers each year. It is being expanded.

In Safran’s factory in Casablanca, workers assemble nacelles—structures encasing engines under aircraft wings—and fit honeycomb composites that help to muffle the screams of jet engines. The boss of Safran Nacelles in Morocco, Thierry Fradet, praises his expanding factory’s location, saying finished goods can reach Toulouse, Airbus’s headquarters, in southern France within three days, by lorry and ship.

Such industries are reshaping Morocco’s economy. But assembly does not bring the bigger gains of higher-value work, such as research and design, nor create a wider system of local suppliers. Mr Nassif expects local firms will eventually supply two-thirds of components at Renault’s Tangier plant, though he does not say when. Creating a supply chain is hard in aerospace, says a manager at Matis, a joint venture between Safran and Boeing for aircraft wiring. Suppliers are expected to share in the investment costs and risks of developing new components. The next job—getting small, local firms to flourish—will prove tougher than luring big foreign ones in the first place.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21699959-european-firms-bring-carmaking-and-aerospace-industry-north-africa-factories-sun/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Apple in India

Forbidden fruit

The trials and tribulations of doing business in India

Jun 4th 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition

Limited connection

MAKING the case that Apple’s gizmos are not “cutting-edge” is a way to goad devotees into an online tirade about the quality of the iPhone’s camera or the slimness of MacBooks. Such debates can usually be ignored by non-geeks. But not in India: a ministerial decision deeming that the tech giant’s products are not “cutting-edge” has, in effect, kiboshed plans to open stores there. It is a second reversal for Apple in a country it says is important to its prospects.

Apple’s application to sell its gadgets through its own stores was rejected because the devices in question are made outside India. Foreign-investment approval is guaranteed only if 30% of a shop’s goods are sourced domestically. The tech firm unexpectedly failed to qualify for an exemption for products that are “state of the art”. Where Apple stumbled is not clear, given the raft of agencies and officials who need to chime in before the finance minister signs off on each new investment proposal.

Arun Jaitley, the current finance minister, backed the decision on the ground that the government of India was concerned with job creation. Perhaps sensing such an argument might crop up, Tim Cook, Apple’s boss, visited India for the first time in May to unveil a development facility creating up to 4,000 jobs. Many thought this investment—to say nothing of a visit to Narendra Modi, the prime minister, and Mr Cook’s attendance at a cricket match—would clinch it for Apple.

Quite the contrary. Another one of Apple’s plans was to sell refurbished second-hand iPhones in the country, possibly the only way to square high prices with Indian consumers’ thin wallets. But after furious lobbying by Apple’s rivals, that too has been rejected by ministers on environmental grounds—despite the firm promising to do the refurbishment in India.

These setbacks (which may yet prove temporary) are an annoyance for Mr Cook. A regulatory filing suggested Apple crossed the $1 billion sales mark in India for the first time last year, albeit out of $234 billion worldwide. He has recently contrasted the firm’s 56% rise in iPhone sales in India with slipping shipments globally. That has much to do with Apple’s tiny share of the smartphone market in India—around 2%, analysts reckon—and saturation elsewhere.

India’s smartphone market is growing at 30% a year, according to Strategy Analytics, a research firm, as growth rates in other big markets such as China and America now languish in single figures. Even if it gets its way with the government, Apple may not benefit that much. Whereas in India the latest iPhone sells for over 50,000 rupees ($740), the most popular smartphones are handsets from Indian or Chinese brands costing just 1,000 rupees. Try finding anything much for that price in an Apple store.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21699956-trials-and-tribulations-doing-business-india-forbidden-fruit/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

The evolution of Mr Thiel

The tech billionaire has morphed from a libertarian into a corporate Nietzschean

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



PETER THIEL is no stranger to the limelight. He is arguably the world’s most successful technology investor, as a co-founder of PayPal, the first outside investor in Facebook and the eminence behind a dozen or so Silicon Valley startups. The self-proclaimed libertarian has used his fortune to fund a wide variety of idiosyncratic causes such as establishing private islands outside government control, paying young people to start firms instead of going to university and waging war on death. Mr Thiel is lampooned in HBO’s “Silicon Valley”, a brilliantly observed television-comedy series, and portrayed briefly in “The Social Network”, a film about Mark Zuckerberg.

Yet even by Mr Thiel’s standards the past fortnight has been a remarkable one. He has admitted secretly funding Hulk Hogan, a professional wrestler (whose real name is Terry Gene Bollea), in his lawsuit against Gawker, a scurrilous website, for invading his privacy by publishing a sex tape. Mr Bollea is one of several beneficiaries of Mr Thiel’s legal largesse. In 2007 Gawker’s Valleywag blog published a piece entitled “Peter Thiel is totally gay, people”. Since his outing Mr Thiel, who clearly thinks revenge is a dish best served cold, has secretly funded a team of lawyers to find “victims” of Gawker and help them bring cases against the website.

A Florida jury has awarded Mr Bollea $140m in damages (legal experts think that the sum will be reduced or the judgment reversed on appeal). Mr Thiel told the New York Times that his funding of court cases is “one of my greater philanthropic things that I’ve done”. But many commentators have been brutal. They condemn Mr Thiel for abandoning his libertarian principles and trying to gag Gawker. They agonise about so-called third-party lawsuits, whereby outsiders pay for one side in a legal dispute in order to make a point. And they fear the menace of billionaires turning the legal system into an instrument of their whims.

It is not hard to find holes in these arguments. Gawker’s invasion of Mr Bollea’s privacy served no public interest. The same principle that allows Mr Thiel to pay for cases against Gawker also allows all sorts of “white knights” to hold big corporations to account. Even Mr Thiel’s resort to anonymity is defensible: if a legal case is a good one, it should not matter whether it is known who is paying for it. If Gawker can justify its behaviour on free-speech grounds, then Mr Thiel can certainly justify his on the grounds of oiling the wheels of justice.

Yet Mr Thiel’s behaviour still gives pause, particularly his promise of “deterrence” for Gawker. He is using his considerable wealth to pursue a vendetta against it. What happens if other billionaires use their money to bankrupt news organisations, for example, simply because they happen to disagree with their politics? Mr Thiel is also helping to fuel a litigation machine that most of his fellow libertarians rightly regard as a scourge on American business and society. Mr Thiel is blessed with one of the most interesting minds in American business. The Gawker case suggests that it is evolving in an odd direction.

At his best, Mr Thiel was a mixture of libertarian and contrarian. As a student at Stanford University in the late 1980s and early 1990s he railed against the new academic orthodoxies of multiculturalism and diversity and political correctness, founding a conservative magazine, Stanford Review, and publishing an establishment-baiting book, “The Diversity Myth”. He even defended a fellow law student, Keith Rabois, who decided to test the limits of free speech on campus by standing outside a teacher’s residence and shouting “Faggot! Faggot! Hope you die of AIDS!” When he was a young tyro in Silicon Valley, his libertarian vision inspired many of his business decisions. He hoped that PayPal would help create a new world currency, free from government control and dilution, and that Facebook would help people form spontaneous communities outside traditional nation states.

There is a darker element in his thinking today. In an essay written in 2009 for the Cato Institute, a libertarian think-tank, he declared that he no longer believed that “freedom and democracy are compatible”, putting some of the blame for growing statism on the rise of welfare dependency and the enfranchisement of women. He added a grandiloquent coda: “The fate of our world may depend on the effort of a single person who builds or propagates the machinery of freedom that makes the world safe for capitalism”. In a book, “Zero to One”, published in 2014, he pooh-poohed competition and celebrated the power of “creative monopolists” who add “entirely new categories of abundance to the world”. He is now not so much a libertarian as a corporate Nietzschean, who believes in the power of gifted entrepreneurs to change the world through the sheer force of will and intellect.

Touchy Thiely

There are lots of reasons for Mr Thiel’s Nietzschean turn. One is his contrarian spirit: the same orneriness that turned him into a scold of political correctness may now lie behind his willingness to act as a delegate for Donald Trump at the Republican Convention. A second is philosophy: a powerful current in libertarianism is less interested in the wisdom of crowds than the brilliance of great men. Ayn Rand’s book, “Atlas Shrugged”, describes a world where the creative minority of business geniuses has retreated from the world, and left the masses to enjoy the fruits of socialism. A third is pessimism: Mr Thiel is so worried that the technology revolution has failed to bring about the expected improvements in productivity that he thinks Silicon Valley and America as a whole need a good shaking.

The most important reason, however, is the march of time. So often it has turned genius into crankiness and caused clever men to waste their energy on silly causes. It would be a terrible irony if a man who has declared his opposition to “the ideology of the inevitability of the death” had fallen victim to one of the classic symptoms of advancing years.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21699954-tech-billionaire-has-morphed-libertarian-corporate-nietzschean-evolution/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Reforming Indian banks: Bureaucrats at the till

Buttonwood: Working hard for the money

China’s currency: Bending, not breaking

Automation: I’m afraid I can’t do that

Crypto-currencies: Etherised

Aircraft finance: Crowded skies

SMEs in developing countries: Caught in the middle

Free exchange: Tales from Silicon wadi





Articles Sections Next

Reforming Indian banks

Bureaucrats at the till

The financial sector in India is being improved rather than overhauled

Jun 4th 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition



INDIA’S biggest banks tend to have official-sounding names, worthy of a central bank. There is State Bank of India, Union Bank of India, Bank of India and even Central Bank of India (the actual central bank is called the Reserve Bank of India, or RBI). That is because, starting in 1969, the entire financial system was nationalised. Although the government has grudgingly permitted private-sector banks over the past 20 years, the 27 public-sector banks (PSBs), which are listed but majority-owned by the government, still account for 70% of lending. That is a worry, because the PSBs are in terrible shape, having lent freely to companies that cannot pay them back. In response, both the government and the RBI are imposing various reforms—but not the most obvious one.

Indian banks dodged the global financial meltdown in 2008. But they promptly embarked on a frenzy of lending to big companies, sowing the seeds of a home-made crisis. The PSBs gleefully funded infrastructure projects that never got the required permits, mines with an output made much less valuable by slumping commodity prices, and tycoons whose main qualification was friendship with government ministers. PSBs have tried to gloss over the problem for years, but the RBI is now forcing them to admit the true extent of the damage.

The reckoning has been brutal: 3 trillion rupees ($44 billion) of loans have been recognised as “non-performing” by banks in the past two quarters, the vast bulk of them at PSBs; 17% of all loans there have either been written off, provisioned for or categorised as impaired, according to Credit Suisse, a bank. More losses are in the pipeline. The revelations have driven the combined market capitalisation of the 27 PSBs down to that of a single well-run private lender, HDFC Bank, founded in 1994.

Tidying up a mess on this scale is never easy, but it is proving particularly tricky in India. The absence of a bankruptcy law (one was enacted in May but it will take months, if not years, to become operational) leaves bankers powerless in the face of defaults. Indian lenders recover just 25% of their money from delinquent borrowers on average, and only after four years of haggling, compared with 80% in America in half the time. A creaky judicial system piles delays upon delays.

Worse, as quasi-bureaucrats, Indian bankers are loth to do the one thing that would help a recovery, which is to sell iffy loans to outside investors and move on. Such investors exist, albeit in limited numbers, but doing business with them can be treacherous: if the borrower’s fortunes recover after a sale and it pays back the new owner of the loans in full, bankers fear government auditors will accuse them of selling the distressed loans on the cheap. Best for the bankers to do nothing, and hope that the situation somehow improves.

The government wants to change this dynamic. A new “bank board bureau”, headed by an unimpeachable former government auditor, has been created to insulate bankers from government meddling, and so give them cover to sell assets at less than face value. Much of what it suggests is sensible: giving longer terms to PSBs’ bosses, for example, and ensuring they are not judged merely on how quickly they increase the bank’s loan book—part of the reason the PSBs ran into trouble before. The government also wants to halve the number of PSBs through mergers.

That is not enough to solve the PSBs’ problems, however. By almost any measure, they lag behind their private counterparts. Costs gobble up 57% of their revenue, compared with 43% at private banks. Net interest margins, the difference between the rate a bank pays depositors and the one it charges clients, stand at 2.4% in PSBs and 3.9% in the private sector. No PSB is valued at more than the value of its assets minus debt (some trade closer to 20% of their book value), unlike almost every private bank. Less than 5% of private banks’ loans have soured, compared with the 17% figure at the PSBs.

The state-owned banks’ defenders point out that private-sector banks, by and large, focus on consumer loans, which have done better than corporate lending. That is as much a matter of skill as luck, however. The largely untroubled private banks are steadily gaining market share, making 58% of new loans last year despite accounting for just 30% of the existing stock, according to Credit Suisse. The corollary is that lending to industry (excluding infrastructure), which the PSBs dominate, has all but stalled (see chart). That bodes ill for the economy, especially since India’s capital markets are too puny to take up much of the slack.



Analysts estimate that PSBs will need $30 billion-50 billion in fresh capital. To date the government, which is trying to cut the budget deficit, has offered just $11 billion spread over several years. A heftier package will come later, an official says, when banks are in better shape. The shortage of capital makes it harder for banks to sell dud loans, since the losses involved might push some below the minimum levels. Meanwhile, struggling PSBs are not passing on the central bank’s interest-rate cuts to consumers in full.

The government may sell down its stakes in PSBs to raise extra capital, but is determined to remain a majority shareholder. That means their staff will remain de facto bureaucrats, subject to elaborate rules on hiring and firing and limited to government pay scales. Arundhati Bhattacharya, the well-regarded boss of State Bank of India, the biggest PSB, makes $35,000 a year in pay and bonuses. (The boss of US Bancorp, which is of a similar size to SBI, made $11.6m last year.) The obvious solution is full privatisation—but that would require parliamentary approval the government is unwilling to fight for.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21699933-financial-sector-india-being-improved-rather-overhauled-bureaucrats/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

Working hard for the money

There are more explanations than solutions for the productivity slowdown

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



ECONOMIC growth stems from two main sources: putting more people to work or enabling workers to operate more efficiently (ie, better productivity). With the workforce in many developed economies likely to stagnate or decline in the next two decades as the baby-boomer generation retires, a lot is riding on improvements in productivity.

So the recent progress of productivity in developed economies is cause for severe disappointment. As the chart shows, growth is well below its level in the late 20th century; the brief surge that was seen in places like America and Canada at the time of the dotcom boom has also dissipated. A combination of productivity growth of 1% or so and a stagnant workforce implies very sluggish GDP growth.

A new paper* from the OECD tries to understand this puzzling slowdown in productivity. It cites a number of possible explanations. There is the “progress is over” thesis, for example: that modern advances in information technology are nothing like as revolutionary as the spread of electricity or the car. Another possibility is the shift from a manufacturing to a services economy, where many workers may be less productive (and their jobs hard to automate). And then there is the question of mismeasurement: some activities, such as free internet-search engines, may not show up in GDP statistics; productivity in service industries is hard to measure.

The role of technology lies at the heart of the puzzle. There were clearly gains in the late 1990s and early 2000s, as the internet reduced transaction costs and allowed companies to track their sales and inventories in real time. There may of course be further gains to come, as companies adopt such technologies as 3D printing or driverless vehicles.

However, most countries have seen a slowdown in technology investment (as a proportion of GDP) since the dotcom boom. Even with interest rates at record lows, it would seem there are fewer attractive high-tech projects around.

It may not just have been technology that caused America’s productivity surge in 1996-2004. Another possible factor is the spread of “global value chains”—business networks linking suppliers in many countries. Companies that want to be part of a global value chain must be as efficient as possible; otherwise competitors will overtake them. Global trade expanded rapidly in the late 1990s and early 2000s as value chains were formed. But since the financial crisis trade growth has been even more sluggish than GDP growth. This may be slowing the development of value chains, and thus productivity.

A further factor may be a slower rate of new business formation. In the medium term, you would expect new businesses to be more efficient than the old ones they replace. But according to the latest data (2012-13), new firms account for a much smaller share of companies in most countries than before the crisis.

Another factor is the mismatch between the skills of the workforce and the needs of industry. In the wake of the recession of 2008-09, many workers were forced to take lower-paying jobs. A survey conducted in 2013 found that more than 20% of workers in rich countries thought they were overqualified for their job (in England and Japan it was over 30%). The ready availability of workers may also have persuaded firms to hire more staff, rather than making capital investments.

At the same time, however, employers also complain of skill shortages. Perhaps Western education systems are not turning out the sort of graduates modern businesses are looking for. Perhaps governments need to encourage more training in the workplace.

The OECD thinks these fundamental factors are more plausible explanations of the slowdown than mismeasurement, especially as the decline is both long-lasting and has affected emerging, as well as developed, economies.

Slowing productivity is one of the biggest problems facing rich countries. But it is remarkable how little it features in public debate. Rather than figure out how to make domestic production more efficient, politicians like Donald Trump focus on keeping out goods and people from abroad. When governments do try to improve productivity (such as the reforms to the labour market the French government is pursuing) they face huge resistance. That suggests the problem is not going to go away.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21699939-there-are-more-explanations-solutions-productivity-slowdown-working/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

China’s currency

Bending, not breaking

As the Fed mulls a rate rise, the yuan comes under pressure again

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



AS CASH poured out of China at the start of this year, hedge funds lined up to bet against the yuan. Many thought it only a matter of time before the government ran down its foreign-exchange reserves, forcing a big depreciation. Publicly, Chinese officials scoffed. “Declare currency war against China? Tee hee,” was the front-page headline in a Communist Party newspaper. Privately, they took the threat more seriously. They fought back on multiple fronts, intervening both at home and abroad to prop up the yuan, while tightening capital controls. The battles have gone China’s way so far: it has slowed the outflow of cash and the yuan is right where it found itself in early January.

Yet the Chinese authorities’ apparent success prompts two questions. The first, of immediate concern, is whether the stability will endure when the Federal Reserve raises interest rates again. For all China’s forceful actions to prop up the yuan, the biggest factor in its favour was arguably external, as the Fed turned dovish. At the beginning of the year investors were braced for a succession of rate rises in America, believing these would drive the dollar, already strong, even higher. But volatile markets and a patch of weaker data stayed the Fed’s hand. That restraint halted the dollar’s ascent and restored the lure of other currencies. The yuan was one obvious beneficiary, gaining 2% against the dollar from mid-January to mid-March.

This reprieve will soon be over. Janet Yellen, the Fed’s chairman, said last week that a rate rise is probable in the coming months. The dollar has started to climb higher against just about every currency, including the yuan. From May 30th to June 1st, the Chinese central bank set the yuan’s opening rate at its weakest level against the dollar in more than five years. That may be a good thing for China’s exporters, but the worry is that depreciation will trigger a resumption of the capital outflows that the bank has worked to curtail.

Yet China is in a better position than half a year ago to resist the pressure. Extensive capital controls remain intact, limiting speculators’ room for manoeuvre. The Chinese economy is itself stronger, thanks to a revival of the property market. And even if the Fed raises rates in June or July, it is expected to proceed cautiously thereafter, suggesting that any dollar rally will only go so far. Against this backdrop, the yuan will probably soften but is unlikely to tumble, says Zhang Lu of CEBM, an advisory firm.

The second question about China’s defence of the yuan is a more fundamental one: has it given up its goal of reforming the currency? For years it pegged the yuan to the dollar and intervened to limit its fluctuations. Last August the central bank introduced a new “exchange-rate mechanism”. It still sets a daily level against the dollar around which the yuan can move up or down by no more than 2%, but that is now based on two factors: the previous day’s closing rate and the value of a basket of currencies, not just the dollar. If implemented in full, the new system would give market forces a bigger role.

In practice, the central bank has retained considerable power. It can influence the yuan’s closing rate against the dollar by intervening directly or instructing state-owned banks to do so. In setting the daily rate it can also choose whether to focus on the dollar or on the basket, as suits its purposes. That is indeed how it has steered the yuan since January. When the dollar has been weak, the central bank has tethered the yuan to it, thereby allowing depreciation against the basket of currencies. When the dollar has strengthened, as in recent weeks, it has let the yuan creep down against it, thereby limiting its appreciation against the basket.

In other words, the central bank has hardly ceded control of the exchange rate to the market. That is not to say that its reforms are meaningless. The yuan’s daily exchange rate against the dollar has indeed been much more closely bound to the previous day’s closing level than in the past: the average difference between the two has been 0.009 yuan since August, compared with 0.06 yuan over the two years leading up to that (see chart). What is more, against the basket of currencies, the yuan has been broadly stable: its level today is almost exactly the same as at the start of 2015. Taken together, the revamped exchange-rate system has started to earn credibility in the eyes of some analysts and traders. It is certainly true that China has only gone part-way in freeing the yuan. But that is all it ever promised to do.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21699937-fed-mulls-rate-rise-yuan-comes-under-pressure-again-bending-not/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Automation

I’m afraid I can’t do that

Reasons to be less afraid about the march of the machines

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



ARE robots coming to steal our jobs? For those manning the tills at pizza restaurants, the answer seems to be yes. In late May Pizza Hut announced that by the end of the year a robot called Pepper would start taking orders and payment at some of its Asian restaurants, providing a “fun, frictionless user experience”.

There is plenty of research to suggest that restaurant workers are not the only ones at risk. One widely cited paper by Carl Frey and Michael Osborne at Oxford University found that as many as 47% of Americans work in jobs that will be highly susceptible to automation over the next two decades. But a new working paper by Melanie Arntz, Terry Gregory and Ulrich Zierahn of the Centre for European Economic Research paints a slightly brighter picture. The earlier study quizzed experts on the chance that a particular occupation could be automated, and then totted up the proportion of American workers in such jobs. But the newer study suggests that this method was too blunt.

Digging into more detailed data, the researchers find that many jobs involve bundles of tasks, only some of which machines can easily handle. Take clerks in book-keeping, accounting and auditing: the earlier study said the odds of computers supplanting them over the next 20 years were 98%. But the newer study finds that three-quarters of those jobs involve some group work or face-to-face interaction—tasks robot struggle with. Applying a similar analysis to all jobs, they find that only 9%, not 47%, are at high risk of automation.

Some caveats are in order: employers could restructure jobs to disentangle tasks that are more or less easy to automate. If that proves difficult, another possibility is that they simply forgo the human interaction now built into many occupations. A smile and some chit-chat once seemed an integral part of paying for groceries, until automated tills became commonplace. And finally, even if the 9% figure is closer to the truth, that still threatens the livelihood of millions. For the poorest quarter of the population, the proportion of jobs at risk rises to 26%, since more of them work in the sort of routine jobs most susceptible to automation.

Even so, the authors offer a few more reasons not to panic about robot-induced unemployment. Both studies look only at what is technically possible. If labour is cheap, businesses will have little reason to invest in fancy machines. Nissan, a car manufacturer, uses robots more intensively in Japan than in lower-wage India. For a robot army to be worrisome, it has to be worth someone’s while to build it.

Even if a wave of automation sweeps over the workforce, total employment may not fall. Innovation could lower prices and thus stimulate incomes indirectly, boosting demand for new jobs elsewhere. That is what happened in the past, at any rate: when automatic teller machines (ATMs) were introduced, the number of cashiers in America actually rose, since the device helped to cut costs, enabling banks to open new branches. From the Luddites to Keynes, many have worried needlessly about mass technological unemployment.

Even if things are different this time, then at least the transition is likely to be slow. The Boston Consulting Group forecasts that only 25% of cars sold in 2035 will have any self-driving features, for example. If the robots do steal our jobs, we should at least be able to see them coming.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21699930-reasons-be-less-afraid-about-march-machines-im-afraid-i-cant-do/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Crypto-currencies

Etherised

Bitcoin’s resurgence may be short-lived

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



BITCOIN is back. Fans (and holders) of the crypto-currency were celebrating after its price jumped more than 20% in the five days to May 31st, to nearly $550—a level it last reached in August 2014. They should contain their elation: the factors driving the rally are not unalloyed positives, and the competition is doing even better (see chart).

Most trading in bitcoin takes place in China: Huobi and OKCoin, two Chinese exchanges, are thought to account for more than 90% of transactions. The currency seems to have become an outlet for Chinese savers frustrated with their limited investment options and searching for high-yielding assets. The Chinese authorities are worried enough to have banned banks from dealing in bitcoin, but individuals are still free to speculate and have been doing so with gusto. Bitcoin’s newfound popularity in China is unlikely to diminish its volatility, however, and thus boost its acceptance as a reliable international payment system.

China has also become the global hub for bitcoin mining, the process by which heavy-duty computing power is used to process transactions involving bitcoin, earning those doing the processing some new bitcoin as compensation. Over 80% of new bitcoin are now minted in data centres in places like Sichuan and Inner Mongolia.

All this virtual mining may be playing a part in bitcoin’s rally. Operators of bitcoin mines get 25 bitcoin (about $13,500) for every “block” of transactions they process. But this payment is set to halve on or around July 10th. That is because the maximum number of bitcoin that can ever be produced is limited to 21m. As the number in circulation gets closer to the limit, the rate at which miners can produce them automatically declines, according to a pre-ordained formula. That makes life harder for miners: on May 29th, one of the biggest, KnCMiner, declared bankruptcy, blaming the coming change. The reduced issuance of new bitcoin should also push up the price, an outcome the current rally seems to be anticipating.

Bitcoin’s resurgence has come just as champions of crypto-currencies have started to gravitate to another system, Ethereum, whose digital tokens are called “ether”. This has both political and technical causes. Bitcoin’s developers have yet to agree on how to increase the capacity of their network, which can only process seven transactions per second. And Ethereum makes it easier for users to create self-executing “smart contracts”, something of a fad in the world of crypto-currencies. Last week Coinbase, one of the biggest bitcoin exchanges, declared bitcoin “stagnant” and said it would start to trade ether too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21699932-bitcoins-resurgence-may-be-short-lived-etherised/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Aircraft finance

Crowded skies

The air-leasing sector may soon face harder times

Jun 4th 2016 | MIAMI | From the print edition



EIGHTEEN months of relatively low oil prices have helped many parts of the aviation industry. Cheaper jet fuel has contributed to record profits at airlines in America; the world’s biggest planemakers, Airbus and Boeing, have compiled fat order books thanks to growing demand for air travel. But one part of the industry may be hurt by cheaper oil: leasing firms, which invest in planes and hire them out to airlines and other operators.

When oil prices were high, airlines were desperate to replace gas-guzzling planes with new, fuel-efficient ones. Given the daunting commercial outlook, many preferred to lease their new jets, leaving the leasing firms to stump up the capital required to buy planes. Leasing firms are now responsible for about 40% of the big planemakers’ sales.

As a result, leasing has become voguish. Cheerleaders claim that average annual returns have topped 10% in recent years—an astronomical figure in a world of low yields. Investors have been keen to pile in, allowing the leasing firms to raise money for new jets directly by issuing bonds, rather than via bank loans. Boeing forecasts that 53% of the aircraft it sells to lessors this year will be financed this way, up from about 33% four years ago. Big leasing firms have been raising other forms of capital, too: BOC Aviation, China’s largest, floated in Hong Kong on June 1st.

But the oil price began falling in 2014. Despite a recent rally, it is still less than half what it was then. Cheap fuel makes older, less efficient planes profitable to run again. That has stoked fears that the world will soon have more planes than it knows what to do with. The number of new orders seems to be slowing. Richard Anderson, until last month the boss of Delta, America’s second-biggest airline, has muttered about an aircraft “bubble”. The airline bought a used Boeing 777 for $7.7m in December—a 97% discount to the listed price for a new one.

The leasing firms themselves insist they are not short of customers. Although demand for cargo planes has stalled, that for passenger aircraft is still rising. International passenger volumes grew by 4.6% year on year in April, with aircraft-utilisation rates reaching near-record levels, according to IATA, an industry group. But the share price of America’s biggest listed lessors fell at the start of the year, because of fears that profits will come under pressure.

Airlines, meanwhile, are beginning to ask whether it makes sense to keep leasing planes. Most of them are now profitable enough to borrow cheaply and interest rates are extremely low. Ryanair, a European low-cost airline, has been issuing bonds to buy new aircraft since 2014. Norwegian Air Shuttle, another low-cost carrier, now treats its fleet of more than 100 planes like a lessor, hiring some of them out to other operators. With more planes around, and fewer customers, the leasing business is bound to get harder.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21699942-air-leasing-sector-may-soon-face-harder-times-crowded-skies/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

SMEs in developing countries

Caught in the middle

Big and tiny firms often find it easier to borrow than medium-sized ones

Jun 4th 2016 | KAMPALA | From the print edition

It takes dough to make bread

THE name of the Grand Global Hotel suggests no want of ambition. But the project ran into financial problems before building work had even finished, says its owner, Emmanuel Tugume. His bank raised interest rates, and would not make allowances for delays in construction. Mr Tugume eventually got a loan from GroFin, a specialist business lender, and now his hotel is thriving. But his experience with Uganda’s banks still rankles. “They do not adjust to people like us,” he says. “They look after the big-time clients.”

Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) all over the world grumble about access to finance, but the problem is worse in developing regions. Around two-thirds of SMEs in poor countries cannot borrow as much as they would like, compared with a sixth in the rich world, says the International Finance Corporation, the corporate-lending arm of the World Bank. It put the “credit gap” for small but formal businesses in developing countries at around $1 trillion in 2011. Throw in informal firms, and the shortfall is even greater.

Plenty of outfits lend to very poor people hoping to start a business. But such “micro-credit” is typically minute, fleeting and expensive. It channels funds to tiny, unproductive businesses, often with no employees. More substantial firms, with greater potential for growth, have to look elsewhere. “The poor are being stuffed with micro-credit,” says Milford Bateman, a consultant, “while SMEs are being starved.”

Banks are hardly rushing to step in. They remain the biggest source of finance for SMEs in the developing world: commercial banks supply around 58% of their funding, while state-owned ones stump up 30%. But they are often reluctant to lend more. Many small-business owners have little collateral, patchy records and non-existent credit histories. It takes time for customers to arrive or crops to grow. Far safer, many banks conclude, to lend to established clients or to the government.

That leaves a gap—the so-called “missing middle”—for newer, more specialist lenders. GroFin, which helped Mr Tugume, tries to limit defaults the old-fashioned way, by trying hard to get to know its borrowers. “Every business has records,” says Arigye Munyangabo, one of its managers in Uganda, “but sometimes they are in the customer’s head.” Regular visits and business mentoring help tease out that hidden information. GroFin charges slightly above-market rates, but has no shortage of clients: in 12 years, it has provided $260m of funding to SMEs across Africa and the Middle East.

Other firms are experimenting with different lending models. EFTA, in Tanzania, offers small businesses hire-purchase schemes for equipment. The business can use the equipment while paying off the loan, but EFTA owns it until the three-year lease period is over. This arrangement sidesteps the need for collateral: EFTA can just take back the machinery if the borrower doesn’t pay (it installs devices in tractors that can disable them remotely). Only 5-6% of its loans by value end in repossession.

These specialist lenders are nimble, and often get a leg-up from development agencies and philanthropists. But most of them are relatively small. If lending to SMEs is really to grow, banks will have to become more enthusiastic. One factor that might help is the data revolution, which is making it easier to weigh risks.

Digitisation, for example, is assisting businesses to keep better records and banks to monitor them. Commercial Bank of Africa is partnering with Strands, a fintech software company, to help businesses take their payments and records online: one advantage will be more detailed data for credit decisions. Numida, a startup in Uganda, is developing an app that allows traders to track transactions on their phones. Lenders, it hopes, will agree cheaper loans for clients that are willing to share these records.

Others are looking for new kinds of data altogether. The Entrepreneurial Finance Lab, a spin-off from a research initiative at Harvard University, is trying out psychometric testing as a way of assessing credit risk. Would-be borrowers complete a short online survey and the software quickly generates an alternative credit score, based on attributes like conscientiousness and confidence. “We want to collateralise people’s human capital,” says Asim Khwaja, a Harvard professor and co-founder of the project. Trials in Latin America suggest that this approach can help to reduce defaults, thereby paving the way for more lending.

Whizzy data are cheaper than the relationship banking of old. As smartphones spread, gathering and digesting information about a small business’s performance will vastly reduce the need for the labour-intensive approach of firms like GroFin. But algorithms can only go so far. Developing countries also need better institutions, from registries of collateral to commercial courts. Nimrod Zalk, an adviser to the South African government on industrial policy, stresses the need for big companies to nurture SME suppliers. He talks admiringly of the role played by KfW, a development bank, in financing German manufacturers. Such changes take time, however. Building a financial ecosystem is a lot harder than downloading an app.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21699931-big-and-tiny-firms-often-find-it-easier-borrow-medium-sized-ones-caught/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

Tales from Silicon wadi

Military insecurity can boost an economy, up to a point

Jun 4th 2016 | TEL AVIV | From the print edition



STANDING amid the skyscrapers of Tel Aviv, looking west over the sun-warmed Mediterranean, one can almost forget how unlikely Israel’s recent economic success has been. The country is a fortress: a tiny island of prosperity in a troubled region. Its neighbours are hostile; Syria, in the midst of a devastatingly bloody civil war, is a failed state. Israel itself is not only mired in conflict in the Palestinian territories, but riven by internal divisions between observant and secular Jews and between Jews and Arabs. International ire over the treatment of Palestinians leads to calls for boycotts of Israeli goods and divestment from Israeli companies. Yet over the past two decades, this small country, with a population of around 8m, has engineered an economic miracle (see left-hand chart). Israel is testimony to the advantages, and limitations, of fortress economies.

Since the 1990s Israel’s economy has been on a tear; between 2004 and 2013 growth in real GDP averaged about 4% a year. Output per person is similar to that in Italy. A nimble tech sector deserves much of the credit. The joke among foreign investors once ran that the best way to make a small fortune in Israel was to begin with a large one. No longer. Relative to the size of the population, there are more researchers working in R&D in Israel than in any other country (see right-hand chart). Venture-capital investment per person is the highest in the world. Israeli startups have increasingly hit it big in recent years, as with Google’s acquisition of Waze, which uses crowdsourced data to monitor traffic, for more than $1 billion in 2013. Cyber-security now generates more export revenue than arms do. Officials from Asia visit to study the tech sector, in the hope of replicating its success.

Israel’s experience follows a familiar script: that of the small, embattled country on the up and up. China’s previously hopeless nationalists somehow built an economic powerhouse after they had been relegated to the island of Formosa (now Taiwan). Having been booted out of Malaysia, Singapore subsequently became far richer and more productive than its neighbour. In fact, there is good reason to believe that Israel’s success stems at least in part from its geopolitical troubles.

Economic development requires a balance between individual freedom and the power of the state. The authorities must be able to collect taxes, for instance, and enforce property rights. External threats have often accelerated the development of the state. National defence is among the purest examples of a public good, and national survival provides a strong motivation to set up a strong state with the authority and legitimacy needed to ensure it. Historically, the expense of war has often prompted governments to improve their capacity to raise revenue. Britain first levied income tax during the Napoleonic wars; other countries instituted it during the arms race before the first world war.

External threats are hardly a sure-fire road to riches. Actual war is destructive. Torsten Persson, of Stockholm University, and Timothy Besley, of the London School of Economics, reckon the underlying institutional strength of the threatened country is crucial. Democracies respond better to external pressure; countries made rich by natural resources do worse. From its earliest days the state of Israel has been democratic (and short on resource wealth)—and has faced a near-constant existential crisis.

The strength and capacity of the Israeli state is most clearly visible in its armed forces, which are arguably the most important public institution in Israeli society. Most Jewish Israelis are conscripted into the military; about 100,000 new recruits, fresh out of secondary school, are drafted each year for a term of service of about two years. The most talented young people in each cohort are assigned to technical units within the Israel Defence Forces (IDF), such as Unit 8200, a signals-intelligence force similar to America’s National Security Agency. Those recruits, in turn, are able to hone their technical skills in the service.

Since the 1990s, when the government became more serious about commercialising the technologies being developed within the IDF, personal relationships built during military service have been critical to the growth of Israel’s tech cluster. Friends from the service start firms together after getting out, invest in each others’ ventures and provide technical and business advice. The personal networks nurtured by the IDF increase the return to staying in Israel for skilled engineers, helping the country retain talent that might otherwise go abroad. Like America’s army and its tech sector, the IDF and Israel’s startups have developed a symbiotic relationship; the IDF supplies talent and expertise to the private sector and is in turn a buyer of private firms’ inventions.

The digital partition

Yet it would be odd if fortress economies did not face constraints on their growth. The ingenuity and nimbleness of the Israeli tech sector does not extend to industries less closely linked to the work of the IDF: across the economy as a whole, Israel’s productivity is among the lowest in the rich world. The paucity of trade with its neighbours is partly to blame. There is no difficulty in selling high-tech services to distant clients, but manufactured goods are another story. Another problem is a dearth of competition in the low-tech parts of the economy.

The underpinnings of the tech sector’s success also limit the number of Israelis who are able to participate in it, and thus benefit from it directly. Ultra-orthodox and Arab Israelis do not have to serve in the army and study in segregated school systems, which are generally much worse than those other Israelis attend. These groups, unsurprisingly, are under-represented in tech. As you pass from predominantly Jewish areas into Arab ones, let alone into the Palestinian territories, the quality of infrastructure deteriorates dramatically. Israeli tech firms that operate in the Palestinian territories keep their presence there quiet, lest investors, customers or activists object. Within walls, there is only ever so much room to grow.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21699920-military-insecurity-can-boost-economy-up-point-tales-silicon-wadi/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Chinese science: Schrödinger’s panda

An update on AIDS: HIV’s slow retrenchment

Zika and the Olympics: Should I stay or should I go?

Avoiding sunburn: Patched up

Black holes: We want information

Jumping to attention: Peppered moths





Articles Sections Next

Chinese science

Schrödinger’s panda

Fraud, bureaucracy and an obsession with quantity over quality still hold Chinese science back

Jun 4th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



CHINA seems to swing from insecurity about its science to hubris. In 2015, when Tu Youyou, a pharmacologist, became the first scientist to win a Nobel prize for work carried out in China, the state media’s reaction was not to celebrate her ground-breaking medicinal chemistry. Rather, they claimed that the award was a recognition of traditional Chinese medicine—something she said had little to do with the work that won her the award.

This week Xi Jinping, China’s president, fell into the opposite trap, of overconfidence. Addressing a sea of scientists at a joint meeting in Beijing of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Chinese Academy of Engineering and the China Association for Science and Technology (see picture above), he repeated his government’s aim that China should become a leading scientific innovator by 2030 and a dominant scientific country by 2049 (a date chosen because it is the 100th anniversary of the communist takeover).

China already spends lavishly on research and development, and publishes reams of scientific papers. Spending on R&D has more than doubled as a share of the economy since 2000, reaching 2.1% of GDP in 2014, just below the rich-world average, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), an inter-governmental think-tank. Meanwhile, GDP itself has trebled. The OECD thus says China will be the world’s largest R&D spender by 2019. In terms of scientific papers published in English, the country is second only to the United States, and its output is rising by 20% a year.

But much of the published work is insubstantial, and a worrying amount is fraudulent. The process of selecting which projects should benefit from the vast pool of money available is often bureaucratic and wasteful. That, at least, is a widespread view of China’s scientific establishment outside China. Much of the criticism is justified, though becoming less so.

Mine’s bigger than yours

China should be about to reap some rewards from its massive investment in big—indeed, colossal—science. The world’s largest single-aperture radio telescope, being built in Guizhou province, is due to open in September. The Five-hundred-metre Aperture Spherical Telescope (Tianyan, in Chinese) dwarfs all other such instruments; the next-largest has a diameter of 305 metres. China is also building an underground neutrino observatory, its second, in Guangdong province. And it is expanding 25-fold its dark-matter-investigating Jinping underground laboratory, in Sichuan province, making that the world’s largest subterranean lab.

As the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) in Europe has shown, in some areas of science size matters. The enormous collecting area of Tianyan, for example, means that it will be able to pick up signals from deeper areas of space. Naturally, China is talking about building an even larger particle collider than the LHC.

There is evidence, too, that the quality of Chinese scientists’ work is improving. Nature, one of the world’s foremost scientific journals, keeps track of the number of articles published in 68 respected periodicals. It takes into account the relative contribution of each author and makes adjustments for the over-representation of papers on astronomy and astrophysics in its sample journals. The result is an index of a country’s or an institution’s production of high-quality research papers.

According to Nature, China’s score in this index rose by 44% between 2012 and 2015, leaving it second behind America, whose score fell by 8% in that period. Among institutions, the Chinese Academy of Sciences had by far the highest score, almost double that of second-ranked Harvard University, though this is partly because the academy, with 68,000 employees and 104 institutions, is so large. China’s research output is dominated by chemistry and the physical sciences. Over 60% of China’s index number is accounted for by articles on chemistry.

These findings are consistent with a study from 2014 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, by Yu Xie of Peking University and others. Dr Yu found that Chinese scientific papers are being cited more often. In 2011 American scientists had about three times more articles in the 1% of most frequently cited papers than Chinese scientists did. That is a big improvement for China: in 2001 the Americans had 15 times as many.

But as President Xi admitted to the assembled academicians this week, science and technology remains “a bottleneck” for economic growth in China. The biggest problems are fraud and the academies of science and engineering themselves.

In 2014 China’s anti-corruption watchdog said it had “uncovered fraud in research grants managed by China’s Ministry of Science and Technology”. In April the British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology retracted an article by scientists from Dalian University, in Liaoning province, because it suspected the peer-review process had been subverted. In 2015 BioMed Central retracted more than 40 papers submitted by Chinese researchers.

The prevalence of fraud reflects poor oversight and a dodgy research culture. Both are rooted in problems in the academies, which are dominated by bureaucrats rather than research scientists. In 2010 two Chinese university deans wrote in Nature’s rival Science that “to obtain major grants in China, it is an open secret that doing good research is not as important as schmoozing with powerful bureaucrats and their favourite experts”.

That is starting to change. The Academy of Sciences altered its criteria for membership in 2014, requiring prospective members to be nominated by other academicians or academic institutions and to be elected by all members. Previously, nominations could come from ministries, the Communist Party, the army and even from companies; the electorate was restricted and thus easier to influence.

But the system remains hierarchical and politicised. Even Ms Tu fell foul of it. Having begun her career in the Cultural Revolution, when scientists were deemed one of “nine black categories”, she does not have a doctorate and did not study abroad. She has been turned down by the Academy of Sciences four times. Chinese science has a way to go before it can lead the world in quality, as well as quantity.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21699898-fraud-bureaucracy-and-obsession-quantity-over-quality-still-hold-chinese/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

An update on AIDS

HIV’s slow retrenchment

The battle against the human immunodeficiency virus continues

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



THE latest dispatch from the war on HIV, the “Global AIDS Update 2016”, just published by UNAIDS, the UN agency responsible for combating the virus, brings qualified good news. Last year, it estimates, there were 1.1m AIDS-related deaths, down from a peak of 2m in 2005 and a figure of 1.2m in 2014. Last year also saw 2.1m new infections, down from a peak of 3.4m in 1998 but up from 2014’s estimate of 2.0m.

By the end of 2015 some 17m people were taking anti-retroviral (ARV) drugs—2m more than the target number for that year, set by the UN in 2011. This accounts for the falling death rate. Some hoped the drug roll-out might also lead to an increased fall-off in the rate of new infections. That hope was based on the idea, experimentally demonstrated at small scale among cohabiting couples, that taking ARVs makes an infected individual less likely to pass the virus on. There is, though, no sign of such an acceleration in the downward trend of new infections. This year’s uptick aside, it has remained fairly steady since the turn of the century, despite the fraction of infected people on ARVs having risen from 3% in 2000 to 46% in 2015.

The next UN target is that, by 2020, 90% of those infected should have been diagnosed and know their status, 90% of those so diagnosed should be on ARVs, and 90% of those on ARVs should have suppressed viral loads. That is ambitious, but history suggests those in the field will rise to the challenge.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21699897-battle-against-human-immunodeficiency-virus-continues-hivs-slow/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Zika and the Olympics

Should I stay or should I go?

A call to stop or move the Olympics because of Zika is mistaken

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



AS THE Olympic torch relay nears Rio de Janeiro in the countdown to the games supposed to start there on August 5th, a proposal to postpone or move the event has ignited controversy. An open letter posted online on May 27th and now signed by more than 200 academics and health experts, mostly bioethicists, argues that holding the games as planned is “unethical” because it will speed up the spread of the Zika virus. The reasons the experts put forward, however, do not warrant such drastic action.

Most Zika infections pass with no symptoms. Though the virus can cause a neurological condition that may lead to temporary paralysis or death, this is rare. Zika is at its most dangerous during pregnancy, because it can cause severe brain damage to the unborn baby. Pregnant women are therefore advised to avoid travel to areas where Zika is being transmitted, including Rio de Janeiro.

That is not the letter-writers’ concern, though. They worry that many of the 500,000 foreigners expected to flock to Rio for the games will get infected, and then spread Zika back home. But, though 500,000 is a huge number, it is less than 0.25% of all those who travel each year to places already affected by Zika, according to America’s Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The World Health Organisation (WHO) agrees. Cancelling or moving the Olympics will not significantly alter the spread of Zika, it said on May 28th. The virus is now present in nearly 60 countries and territories, and people will continue to travel to and from these, games or no games. Although it is impossible to predict how many of those visiting Rio for the Olympics will be infected, Mike Turner, director of infectious diseases at the Wellcome Trust, a British health charity, reckons the risk is “close to zero” for those who take the recommended precautions.

Such precautions are simple. Visitors are most likely to catch Zika through the bite of Aedes aegypti, a mosquito that transmits the virus. Wearing trousers and long-sleeved shirts reduces the target area mosquitoes can attack and wearing repellent drives them away. Sexual transmission of Zika, which is known to occur for up to two months after infection, is much rarer and condoms can prevent it.

Most fans and athletes will probably be diligent about slathering on repellent, and may even compromise their sartorial elegance to avoid the mosquitoes’ attentions. Less certain is whether A. aegypti will be a rare sight at Olympic venues, as promised. It is a tricky creature to get rid of (the CDC’s director, Tom Frieden, calls it “the cockroach of mosquitoes”). Rio’s authorities have stepped up insecticide-spraying campaigns and the mopping-up of spots of stagnant water in which the insect can breed. The state’s allotment of federal money for this task is 45% more than the amount it got in 2015. But El Niño has brought a summer much warmer and rainier than usual—so mosquitoes in Rio de Janeiro have been more plentiful.

So far this year, the number of cases there of dengue, another disease transmitted by A. aegypti, have been nearly twice those in the same period last year. Dengue rates, though, swing wildly from year to year depending on how rainy it is, so that does not necessarily mean mosquito control is ineffective. And, as Wanderson Oliveira of the federal health ministry’s unit for monitoring and emergency response points out, mosquitoes will be much less of a problem when the games start because August is a dry month when the insects’ numbers fall “vertiginously”.

The authors of the open letter doubt the WHO’s impartiality to make the right call about Rio, suspecting it of secretly being in cahoots with the Olympics’ organisers and citing a now-expired agreement between the two to improve healthy lifestyles by way of evidence. That smacks of paranoia.

A more sensible reason for jittery nerves is Brazil’s shaky relationship with the truth when it comes to promulgating official information. Tourists and athletes might be more assured that Zika is under control if data relating to it were monitored by foreign experts working alongside local authorities, much as voting in many countries with rickety electoral systems is observed by outsiders. At first, Mr Oliveira is a little indignant at the suggestion (“This didn’t happen in London [in 2012],” he says) but then he admits the idea could be considered. “Any expert is welcome to get in touch with us,” he says. Please form an orderly queue.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21699895-call-stop-or-move-olympics-because-zika-mistaken-should-i-stay-or/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Avoiding sunburn

Patched up

How to avoid solar overexposure, and still get a tan

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition

I was down by Bondi pier...

SUN cream is a fickle friend. It protects against burn-inducing ultraviolet (UV) light, but only for a period. And the first most people know of when that period is up is the sickening sensation that their skin is starting to catch fire—by which time it is too late to act. But Justin Gooding of the University of New South Wales, in Sydney, Australia, now thinks he has a solution for those who might otherwise risk overdoing it on Bondi Beach: a stick-on UV sensor that can be tuned to give warning when a new slap of protection would be advisable.

Dr Gooding’s invention, described in this month’s ACS Sensors, is based on titanium oxide. This is a compound well known to shed high-energy electrons if hit by UV. When those electrons interact with water and molecular oxygen, they generate reactive groups of atoms called free-radicals. Dr Gooding suspected that these radicals could be used to trigger changes in the sorts of dyes employed to colour food.

To test this idea, he and his colleagues filled the cartridges of an inkjet printer with a series of solutions consisting of three ingredients. One was titanium dioxide. The second was one of several food dyes, including lemon yellow and sunset yellow, green and blue. The third was polyvinylpyrrolidone, a substance which bound the other two components together to form a suitable “ink” for printing. The researchers then sprayed this ink onto sheets of paper, put those sheets under a lamp that mimicked the sun’s output, UV and all, and waited to see what happened. As a control, they put similar sheets under the lamp when it was masked with a filter that intercepted the UV part of its output.

As they had hoped, all of the sheets exposed to the unfiltered light changed colour. The changes most noticeable to the naked eye were that the green dye turned red and the blue turned yellow. By contrast, the control sheets remained unaffected.

The principle established, the next question Dr Gooding and his colleagues needed to address was how to modulate the dyes’ responses so that they would give appropriate and timely warning of potential overexposure. That task was made harder by the fact that darker skin and higher-factor sun cream permit longer safe-exposure periods.

To start with, they tried tinkering with the mixture of ingredients in the ink. This worked, but only to a point. The maximum by which such tinkering could delay the colour change was half an hour. Given that strong sun creams and darkly pigmented skin delay burn times by up to five hours, the researchers realised that they needed a different approach if they were going to create a useful product. They therefore started experimenting with cheap, non-toxic UV-filtering films of various opacities, and found that the strongest of these could delay the sensor’s colour change by 9½ hours—nearly twice what was needed.

As a result, it is possible to work out, for any combination of skin tone and sun-cream protection factor (from ten to 50), what strength of filter is required to cause a particular colour change to happen sufficiently in advance of a burn beginning to form to provide useful warning. The colour change is gradual, so in a commercial product a reference strip showing the warning colour would need to be included in the sensor, to let the wearer calibrate what was going on. That done, though, the upshot would be something that could safely and easily be stuck onto the skin like a plaster, and could be printed in huge volumes at little cost. After use it would leave behind a sensor-shaped patch of light-coloured skin. But that is probably better than the look of lobster thermidor.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21699896-how-avoid-solar-overexposure-and-still-get-tan-patched-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Black holes

We want information

Even Stephen Hawking sometimes turns out to be wrong. Who better to put him right than himself?

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



ARE black holes bald or hairy? On that strange and esoteric question may hang the future of the universe’s past. The present, the past and the future are all connected by physical laws, a phenomenon called “causal determinism”. With complete information about a system’s present, it ought therefore be possible to determine all its past and future states. In theory, that applies to any system, up to and including the entire universe.

In 1976, however, an up-and-coming Cambridge-based cosmologist called Stephen Hawking challenged this idea by showing that black holes (which are part of the universe, albeit a rather odd part) should evaporate over the course of time, and eventually vanish. That would cause information about anything they had swallowed (and thus a part of the universe’s past) to be lost, meaning the future could not be determined, even in principle. The naive might think this information loss had happened already, as a consequence of the swallowing. But even though it is inside the hole the information continues to exist for as long as the hole does. Causal determinism is not violated.

A black hole’s disappearance, though, really would mean the information’s loss. This, in turn, would mean the end of causal determinism—and with it the assumptions which underpin the whole of modern physics. Fortunately, 40 years on from his pushy original paper, the now-venerable Dr Hawking thinks he has found a way to permit black holes to evaporate while preserving causal determinism.

Soft particles, the magic ingredient he invokes, form ethereal hairy coats around such holes. These retain records of what has been swallowed and then imprint this information on the radiation that is carrying away the black hole’s substance and causing its evaporation. In a manner analogous to the modulation of a television or radio signal, that radiation (known as Hawking radiation in honour of the man who conceived of it) carries data about a black hole’s meals out into space even after the hole itself is defunct. Causal determinism is therefore preserved.

Soft particles are the area of expertise of Andrew Strominger of Harvard University, one of Dr Hawking’s co-authors on the causal-determinism-rescuing paper, to be published next week in Physical Review Letters. A soft particle is one that has virtually no energy. Dr Strominger showed a few years ago that the vacuum of space teems with them. The calculations he, Dr Hawking and Malcolm Perry, also at Cambridge, have made suggest that when matter falls into black holes it leaves ghostly traces in the form of two sorts of soft particle—photons (the particles of light) and gravitons (the particles, still hypothetical, that theory suggests transmit gravity)—which then hang around the event horizon, the hole’s point of no return. The number and distribution of these particles holds information that would otherwise be lost when a black hole evaporated away.

Hair transplant

The Hawking radiation itself is a consequence of the fact that a vacuum is not actually empty space. Rather, because of quantum uncertainty, pairs of particles (one of matter and one of antimatter) are constantly popping in and out of existence in it. These particles (which are distinct from the soft variety whose emergence Dr Strominger studied) normally annihilate each other soon after they pop up, leaving nothing behind. However, if they appear at a black hole’s event horizon one member of the pair may be pulled in while the other is not. The stranded particle is thus “forced” to become real and acquire energy, which it takes from the black hole. That reduces the hole’s mass (because energy and mass are equivalent, by E=mc2). Given enough such events, the hole will vanish. The wrinkle the new paper introduces is that the behaviour of the now-real Hawking-radiation particle is affected by the soft particles it encounters when it materialises. This causes the modulation that preserves causal determinism.

Previous attempts to explain the Hawking radiation while retaining causal determinism have involved throwing some other cherished physical axiom overboard. One jettisoned the principle of equivalence between acceleration and gravity that lies at the heart of general relativity; others violated aspects of quantum field theory, which describes the interactions of subatomic particles. The cure, in other words, was worse than the disease. The soft-particle explanation does not do this. It fits with all established laws of physics.

As yet, the new explanation is incomplete. So far, the researchers have only computed the effects caused by one property of matter falling into a black hole, its electric charge. They have not shown the effect of its mass, which would also be important. Their calculations therefore account only for part of the information that is lost. But they have established a principle that may lead to a full accounting of the matter. That would let physicists sleep easy in their beds, in the knowledge that reality is once again behaving, at least approximately, how they think it ought to.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21699899-even-stephen-hawking-sometimes-turns-out-be-wrong-who-better-put-him-right/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Jumping to attention

Peppered moths

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



The peppered moth is one of the most famous animals in evolutionary biology. Victorian collections show how a melanic version of this normally speckled species spread through sooty urban areas because its black wings camouflaged resting moths from hungry birds (see picture above). The exact genetic change involved, however, remained elusive. But, in a paper in Nature, Arjen van’t Hof of Liverpool University, in England, and his colleagues, say they have nailed it down. It is a transposable element—a piece of DNA that leaps from place to place in the genome. In this case it has leapt into a gene called cortex, which controls cell division. That promotes cortex’s expression. Just why this makes wings black, though, has yet to be worked out.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21699900-peppered-moths/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




Developing economies: The long road

Johnson: Get over it

Human life: Live long and prosper

Psychology: Character-driven

Contemporary art museums: Home of the brave





Articles Sections Next

Developing economies

The long road

Making sense of euphoria and despair about emerging markets

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



The Rise and Fall of Nations: Forces of Change in the Post-Crisis World. By Ruchir Sharma. W.W. Norton; 466 pages; $27.95. Allen Lane; £25.

GLOBALISATION has gone into reverse gear. Trade volumes have stagnated and the value of the capital flows sloshing around the world has dropped by over half since 2007. The West is angry and inward-looking. Disappointment festers in the emerging world. In the boom years between 2003 and 2010 it appeared that a new era of openness and global supply chains would help emerging countries to grow at turbocharged rates for decades, closing the gap with the rich world. Today that idea is out of fashion. Brazil’s economy is shrinking, China’s debts are terrifying and Russia is a rusting autocracy. Emerging countries are growing at 4%, half as fast as in 2006.

Into the wreckage steps Ruchir Sharma, a fund manager and author of the bestselling “Breakout Nations”, which came out in 2012. His new book, “The Rise and Fall of Nations”, has three aims: to assess the crash; to dismantle the analysis that led investors and economists to get overexcited; and to offer a new framework for thinking about emerging countries. The result is ambitious. It covers four-fifths of the world’s population and 40% of its GDP, and though it is sometimes rambling, it is also entertaining, acute and disarmingly honest. Instead of pious statements about poverty, or portentous mutterings on the importance of American leadership, Mr Sharma sees the world from the ruthless and restless perspective of an investor.

The emerging-market slump, he argues, is not over yet. Commodity-exporting economies, such as Russia, Brazil and South Africa, have yet to adjust fully. Some multinational firms cannot admit that their investments abroad will not return a decent profit. To counteract the global slowdown after the crisis of 2008-09, most emerging economies went on borrowing binges. China, in Mr Sharma’s view, is almost certain to face a crunch of some kind. No country, he says, has “ever survived a debt binge of such a scale without suffering a severe economic slowdown”.

Plenty of executives and forecasters mistook a commodity-driven boom for a step-change in long-term prospects. On paper there are some reasons why GDP per person might increase much faster in emerging economies than in rich ones: for example, they might be able to leapfrog generations of technology, learning from rich countries’ experience. But history suggests that sustaining fast growth is terribly hard in practice. Since 1945 most countries’ spurts of success have been followed by periods of mediocre growth or worse.

Some forecasters then compounded this error by making projections over a dizzyingly long time. At the height of the emerging-market boom, it became routine for bosses and bankers to discuss the relative size of the GDPs of America and India and China in 2050. Mr Sharma thinks that looking beyond a horizon of between five and ten years is useless, and even then things are murky.

What organising idea should replace the belief that the emerging world will one day converge with the rich world? Mr Sharma’s proposal is cycles. Countries’ prospects rise and fall over cycles of up to ten years. Spurts of fast growth contain the seeds of their own destruction: exuberant investors sponsor frothy projects and politicians become complacent. After a slump banks and firms eventually purge their balance sheets and reformers are emboldened, allowing growth to pick up again.

It is hardly a novel way of thinking about the world, but Mr Sharma has ten tests for working out where countries are on this rollercoaster ride. For example, a country at the beginning of a rising cycle will often have an expanding manufacturing base, stable debts, low inflation, a cheap currency that boosts exports, a state that builds bridges but does not meddle, few crony billionaires, and hungry leaders who have not been in office long enough to become lazy or corrupt.

For investors, the trick is to bet on a country before the next cycle of hype begins (and then sell before it peaks). Fittingly, Mr Sharma is keen on countries that few investors think about much: Pakistan and Romania, for example.

He has a knack for sharp comparisons between countries. Australia’s history of high immigration is contrasted with Japan’s insularity. The puny trade links between India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka are compared with the umbilical cords that bind South-East Asia and which have made it richer. He is pithy, too. In countries with rotten financial systems, “a shake-up of banking is a shake-up of society”. China’s periodic attempts to perk up its economy are like watching “a ping-pong ball bouncing down stairs”.

The book has two limitations. First, it is an unashamedly business-class view of the world. Mr Sharma name-drops and networks like mad, often to entertaining effect. Visiting China less than a year after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, he finds an air of “triumphant self-satisfaction”. In 2015 Najib Razak, Malaysia’s prime minister, gets confused while addressing a room full of investors in New York, despite an aide’s attempts to keep him on-message. Yet there is little first-hand reporting on the slower currents of change in the emerging world—such as the shift from the countryside to cities—that continue regardless of where currencies and shares trade.

The second flaw is that Mr Sharma doesn’t tackle whether it makes sense for most people to compare countries as he does. His point is that although no grand theory explains the world, an experienced observer can make informed guesses about which places are on the up or in decline. This is a useful skill for a portfolio manager, shifting money around the world. But it is of less use to people in government, or to companies, whose time horizons are longer. If Mr Sharma is right that global capital flows will remain depressed, and that developing economies face a pedestrian future, then the hot money chasing them will recede—as, perhaps, will the influence of famous fund managers. Until then, Mr Sharma’s book is a fine guide to the great emerging market boom and bust.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21699885-making-sense-euphoria-and-despair-about-emerging-markets-long-road/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

Get over it

When it comes to language, some users are more peevish than others

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



WHO doesn’t have their own little language peeve? “Literally” should be reserved for literal situations; there are plenty of ways to intensify a statement rather than saying, “We literally walked a million miles.” “To beg the question” is an old term from logic that means “to assume one’s own conclusion in an argument”; today, most people use it to mean “to prompt the question”. Two clauses connected by a comma, the “comma splice”, is jarring in good writing; people should avoid it.

But some people take peeves to another level entirely. They choose words or phrases that have a widely understood, long-standing second meaning, and treat the second, perhaps metaphorical or new meaning, with a shocked seriousness that should be reserved for the apocalypse.

Someone has recently created a new Twitter account, @over_morethan, dedicated to the idea that “over” may not be used with numbers: one thing may physically only sit over another thing, in this view. But to write, as The Economist has recently, of “over two-thirds”, “over 150 fellows of the Royal Society” or “over a year” is to take a pure preposition and debase it with metaphorical usage. The purists would say that these should be “more than two- thirds”, “more than 150 fellows” and “more than a year”.

And it wasn’t just @over_morethan. Using “over” with numbers was even banned by the Associated Press (AP) stylebook, which many American newspapers use as their own, and which thus gives it a kind of sanctified status. According to one account, there was an audible gasp at the meeting of the American Copy Editors’ Society when AP announced that it was abandoning the “rule”. Never mind that, as Jonathan Owen, an editor, pointed out, languages from Swedish to ancient Greek can use their “over” preposition in exactly the same way, or that “over” has been used like this for centuries in English. Some people are quite simply attached to this pseudo-rule—no “over” with numbers—and they have treated AP’s more-than-justifiable abandonment as a lowering of intellectual standards.

Then take Bryan Henderson, a man who has “corrected” tens of thousands of Wikipedia articles, removing “comprised of”. His rationale was that a “whole comprises the parts”, so the phrase “comprised of” is meaningless gobbledygook probably inspired by confusion with “composed of”. If it is meaningless, a lot of native speakers seem to disagree: the phrase turns up almost 4,000 hits on The Economist’s website and 63m results on Google. Odd that a meaningless phrase can be used so meaningfully by so many people.

The case for making language rules based on how speakers actually use their language—rather than a dreamed-up ideal for how it should be used—is straightforward. Language is an arbitrary system of signs agreed on by a community. If English-speakers agree that the sound “dog” should go with a barking four-legged mammal, then that ends the discussion about what a “dog” is.

Most English-speakers have no problem with “over” plus a number. The anonymous Twitter pundit has clearly enjoyed herself (it turned out to be a woman, even though in Johnson’s experience it is men who complain most about grammar), correcting the New York Times, Time magazine, Newsweek, along with AP, for using “over” with a number. It does not seem to have occurred to her to wonder why such a variety of publications—which agree on barely anything else—should agree that “over” can be used with a number. And they can hardly be accused of confusing their readers. The same could be said for the thousands of Wikipedia editors that Mr Henderson has corrected—nearly all highly educated native-speakers keen on sharing knowledge. They know their readers will understand; who says they cannot use their language properly?

Language change happens slowly. “Over” with a number seems to have ancient roots; “comprised of” began rising in English books more than (or is that “over”) a century ago; and nobody is confused by either. Of Johnson’s own peeves, it seems that careful writers still mostly use “literally” literally—something worth fighting for. But “to beg the question” meaning “to prompt the question” is fully mainstream. It is all well and good to oppose a change that has not yet taken hold, or one that still confuses people. But when the language has truly moved on, so should its guardians.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21699888-when-it-comes-language-some-users-are-more-peevish-others-get-over-it/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Human life

Live long and prosper

How to plan for a long, long life

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



The 100-Year Life: Living and Working in an Age of Longevity. By Lynda Gratton & Andrew Scott. Bloomsbury; 264 pages; $28 and £18.99.

IT USED to be rare to live to 100. But the progress of science has meant that over the past two centuries every year has added three months to average life expectancy, at least in rich countries. If “The 100-Year Life” by Lynda Gratton and Andrew Scott is correct, half the children born in the rich world today are likely to live to 100.

Predicting future life expectancies is not easy. Some say there are fundamental limits to the continued extension of the average lifespan, and that further gains may become disproportionately hard to achieve. It is certainly true that reducing child mortality or cardiac diseases in middle age—the low-hanging fruit of increased longevity—have all been reached.

How to look after all these elderly folk is a different problem. Governments around the world are already struggling to support growing numbers of retired people who depend on a shrinking working population. Eighteen OECD countries have raised pension ages. At the same time, workers are being asked to dig deeper into their own pockets. None of this is enough.

The book suggests that even greater difficulties lie ahead. Looking at three hypothetical people, born in different eras, the authors map out the scale of the problem and what it might mean for a working life. Jack, born in 1945, worked for 42 years and was retired for eight. He had to save only a small percentage of his salary in a pension every month, which was topped up by the government and by his company. Jimmy was born in 1971 and has a life expectancy of 85. If he works for 44 years and retires for 20, he will be likely to need to save a whopping 17% of his income during his working life. From here the numbers grow more unsettling. Jane, born in 1998, will need to finance 35 years of retirement on the same 44 years of work. This will mean she must save 25% of her income—an improbable sum given other commitments such as mortgages, university fees and child care. The upshot of all of this continued extension of longevity is that working to 70 or even past 80 may not only become less unusual, but may be necessary in the future.

While one can certainly quibble with the assumptions built into each of these scenarios, the scale of the problem is perfectly clear. It is going to be nearly impossible for workers to save enough money during the current span of a working life to fund retirements of increasing length. And if people have to work longer, it is unclear whether their education or the places where they work are geared to support such a future.

How best to adjust education so it prepares the youth of today for longer working lives and many different jobs? Online courses and retraining are becoming increasingly popular—and increasingly important—for this reason. But universities may need to rethink the model of handing a big dollop of education once, in youth, and forcing graduates to repay that cost over decades. If people must retrain throughout their lives, as well as save more for retirement, a costly, one-shot education at the start might become an unmanageable burden.

The authors use a little too much management-speak. Even so, the book is useful. Too few people are considering the issue that if the world is unprepared, longevity will be both a gift and a curse.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21699886-how-plan-long-long-life-live-long-and-prosper/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Psychology

Character-driven

Why never giving up is a worthwhile goal

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition

The test will be when the gloves come off

Grit: The Power of Passion and Perseverance. By Angela Duckworth. Scribner; 352 pages; $28. Vermilion; £20.

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, a German philosopher, once stated that there was a universal tendency to see success as the result of innate talent, rather than effort. Today it is still common to think of the straight-A pupil as having a “gift” for learning, or of the sports star as miraculously skilful. Angela Duckworth, a professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, believes that talent is overrated. More important, she suggests, is a blend of persistence and passion—or “grit”. “Our potential is one thing,” she writes. “What we do with it is quite another.”

That character matters is not a new idea. But “Grit”, Ms Duckworth’s first book, is part of a broader trend which is influencing organisations from sports teams to schools. Over the past two decades more and more scholars have analysed traits like curiosity and self-control. Such faculties are at least as important as raw cognitive ability to grades and pay, they say. And since these attributes are seen as independent of and more malleable than intelligence, they are a voguish area for education reformers. This year, for example, nine school districts in California will begin testing pupils on their character.

“Talent counts, [but] effort counts twice,” insists Ms Duckworth in the first and best part of her book. Much of her work is based on her Grit Scale, a questionnaire which asks people how much they agree with such statements as “I am diligent. I never give up.” At West Point, an American military college, grit scores predict dropouts better than academic records. Grittier salespeople stay in their jobs, grittier swimmers win more medals and grittier pupils persevere with university.

Some critics have suggested that Ms Duckworth’s work is a rebranding of earlier research on conscientiousness. She argues, however, that grit is about more than that. It also involves finding and fostering a purpose. How to build grit is less well understood, she concedes. “Goof around” until you find something you love, she suggests, and then practise so that it becomes a habit. Parents, teachers and bosses can help by giving praise for effort and displaying grit themselves. Ms Duckworth’s own family obeys the “hard thing rule”: everyone must pick a difficult task, like learning the piano, which they can abandon but only at a natural stopping point, say the end of term. She adds homilies of successful people such as Jamie Dimon, chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, and Ta-Nehisi Coates, a writer, who she says are “paragons of grit”.

All this is mildly inspirational, if vague. The author’s relentless message simplifies a complex story. Traumatic childhoods, bad parenting, awful schools and a lack of extra-curricular opportunities can make it harder for children to develop grit; success for poor pupils is not simply a matter of them pulling themselves together. Ms Duckworth knows that. She has warned schools against grading pupils on grit in high-stakes tests. In 2013 she co-founded the Character Lab, a research centre which tries to ensure that policies to encourage grit are based on science. She has a tough task ahead, but is determined to see it through. That’s grit for you.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21699890-why-never-giving-up-worthwhile-goal-character-driven/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Contemporary art museums

Home of the brave

It all started with Tate Modern

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



THE view north from the top of Tate Modern’s new twisted ten-storey extension (pictured), which opens on June 17th, is among the finest in London: a perfectly aligned panorama of St Paul’s Cathedral in all its Baroque beauty. And such is the democracy of the museum that the public will get to enjoy it too, from a generous balcony that wraps right around the building. They won’t have to pay. They won’t even have to look at any art on the way up. “Museums now are places where people come to meet each other and have a conversation and a good time,” says Sir Nicholas Serota, director of the Tate Galleries. “I’m happy about that.”

The eating and meeting places have been part of Tate’s appeal ever since this former power station, converted by Herzog and de Meuron, a Swiss firm, opened in 2000. People flock to the projects in the Turbine Hall, among them Carsten Holler’s scream-inducing slides and Olafur Eliasson’s Weather Project emulating the glory of the rising sun. With over 5m visitors a year, twice the number going to the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York, and with only half the exhibition space, an extension quickly became inevitable.

Tate Modern’s original permanent exhibition was sniffed at for its patchy content and occasional holes. This forced the gallery to put on thematic rather than chronological displays, some of them quite baffling. But over the past 16 years, Frances Morris, first as a curator and now as director of Tate Modern, has been building up a wide-ranging collection, roaming first through Latin America and then on to the rest of the world.

Sculptures by Saloua Raouda Choucair from Lebanon and the modernist paintings of Ibrahim El-Salahi from Sudan would be out of Tate’s reach if the board hadn’t started buying before the market caught on. “It’s a way of collecting geared to what they could afford, but it’s ended up being a lot of good work from under-represented areas,” says Matthew Slotover, co-founder of the Frieze art fairs. “It now feels very forward looking. MoMA [with its predominantly American and European collection] is struggling to catch up.” Ms Morris and Sir Nicholas, on the other hand, would prefer it to be seen as a new way to look at the history of art and a rethink of the modernist canon, rather than a matter of economics. “Modernism didn’t just happen in Paris, or New York,” says Ms Morris.

Modernism even happened in London, though it wasn’t much loved there. But by the time Tate Modern emerged, YBAs (for Young British Artists) like Tracey Emin and Damien Hirst, who had been snaffled up by Charles Saatchi in the 1980s and 1990s, had finally created an appetite for contemporary art in a city which, thanks to Margaret Thatcher’s financial deregulation in 1986, was becoming very much richer. It was Tate, though, that put London on the international art map, with a string of after-effects: the Frieze art fair which arrived in 2002, a proliferation of contemporary-art dealers and eventually the arrival of big-name American galleries like Pace and David Zwirner that could no longer avoid having a presence in the city.

Thin, besuited and outwardly cool, Sir Nicholas describes his job as “balancing the books and being creative and brave”, but his strongest play has been to develop enduring relationships around the world and create an enviable network of influence, balancing a subtle showmanship with a love of art. Cy Twombly, an American artist who died in 2011, left three swirly paintings from his Bacchus series (worth in the region of £30m at auction) to the Tate, based solely on his long-standing friendship with the director. Board members such as Howard Davies, a banker, and Janet de Botton, a well-known collector, step down, but never really leave. When Hannah Rothschild was appointed chairman of the National Gallery, she stayed on as the “liaison” trustee between the two institutions. “You don’t turn down a chance to keep learning from the master,” she says of Tate’s boss.

It is hard to believe that when Tate Modern opened, its senior team worried that the Turbine Hall was too big and wondered if people would come. If they could have seen into the future, they would have observed what could be called the “Tate effect”. When the new San Francisco Museum of Modern Art opened last month, its director Neal Benezra described a ground floor space with windows onto the street as “our Turbine Hall”. It is doubtful that the HangarBicocca, a 15,000-square-metre former factory in Milan which opened in 2004, would have happened without Tate’s example (its curatorial programme, incidentally, is currently in the hands of a former Tate Modern director, Vicente Todoli). Or the Power Station in Shanghai. Or the massive Art Mill in Qatar.

And perhaps, when the Guggenheim Museum of Art made its whole interior over to a James Turrell light installation in 2013, that was the Tate effect too. Over 5,000 visitors came each day (more than any other exhibition in New York that year), lying on their backs on the floor, selfie-ing furiously as the colours moved through the rainbow. It is interesting to see Tate Modern broaden its brief, but many people go for the entertainment rather than for a lesson in art history. Could that be the ultimate Tate effect?



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21699887-it-all-started-tate-modern-home-brave/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Jane Fawcett: The deb who sank the Bismarck





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Jane Fawcett

The deb who sank the Bismarck

Jane Fawcett (née Janet Caroline Hughes), codebreaker and saviour of Victorian buildings, died on May 21st, aged 95

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



A DRAUGHTY wooden hut, in the company of the best brains of Britain, was not quite the billet Jane Fawcett had imagined for herself. At Miss Ironside’s School for Girls in Kensington the drill had been to sit up straight, learn to curtsey and not bother her head about exams, for Mr Right was bound to come along eventually. After that, in 1939, she was a deb, parading en masse in a long white frock and an obvious sulk. A complete waste of time, she thought. Now, aged 19, just a chicken in the Bletchley Park code-breaking team, she was spending hours on a horrid hard chair, bent over a machine on a wobbly trestletable. Lights hung down on strings, and a frightful old stove smoked in the middle of the room. She was also saving the country, and it was terribly exciting. But she could not breathe a word about that.

She had told her parents she was working for the Foreign Office. They probably presumed it was as a typist, the kiss of death. She had been recruited for Bletchley because the government then believed that the upper classes were better at keeping secrets. Such an odd idea; she’d supposed the whole country was making common cause. She often didn’t think much of aristocrats, despite moving in that world herself.

It was certainly a relief, though, when her father rescued her from her first lodgings, in a fume-ridden council house with a lorry-driver’s family. Couldn’t have Jane there, he said. She moved to Liscombe Park, the Elizabethan mansion of a family friend, where a much jollier time was had, though the trip to Bletchley down pitch-black country lanes for night shifts was hairy, to say the least. Bletchley Park itself, a pile of best “lavatory Gothic” as she later described it, was sociable for a spy-centre; she danced Scottish reels on the lawn and sang madrigals. Those gave brief respite from the gruelling days and nights spent tracking what the Germans were up to.

Her enemy was the German Enigma machine, a fiendish configuration of rotors which changed every day to set the code for Nazi military communications. Bletchley Park’s code-breaker, known as the Bombe, was being ever-upgraded to compete with it by a group of laconic, obsessive men (including Alan Turing, “desperately screwed up”, and Gordon Welchman, “always in the depths of the deepest thought”). Of course, they never noticed her. Yet women, two-thirds of the workforce, were treated pretty much as equals at Bletchley. They could notch up their own victories, and May 25th 1941 was hers.

The day was going as usual. When an Enigma code was broken, she would check the decoded message to see, one, if it was plausible German, and two, if it was of any interest. (She had all of six months of German, picked up in dull Zurich, where she had been sent to get over her heartbreak that she was too tall to be a ballerina. She soon went off to St Moritz instead.) In May 1941 they were all trying to trace the Germans’ best battleship, the Bismarck, which had just destroyed HMS Hood with the loss of more than 1,400 lives. They thought it was still off Norway. But the decoded message, spooling on a paper strip out of her machine, told her that the Bismarck was going to Brest. The message was passed straight to Whitehall, and they were all “absolutely on their toes” to know what would come through next. It was a distress call, as Hitler’s finest ship was sunk by the Royal Navy. That earned her a rousing cheer in the Bletchley Park dining room.

A red-brick victory

And that was all she got. No one outside the circle knew anything of it; they were all sworn to absolute secrecy for life. That was sometimes very hard. Her fiancé Ted, a naval officer, came back from the war a hero; she felt like an also-ran. Nonetheless, not being one to brood, she became a professional singer for 15 years while bringing up two children; and then, unexpectedly, got the chance to charge off to war again. Which, of course, she did.

This time the secret central command was in her own house in Kensington. There, as secretary from 1964 to 1976, she ran the affairs of the Victorian Society. Once more, it was David against Goliath: a small group led by another obsessive intellectual, Nikolaus Pevsner, fighting tooth and nail to persuade the whole government, the whole of the British public, all academe and almost all architects that Britain’s Victorian buildings were worth saving. Once more, too, it was she who did most of the hard slog. She wrote books, lectured, managed the rickety finances and tormented British Rail while the men, especially John Betjeman, the poet, grabbed the attention. Well, never mind; she counted saving the rampant red-brick London Midland Hotel beside St Pancras as one of her special achievements. And she was even happier to see how good it looked inside when it reopened in 2011. She had feared the redo would be very vulgar.

The refurbishment that pleased her less was of Hut 6 at Bletchley. At last, the great secret got out; the place became a museum, and she went to see it. The lawns were too neat, the lights were wrong and the tables no longer wobbled. It was all much too clean and rather sterile. Still, that didn’t stop her seizing the hand of the Duchess of Cambridge and chatting away briskly for ages, as one well-bred gel to another, about the best time of her life, spent there.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21699884-jane-fawcett-n-e-janet-caroline-hughes-codebreaker-and-saviour-victorian-buildings-died/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Manufacturing activity

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Jun 2nd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21699953-interactive-indicators/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21699929-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21699925-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21699928-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Manufacturing activity

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition



The latest round of manufacturing data from Markit, a research firm, paints a gloomy picture. In America the purchasing managers’ index (PMI) dropped slightly in May to 50.7, its worst reading since 2009 and only just above the 50 threshold that indicates expansion in manufacturing activity. The euro area’s PMI also fell, confounding expectations that activity there would recover after fresh monetary stimulus. In Brazil manufacturing firms are shedding jobs at the fastest rate on record; China’s index was below 50 for the 15th month in a row. Britain’s score edged up to 50.1 from April’s low of 49.4, but over a third of managers think that the possibility of Brexit has hurt their business.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21699927-manufacturing-activity/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Jun 4th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21699924-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Thu, 02 Jun 2016]

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



Free speech: Under attack





Strikes in France: Don’t cave in, Mr Hollande





Rethinking the welfare state: Basically flawed





Indian banking: Of banks and bureaucrats





Shopping in America: Between Bentonville and Bezos





Fighting corruption: Cleaning up





Letters



On anti-Semitism, Brexit, Ban Ki-moon, Jordan, referendums, egg shells: Letters to the editor





Briefing



Universal basic incomes: Sighing for paradise to come





United States



Bernie Sanders: California, here we come





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





Chicago: Predictable policing





Refugees: Their own public Idaho





Lexington: Trumpology





The Americas



Brazil’s economy: Nowhere to go but up





Poverty in Argentina: Gutted community





Bello: Fujimori versus anti-Fujimorismo





Asia



Japanese politics: Postpone and be damned





Africans in India: They don’t love us





Banyan: Dialogue of the deaf





China



Education: The class ceiling





Remembering Tiananmen: Squaring off





Middle East and Africa



Railways in Africa: Puffed out





Crimes against humanity: One dictator down





Nigeria’s life coaches: Yes you can!





Palestine: A museum without exhibits





Syria’s war: Never-ending horror





Western Sahara: A forgotten leader of a lost cause





Innovation in the Arab world: From zero to not much more





Qatar: The other Wahhabi state





Europe



France on strike: Aux barricades





Turkey’s Kurds: War of attrition





Germany and the Armenian genocide: Name and shame





Corruption in Romania: Death of an antiseptic salesman





Russia’s empty elections: United Russia, divided Putin





Charlemagne: For the love of pizza





Britain



Brexit and the union: Tug of war





Retail: Modesty sells





Brexit brief: If it were done





Policy-making: Lost in transit





Public services: Pay up





Agriculture: Casting asparagus





Teaching assistants: Help needed





Bagehot: Pity the Brexpats





International



Free speech: The muzzle grows tighter





Free speech in Bangladesh: Muted by machetes





Campus protests and free speech: The colliding of the American mind





A youthful trend: Don’t be so offensive





Business



Walmart: Thinking outside the box





Digital celebrities: From smartphone to silver screen





Price-fixing: No truck with cartels





French manufacturers in Morocco: Factories in the sun





Apple in India: Forbidden fruit





Schumpeter: The evolution of Mr Thiel





Finance and economics



Reforming Indian banks: Bureaucrats at the till





Buttonwood: Working hard for the money





China’s currency: Bending, not breaking





Automation: I’m afraid I can’t do that





Crypto-currencies: Etherised





Aircraft finance: Crowded skies





SMEs in developing countries: Caught in the middle





Free exchange: Tales from Silicon wadi





Science and technology



Chinese science: Schrödinger’s panda





An update on AIDS: HIV’s slow retrenchment





Zika and the Olympics: Should I stay or should I go?





Avoiding sunburn: Patched up





Black holes: We want information





Jumping to attention: Peppered moths





Books and arts



Developing economies: The long road





Johnson: Get over it





Human life: Live long and prosper





Psychology: Character-driven





Contemporary art museums: Home of the brave





Obituary



Obituary: Jane Fawcett: The deb who sank the Bismarck





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Manufacturing activity





Markets





