The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Technology Quarterly

Business

Finance and economics

Economics brief

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



Negotiators for Colombia and the FARC, a left-wing guerrilla group, announced that they had reached a final agreement to end their 52-year-long war. Some 220,000 people died and 7m were displaced in Latin America’s longest-running military conflict. Combatants who committed crimes are to face a special tribunal. Those who confess will have their movement restricted and perform community service but will not go to jail. Colombians are to vote on the agreement on October 2nd. See here and here.

Venezuela’s president, Nicolás Maduro, warned that some government workers who signed a petition to initiate a referendum to recall him from office will themselves be sacked. The order applies to managers in five ministries, including those responsible for food, labour and finance.

Tens of thousands of people protested against Chile’s pension system, which they say pays inadequate benefits. Chile’s system of private pension accounts is seen as a model by many. But workers who did not contribute consistently receive lower payouts than they expected—and are outraged. See article.

The cauldron

The war in Syria became yet more complex when Turkey sent troops across the border to push Islamic State forces out of Jarabulus, a strategic town. This came less than a week after American jets intercepted Syrian ones that were bombing Kurdish forces supported by American troops. Shortly before Turkey intervened a suicide-bomber killed more than 50 people at a Kurdish wedding in Turkey near the border with Syria. Most of the victims were children. Meanwhile, Iran stopped allowing Russia to use one of its airfields to bomb rebel positions in Syria. See here and here.

South Africa’s currency and bonds tumbled on news that the finance minister, Pravin Gordhan, had been asked to report to police for questioning about an investigation within the revenue authority. Mr Gordhan is tackling corruption in state-owned enterprises and government procurement. The markets think the allegations against him are baseless and politically motivated.

An Islamist rebel admitted to destroying religious artefacts in Timbuktu, Mali, at the International Criminal Court in The Hague. He pleaded guilty to the charges, the first time any defendant has done so at the ICC. It was also the first time the court tried a case of cultural vandalism.

The day the ground shook



An earthquake of magnitude 6.2 struck central Italy, killing hundreds of people. Buildings were reduced to rubble in villages and towns across the regions of Lazio, Umbria and Le Marche. Amatrice was particularly badly hit. “Half the town is gone,” said the mayor. See article.

Nicolas Sarkozy, France’s former president, announced his candidacy for the 2017 presidential election. The centre-right politician will first have to win his party’s primary in November, where his main challenger is Alain Juppé, a former prime minister. See article.

The European Commission ordered France to hand over the details of its study on Renault’s car emissions. Some MEPs accuse France of covering up the details in order to protect its domestic car industry. The French state has a 20% stake in Renault.

Sadiq Khan, London’s popular mayor, threw his support behind Owen Smith, who is challenging Jeremy Corbyn for the leadership of Britain’s Labour Party. Although Mr Khan nominated Mr Corbyn in last year’s leadership contest (so the party could have “a proper debate”), he did not vote for him and they have crossed swords many times since. Mr Khan does not think Labour can win an election with Mr Corbyn in charge. See article.

Talking peace

Representatives of the Philippine government and communist rebels met in Oslo in the hope of negotiating an end to a 47-year-old insurgency. The rebels want their captured comrades released, but the government fears the negotiators do not have the authority to end the conflict. See article.

A representative of Shanghai’s government attended a forum in Taiwan. He is the most senior Chinese official to visit the island since Tsai Ing-wen became president in May. China had downgraded links with Taiwan in a protest against her party’s pro- independence stance.

A UN human-rights envoy, Philip Alston, was granted a rare visit to China. At the end of his trip, he spoke of a “shrinking space” for the country’s civil society and said he had been asked to notify the government before any meetings with private individuals. But he said China should be “genuinely congratulated” for its fight against poverty.

Foreign ministers from China, Japan and South Korea showed unusual solidarity during a trilateral meeting in Tokyo overshadowed by territorial and security-related disputes between China and both of its interlocutors. The three condemned a missile test by a North Korean submarine which had just taken place.

Zika dangers

An American health official warned Louisiana to monitor its mosquito population when the water in areas hit by recent flooding starts to recede, in case the mosquito-borne Zika virus has spread to the state. In the latest government guidance, pregnant women were advised not to travel to Miami Beach, where transmissions of the virus have been detected.

A federal judge blocked the Obama administration’s edict that transgender school pupils should be allowed to use whichever toilet or locker room they feel comfortable in. The judge ruled that states had not been given time to implement the rule.



The Olympic games finished in Rio de Janeiro. America again dominated the medals table. Because it won the second-most golds, Britain came next, placing above China in the ranking. The hosts, Brazil, did not capitalise on their home advantage, finishing 13th overall and taking 19 medals in total, just two more than in 2012. That result is even more disappointing considering 465 Brazilian athletes took part in the Rio games compared with 248 in London in 2012. See article.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21705873-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

The Indian government named a successor to Raghuram Rajan as governor of the Reserve Bank of India, nine weeks after his surprise decision to step down. Mr Rajan’s replacement is Urjit Patel, a deputy governor at the central bank who is credited with shaping an inflation-targeting framework that has helped tame prices. See article.

John Cryan, the CEO of Deutsche Bank, lashed out at the European Central Bank’s policy of negative interest rates, saying it countered the aim of making the banking system safer. The ECB charges banks 0.4% to park their deposits with it. Mr Cryan thinks that policy, coupled with regulations that compel banks to hold more liquid assets, has weakened banks, not strengthened them.

A court in Zurich handed Rudolf Elmer, a whistle-blower, a 14-month suspended prison sentence for threatening his former employer, Julius Bär, a private bank. However, he was acquitted of the more serious charge of violating Swiss banking-secrecy laws. The ruling sets an important precedent, since it indicates that Switzerland’s famously strict confidentiality laws do not protect foreign trusts and companies that hold Swiss accounts.

The Hong Kong stock exchange introduced a circuit breaker that halts trading in volatile conditions. Hong Kong’s system targets specific shares, unlike the circuit breakers that created havoc on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stockmarkets in January by shutting down the whole market.

Importing trouble

Orders for British exports are at a two-year high, according to the Confederation of British Industry, as the sharp fall in sterling “is starting to filter through to overseas demand”. But the CBI warned that a weak pound is pushing up costs for manufacturers. Meanwhile, other data indicated that net withdrawals from UK-based investment funds were £4.7 billion ($6.2 billion) in July. That was a three-year high and up from £3 billion in June, when Britain voted in a referendum to leave the EU.

The euro-zone economy picked up slightly in August, judging by a closely watched index of private-sector activity. It had been expected to fall after the Brexit vote.

America’s budget deficit will rise this year for the first time since 2009. The Congressional Budget Office estimates the deficit will total $590 billion for the fiscal year ending September 30th, a third higher than in 2015. The main reason is that revenues are much lower than had been anticipated, especially from corporate taxes. However, the outlook foresees deficits getting smaller over the next decade, partly because the government will pay lower interest on its mountain of debt.

The American government officially nominated Jim Yong Kim to serve a second term as president of the World Bank. Although Mr Kim has the support of America, his restructuring of the bank has ruffled the feathers of much of its staff. Their association recently talked of a “crisis of leadership” at the organisation and called for a new leader.

Broadcast news

The saga that pitted the Redstone family against Viacom’s bosses reached a conclusion. Sumner Redstone, the 93-year-old mogul who controls most of the shares in the media conglomerate, and his daughter, Shari, claimed victory when the board dismissed the embattled chief executive, Philippe Dauman, and named five new members selected by Ms Redstone. All lawsuits between Viacom and Mr Redstone will now end. Mr Dauman leaves with a $72m severance package. See article.

Pfizer agreed to pay $14 billion for Medivation, a biotech company based in San Francisco that makes a bestselling treatment for prostate cancer. Its work in immunotherapies sits nicely with Pfizer’s research into drugs that fight cancer using the body’s immune system. Pfizer is still considering splitting itself in two, with one part producing profitable drugs and the other selling medicines that have lost their patent protection.

Tesla Motors unveiled new versions of its electric Model S sedan and Model X sports-utility vehicle with more powerful batteries that extend the cars’ driving range. The new Model S can travel over 500km (315 miles) without a recharge. The company claims the car can accelerate faster than any “mass-produced” vehicle made so far, reaching 60mph in 2.5 seconds.



A multinational team of astronomers working at the European Southern Observatory in Chile discovered an Earth-sized planet in orbit around a star four light-years away. Proxima Centauri b is a bit bigger than Earth and orbits within its parent’s habitable zone. That will make it the focus of scientific efforts to search for life elsewhere. See article.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21705874-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21705875-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




Space exploration: Brave new worlds

Colombia and the FARC: Ending a half-century of war

Monetary policy: When 2% is not enough

Turkey and the West: Don’t lose the plot

The desire for children: Wanted





Articles Sections Next

Space exploration

Brave new worlds

New discoveries, intelligent devices and irrepressible dreamers are once again making space exciting

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



IT MAY turn out to be a bare and barren rock. The fact that liquid water could be flowing across the surface of the planet just discovered orbiting Proxima Centauri, the nearest star to the sun, does not mean that any actually is—nor for that matter that it has an atmosphere. The fact that water and air, if present, could make this new world habitable does not mean that it is, in fact, a home to alien life.

But it might be.

What is exciting about this new world is not what is known—which, so far, is almost nothing (see article). It is what is unknown and the possibilities it may contain. It is the chance that there is life beneath that turbulent red sun, and that humans might be able to recognise it from 40 trillion kilometres away. In the immense distances of space that is close enough to mean that, some day, perhaps, someone might send probes to visit it and in so doing glimpse a totally different form of life. In the thrill of such possibilities sits all that is most promising about the exploration of space.

All our yesterdays

Next year will mark the 60th anniversary of the first satellite, Sputnik. The intervening decades have brought wonders. Men have looked back on the beauty of the Earth from the bright-lit Moon—and returned safely home. The satellites of America’s Global Positioning System (GPS) have created a world in which no one need ever be lost again—changing the human experience of place rather as the wristwatch changed the experience of time. Robots have trundled across the plains of Mars and swooped through the rings of Saturn. The Hubble space telescope has revealed that wherever you look, if you look hard enough you will find galaxies scattered like grains of sand across the deep.

Even so, space has of late become a bit dull. No man has ventured beyond low Earth orbit in more than four decades (no woman has done so ever). Astronauts and cosmonauts commute to an International Space Station that has little purpose beyond providing a destination for their capsules, whose design would have been familiar in the 1960s. All the solar system’s planets have been visited by probes. The hard graft of teasing out their secrets now offers less immediate spectacle.

The use of space is integral to all sorts of things, including the workings of armies, air forces and navies, but its role in GPS—or, for that matter, Google Maps—barely merits a mention. Some companies make money from putting satellites into orbit, and not just the kind that do things for governments. But there is an undeniable bathos to the fact that the biggest business in a realm once synonymous with human transcendence is providing viewers on Earth with umpty-seven channels of satellite TV.

Now that is changing. The technological progress that has put supercomputers into the pockets of half the world has made it possible do a lot more in orbit with much smaller spacecraft. A generation of entrepreneurs forged in Silicon Valley—and backed by some of its venture capitalists—are launching highly capable new devices ranging in size from shoe boxes to fridges and flying them in constellations of dozens or hundreds. Such machines are vastly more capable, kilo for kilo, than their predecessors and cheaper, to boot. They are making space interesting again.

The first new businesses are based on something easily returned from space to Earth: data. Although companies such as DigitalGlobe, in Denver, have been selling satellite images for decades, most of their customers have been spooks and soldiers. Today’s entrepreneurs at companies like Planet, BlackSky and Spire are hoping to sell not just snapshots of places that brass hats want to peer at. They are offering comprehensive and constantly updated global data sets. Ever better machine-learning programs can mine these for information on crops, shipping, traffic, wildlife or the environment that will be used by everyone from eco-warriors to hedge funds. Add the potential of small, smart satellites in their hundreds or even thousands to connect the billions of people too poor and remote to have yet been reached by the phone revolution, or the trillions of devices in the “internet of things”, and this new space age will bring more than ever to the world below.

And that is just the start. Elon Musk, the founder of both Tesla, a car company, and SpaceX, a rocket company, wants to found a colony on Mars and will soon be building spacecraft that can go there. Jeff Bezos, of Amazon, is following a steady and somewhat secretive path that may one day see the skies filled with automated factories and asteroid mines. Yuri Milner, an investor who got into Facebook early, is spending $100m on the most serious attempt yet to detect civilisations around other stars. He is also funding a programme aimed at studying planets like the one around Proxima Centauri with probes travelling at a fifth the speed of light—spacecraft so tiny as to make today’s shoe-box satellites look like battleships.

New life, and new civilisations

Even if they fail, these attempts to reinvigorate space will be instructive and thrilling. Just as on Earth, states will always have a role as, among other things, protectors of their national satellite infrastructure and as the enforcers of the laws they have put in place to govern the commercial exploitation of space. But in the years ahead, as the cost of hardware plummets and as systems on Earth learn to make better use of data, the growing number of star-struck entrepreneurs promise to relieve governments of the burden of space-age dreams with a torrent of innovation.

There is no objective need for people to colonise space or for them to look at planets in other solar systems in order to answer questions about life’s place in the universe. People can survive without such journeys or knowledge. Some, though, see the possibilities, stand in awe, and start making plans. They may not succeed. The planets may turn out to be barren rocks. Infinite space, in the end, might be just a nutshell’s worth of emptiness.

But, then again, it might not.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21705825-new-discoveries-intelligent-devices-and-irrepressible-dreamers-are-once-again-making-space/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Colombia and the FARC

Ending a half-century of war

After 220,000 deaths, voters should endorse the new Colombian peace accord

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



A DECADE or so has passed since a ferocious war between the state and the FARC, an army of leftist narco-guerrillas, dominated life in Colombia. An offensive launched by government forces in 2002 pushed the FARC into remote mountain and jungle areas. A unilateral ceasefire declared by the FARC last year virtually ended hostilities. Nowadays the war’s terror no longer troubles city-dwelling Colombians.

Nevertheless, the final peace accord announced on August 24th, after four years of talks in Havana, is historic. It ends a war that began 52 years ago and has killed perhaps 220,000 people and displaced 7m more. Under the agreement, the FARC is to turn itself into a normal political party. After its fighters finally remove their uniforms, vestigial insurgencies will continue in South America. A drug-running rump of the Shining Path fights feebly on in Peru and the ELN remains more than a nuisance in Colombia. But the FARC’s recognition of Colombia’s constitutional order represents the death of a strain of Stalinist violence that has plagued Latin America for decades. When Colombia’s citizens vote on the settlement on October 2nd it deserves their endorsement.

The deal arrived at by Colombia’s president, Juan Manuel Santos, and the FARC’s leader, Rodrigo Londoño-Echeverry, known as “Timochenko”, provides for the disarmament of the FARC’s remaining 6,800 troops and 8,500 militia and their concentration in 23 “normalisation zones”. That process is to be overseen by the UN. The guerrillas will eradicate coca fields and clear landmines, which have killed 11,000 people since 1990. The government is to spend billions of dollars on development in areas that the FARC once controlled.

It is not a perfect agreement. The most contentious part is the provisions for bringing to justice those who committed horrific crimes against non-combatant Colombians. The FARC, the Colombian army and right-wing paramilitary groups all murdered civilians. The FARC’s crimes extended to extortion, kidnapping and pressing children into military service. Perpetrators of such crimes belong in prison. Under the peace accord, though, they will serve no jail time if they confess. Instead, guerrillas and soldiers will appear before a special tribunal; if convicted their liberty will be “restricted” and they will perform community service for up to eight years.

A somewhat just peace

Many Colombians understandably find such leniency hard to stomach. Their outrage has been seized upon by Álvaro Uribe, Mr Santos’s predecessor. The unremitting offensive against the FARC during his time in office made peace possible (and led to some of the atrocities committed by pro-government forces). Now a senator, Mr Uribe denounces the peace agreement as a surrender to “Castro-chavismo” (which it is not) and is leading a campaign against it. Opinion polls suggest that the vote in the plebiscite will be close (see article).

Mr Uribe’s fight is wrongheaded. Though flawed, the “transitional justice” that the peace accord will bring about will be more rigorous than that achieved in other countries, such as South Africa and El Salvador, which have ended bitter conflicts. The peacemakers asked the pope and the UN secretary-general to help pick the committee that will appoint judges to the tribunal. That will bolster its credibility.

A vote to reject the agreement would be a tragedy. The FARC cannot return to its former deadly potency, but even as late as 2013 some 2,000 armed clashes took place. Rural regions that bore the brunt of the war are desperate for peace. Colombians have a chance to end one of the world’s longest-running conflicts. They should seize it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21705827-after-220000-deaths-voters-should-endorse-new-colombian-peace-accord-ending-half-century/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Monetary policy

When 2% is not enough

The rich world’s central banks need a new target

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



LIKE other areas of public policy, central banking is prone to fads and fashions. From limits on money-supply growth to pegging exchange rates, orthodoxies wax and wane. Yet the practice of inflation-targeting has proved remarkably long-lived. For almost three decades, central bankers have agreed that their best route to stabilising an economy is to aim for a specific target for inflation, usually 2% in advanced economies and a little higher in emerging ones.

This orthodoxy is still intact in many emerging economies where inflation is yet to be tamed (see article). But in the rich world the consensus is beginning to fracture. As central bankers gather this weekend for their annual shindig in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, John Williams, head of the San Francisco Fed, has caused a stir by suggesting it is time for a rethink on what central banks should aim for. He is right.

The reason is that the rich world’s central banks are working in a different context from the 1990s, when today’s inflation-targeting doctrine was formed. Then, it seemed that inflation would spend as much time above target as below it. And the “natural real rate of interest”—the inflation-adjusted price that balances the supply of, and demand for, savings in a full-strength economy—was as high as 3.5%. But inflation has been below the central bankers’ target for years. And the underlying real natural rate of interest has fallen to 1% or lower, probably because population ageing has boosted saving even as lower expectations of growth have cut investment (see article).

This matters because low inflation and a low natural interest rate limit the effectiveness of central bankers’ traditional policy lever: setting short-term interest rates. Since nominal interest rates are the sum of real rates and inflation, the rich-world central banks cannot, under today’s regime, expect their policy rates to rise much higher than 3% (the 2% inflation target plus a 1% real rate). That leaves very little room to cut when the next recession strikes. In the three most recent recessions the Fed slashed rates by 675 basis points (hundredths of a percentage point), 550 basis points, and 512 basis points.

Fear of future impotence is the main cause of today’s misgivings over a low inflation target. But there are other drawbacks with the current regime. First, a target for annual inflation gives the central bank no leeway to make up for periods during which inflation has been too high or too low. If central bankers could credibly promise that they would allow a burst of catch-up inflation, they might be more successful at boosting too-low inflation today. Second, when supply shocks such as a sudden rise or fall in the oil price send inflation and economic growth in opposing directions, central bankers face a tricky choice of which to respond to.

How might these problems be fixed? One possibility is simply to raise the inflation target to, say, 4%. Credibly enacted, that ought to alleviate the risk of impotence. If investors and consumers believe inflation will reach 4%, nominal interest rates should eventually rise to 5% or so even if real rates stay low. But rich-world central banks have undershot their targets for so long they may struggle to persuade the public to expect higher inflation. And a higher target would still leave central banks with a dilemma when economic growth and inflation diverge. Neither would it make up for big misses.

Who ate all the pi?

A more radical option is to move away from targeting inflation altogether. Many economists (and this newspaper) see advantages in targeting the level of nominal GDP, the total amount of spending in the economy before adjusting for inflation. A nominal-GDP target would allow for temporary variations in inflation. Downturns would be tempered by an expectation of protracted stimulus later on to make up lost ground. In better times, a rise in real GDP would provide the lion’s share of the required nominal-GDP growth and inflation could drift lower.

Changing targets is not something policymakers should do lightly; their credibility depends on stability. And, like every regime, a nominal-GDP target has its drawbacks, not least that few non-economists have ever heard of the concept. It will not be easy to build a consensus for it. But it is right to start doing so. A 2% inflation target is ill-suited to the rich world today. Doubling it would be an improvement, but targeting nominal GDP would be better still. Time for a new era.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21705826-rich-worlds-central-banks-need-new-target-when-2-not-enough/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Turkey and the West

Don’t lose the plot

How to manage relations with NATO’s most awkward member

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS hard to dissuade people from believing conspiracy theories, especially when there really has been a conspiracy. The attempted coup in Turkey on July 15th involved thousands of members of the armed forces. Encouraged by their government, many Turks seem to believe that the West—in particular America—had a hand in it. Relations have soured and Turkey has taken to demanding that Western countries demonstrate they are on its side. Turkey is a NATO ally and, notwithstanding a spate of recent terrorist attacks, a bastion of relative stability in a region racked by war. Western countries want to keep it that way. This week America’s vice-president, Joe Biden, visited Ankara as a gesture of goodwill. Beyond his offer of soothing words (see article), what more should the West do?

Tone it down

Turkey’s attempted coup shocked an already tense society. At least 240 people were killed, and the country narrowly averted a disastrous military takeover. The plot was led in part by followers of the Gulen movement, a secretive Muslim sect that runs a global network of schools, charities and businesses and has infiltrated the Turkish state. It is only natural that Turks should be determined to identify and punish the conspirators.

Yet rather than focus on those directly involved, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has launched a vast crackdown on anyone with Gulenist ties, as well as on other opponents of his governing Justice and Development (AK) party. Over 80,000 people, including judges, businesspeople, journalists and academics, have been purged. Mr Erdogan speaks darkly of a “higher mind” directing both the coup and the other threats Turkey faces, including an insurgency by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and bombings carried out by Islamic State (IS). The purges have enormous support, even among secular Turks who oppose Mr Erdogan’s Islamist policies.

Mindful of Mr Erdogan’s authoritarian bent, Western leaders tempered condemnation of the mutiny with warnings against the ensuing crackdown even as Turks were celebrating the survival of civilian rule and voicing fear of the Gulenists. Stung by the criticism, Turkey’s pro-government media have claimed, preposterously, that America must have been behind the coup. Polls suggest that most Turks believe them.

Such paranoia is dangerous, and not only because it could accelerate Turkey’s drift into autocracy. Mr Erdogan has made overtures to Vladimir Putin and hinted at a realignment towards Russia and Iran. He is demanding that America extradite Fethullah Gulen, the inspiration behind the movement, who has been in self-imposed exile in Pennsylvania since 1999 and whom he accuses of masterminding the plot against him. Turkey’s justice minister, Bekir Bozdag, says extradition is a political test: is America for Turkey or against it?

Turkey likewise wants European governments to help track down Gulenists among their Turkish populations. Turkey also wants progress on granting its citizens visa-free travel to the European Union’s Schengen zone, part of the deal the two sides struck in March to control the flow of Syrian refugees. But that requires Turkey to reform its laws on terrorism, tricky amid a security crackdown. Meanwhile, clashes have broken out in Europe between backers of Mr Gulen and of Mr Erdogan. Anti-Muslim populists have exploited the tensions. Austria’s chancellor has demanded that Turkey’s accession talks to the EU be halted; Turkey has recalled its ambassador to Vienna.

It is a mess, but two thoughts should guide the West. One is that, just as it wants Turkey to observe the law, so it must follow due process itself. Extradition is a matter for the judiciary, not for politicians or intelligence agencies. If Turkey can provide solid evidence against Mr Gulen that was not collected under duress, he should be extradited; if not, then he should remain in Pennsylvania. Similarly, Europe should honour its promises. If Turkey brings its terrorism laws into line with EU standards and meets the other conditions in the migrant deal, its people should be granted visa-free travel. Until it does, however, the EU should wait.

Second, the West should cleave to its principles, urging Mr Erdogan to seek pluralism and strong institutions rather than an all-powerful presidency. Instead of attempting to bolster his position with ethnic Turks by stirring up antipathy towards the Kurds, Mr Erdogan should return to the search for peace.

Turkey allied to Iran and Russia, rather than NATO, would be weaker. Even as Mr Biden was visiting Ankara, Turkish forces were entering Syria under NATO air cover to attack the jihadists of IS (see article). Russia could not provide the same support. The truth is, Turkey needs the West and the West needs Turkey, no matter how infuriating its leader.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21705828-how-manage-relations-natos-most-awkward-member-dont-lose-plot/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The desire for children

Wanted

Unwanted pregnancies are bad. But so is the unfulfilled desire for children—and that problem is growing

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



FAMILY planning has been a huge success. The global fertility rate has crashed, from 5.1 babies per woman in 1964 to 2.5 today. The average Bangladeshi woman can now expect to have about the same number of children as the average Frenchwoman. Only in sub-Saharan Africa are big families still in vogue, and even there they are shrinking. This is welcome. It suggests that women have gained more control over their bodies and that parents no longer reproduce frantically for fear that some of their children will die. Cutting the birth rate also leaves countries with fewer dependants per worker, at least for a time, making them better off.

But this triumph conceals a growing problem. For more and more couples, the greatest source of anguish is that they have fewer children than they want, or none at all. With Globescan, a consultancy, The Economist polled 19 countries, asking people how many children they would like and how many they expect to have. In every rich country we surveyed, couples expect to be less fertile than they would like, and many in developing countries suffer the same sorrow (see article). On average, Greeks think the ideal family contains 2.6 children but believe they will end up with 1.7.

Medical infertility is part of the problem, not just in rich countries, where couples put off having children until it is rather late, but also in poor countries, where health care is worse. By one global estimate, at least 48m couples have been trying for a child for the past five years but have not succeeded, up from 42m in 1990. But the main reason for the shortfall, according to our poll, is money. From Brooklyn to Beijing, the cost of housing and education is so high that many young people say they cannot afford as many children as they want.

Malthusians will rejoice. The population is growing fast enough already, they will argue. Besides, can’t infertile couples just adopt children? In fact, population growth today largely reflects longer lives and will eventually go into reverse. It is not clear that there are too many people; and it is callous to ask couples who might want children to forgo that joy simply because some of their neighbours would prefer a less populous planet. And adoption, though admirable, is neither the sole responsibility of the childless nor a perfect substitute for procreation.

The pain of having no or fewer children than you desire is often extreme. It can cause depression and in poor countries can be a social catastrophe. Couples impoverish themselves pursuing ineffective treatments; women who are thought to be barren are divorced, ostracised or worse. Last month a childless Kenyan tailor was charged with attempted murder, having allegedly attacked his wife with a machete.

More frugal innovation, please

In wealthy countries, where maternity wards are quiet partly because the young are so economically insecure, governments can help by doing things they should be doing anyway: liberalising labour markets that shut the young out of jobs, relaxing planning rules to make housing cheaper and promoting child-friendly policies in the workplace. Across the world, education is important, both to warn women about how fertility declines with age and, especially in Africa, about preventable infections such as chlamydia and gonorrhoea.

Most important, however, is medical innovation. In vitro fertilisation (IVF) has become better over the years but is still horribly expensive. Some couples remortgage their homes in the hope of conceiving. Research into more frugal technology is staggeringly rare, given the demand for it. Would lower, cheaper doses of IVF drugs work as well for some people? No one knows. Will a shoe-box-sized IVF laboratory developed in America work reliably? Trials are only now under way.

More money for research would help, as it generally does. But perhaps not as much as more attention. Governments and aid agencies have turned family planning into a wholly one-sided campaign, dedicated to minimising teenage pregnancies and unwanted births; it has come to mean family restriction. Instead, family planning ought to mean helping people to have as many, or as few, children as they want.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21705829-unwanted-pregnancies-are-bad-so-unfulfilled-desire-childrenand-problem/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




On Taiwan, obesity, Labour, China, Alaska, Ultimate Frisbee, economics, jazz: Letters to the Editor





Articles Sections Next

On Taiwan, obesity, Labour, China, Alaska, Ultimate Frisbee, economics, jazz

Letters to the Editor

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



Taiwan’s claim to Taiping

The latest ruling on Taiping Island (commonly known as Itu Aba) in the South China Sea by the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague does not infringe Taiwan’s territorial claims, as you state (“A series of unfortunate events”, July 30th). The ruling downgrades the legal status of Taiping from an island to merely a rock without exclusive economic zones or a continental shelf. Taiwan is not a party to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea but has administered Taiping since 1946. Yet Taiwan was not invited to join the arbitration nor consulted during the process. This is a violation of the due process of law. Taiping’s ample fresh water, agricultural produce and around 200 residents clearly meet the requirements of an island under the UN convention.

Moreover, Taiwan’s claim on Taiping is far from “bizarre”. It dates back to the 18th century and the Qing dynasty. Taiping lies 1,600km from Taiwan, about an eighth of the distance between the British mainland and the Falklands, for which the Royal Navy fought rightly, not “bizarrely”, against Argentina in 1982.

When I was president I felt obliged to let the PCA and the whole world know that Taiping is an island, not a rock. I landed there myself and invited foreign media to see it for themselves earlier this year. There is nothing wrong with a national leader stepping on his or her country’s own territory. Both my predecessor and I visited Taiping, and so should my successor in the future.

MA YING-JEOU

Former president of the Republic of China (Taiwan)

Taipei



Something to chew on

“Counting calories” (August 13th) takes it for granted that obesity costs the National Health Service “billions of pounds each year”. According to a widely cited study from 2008 by Pieter van Baal, a Dutch economist, it is the long-living healthy (non-smoking, non-obese) who ultimately generate the highest lifetime medical costs. Because obese people die younger on average, they require fewer years of medical care and are less likely to fall victim to the expensive morbidities associated with old age. Obesity prevention is important to improving public health and should not be seen purely as a way of saving money.

TAMAY BESIROGLU

London

Contrary to what you say, the zero-tolerance attitude towards smoking does not offer a lesson on obesity (“Bitter fruits”, August 13th). Hostility to smoking is rarely directed towards smokers, but to their habit. The obese are maligned personally for being fat. A survey for University College London found that obese people who reported discrimination or abuse were more likely to continue gaining weight than those who were not. Ridiculing the obese just drives them out of the gym and into their comfort zone.

BRENDAN MCGRATH

Dublin



Labour's abysm

* Bagehot’s comparison between Neil Kinnock and Ed Miliband (July 30th) was a little glib: in fact the two leaders could not have been more different. Mr Kinnock showed immense political courage in making the Labour party electable again after 1983 and, as Tony Blair has acknowledged, made the latter’s premiership ultimately possible. By contrast, Mr Miliband’s inability to make hard choices or develop a coherent narrative for Labour during his tenure took the party backwards from its second-worst ever defeat in 2010 and led, almost unthinkably, to near wipeout in Scotland. By extending the leadership franchise to any registered supporter prepared to pay £3, he sowed the seeds for the current chaos. Mr Kinnock rescued Labour from one abyss; Mr Miliband took it to the edge of another.



DAVID HORNSBY

Herne Bay, Kent



Tech firms in China

It is true that some technology platforms in China have features that are absent from Western ones (“China’s tech trailblazers”, August 6th). However, this doesn’t mean that these companies are as sophisticated. Baidu is the king of search in China—and nowhere else. Google is more successful in the European Union, with a 90% share in search there, than in America.

Furthermore, many social- networking sites are actually country-specific, and it is little surprise that Chinese ones are more popular in China. The reason, as you noted, is that local companies often understand the market better and can tailor their offerings before foreigners come in. The problem is that these local adaptations may be of little use elsewhere. WeChat’s payment system came about because of a scarcity of payments infrastructure in China. Alibaba was created because buyers had little recourse if sellers sent them faulty goods. These are not problems in the West. It is not that Western apps are more advanced than Chinese ones, or vice versa. They simply address different needs.

Against the backdrop of Western tech companies’ woes in China, Apple’s success there looks even more phenomenal, but it could be because iPhones are considered more of a fashion item than a piece of technology.

NICOLAI POGREBNYAKOV

Associate professor

Copenhagen Business School



No place for softies

In case the new survivalists have forgotten, it is Alaska that proudly calls itself, “the Last Frontier”. The reason “redoubters” live in the Lower 48 is that they don’t have the guts to try to survive up here (“The last big frontier”, August 6th).

JON HOREN

Fairbanks, Alaska

Stamina a requirement



Ultimate Frisbee is a real thing, not an oddity requiring quotes around it as if it were a strange metaphor of a sport (Schumpeter, August 13th). It is recognised by the International Olympic Committee. The World Flying Disc Federation manages global tournaments and enforces the World Anti-Doping Agency’s regime. Some in the sport cautiously avoid the trademarked Frisbee name and are pushing for the sport to be called Ultimate. Indeed, the disc officially used is not that of Frisbee’s trademark owner, Wham-O, but is typically a Discraft manufactured disc. It may be time to update your style guide to include this magnificent sport. It is definitely time to surrender the quotes. It truly is Ultimate.

ANDREW WORK

Editor-in-chief

Harbour Times

Hong Kong



The human factor

Hyman Minsky recognised that economics cannot be summarised in terms of a complex physical system largely explained in terms of partial differential equations and he abandoned mathematics (“Minsky’s moment”, July 30th). Economics is a complex adaptive system in which the interacting agents are themselves modified, making analysis more intractable than its practitioners admit. A new philosophical and mathematical approach is needed that supplants the modelling that is currently used. Unfortunately human psychology will be one of the agents in the mix. No wonder predictions are unreliable.

MICHAEL SHERRATT

Tring, Hertfordshire



Jazz from hell

As an aficionado of most forms of music over 60 years, I still surprise myself in my struggle to appreciate jazz. Amused by Frank Zappa’s quote at the beginning of your piece (“Playing outside the box”, July 30th), I listened to several tracks by the band The Comet is Coming. The music was interesting and reminiscent of early tracks by Pink Floyd, including “Interstellar Overdrive”, which Pink Floyd played and Zappa jammed on at the Festival d’Amougies in 1969. So does that mean I have always enjoyed jazz but did not know it?

PETER BRADSHAW

Anchorage, Alaska

* Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21705663-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Demography and desire: The empty crib

In vitro fertilisation: An arm and a leg for a fertilised egg





Articles Sections Next

Demography and desire

The empty crib

Our poll of 19 countries reveals a neglected global scourge: the number of would-be parents who have fewer children than they want—or none at all

Aug 27th 2016 | ATHENS, LAGOS AND MUMBAI | From the print edition



ALTHOUGH he recently lost his job, T. R. Sesadri is a contented middle-aged man. He rides a Royal Enfield motorbike and plays badminton every day. Two years ago he acquired a small flat on the outskirts of Mumbai, which he plans to rent out. Most satisfying of all, Mr Sesadri and his wife have two children, a boy and a girl—“the perfect combination”, he says.

An only child does not learn to compromise, argues Mr Sesadri. A lone boy never has to wait for his sibling to leave the bathroom and never has to concede over which television programme to watch. But three children are too many in modern India. “If someone has a third child, people will think, what the hell is he doing?” he says. Some will scornfully ask: “Did you have two daughters first?” No—two is just right.

Urban India played a starring role in “The Population Bomb”, Paul Ehrlich’s bestseller of 1968. “The streets seemed alive with people,” Mr Ehrlich wrote, of a sweltering taxi ride through Delhi that convinced him the world was heading for a Malthusian catastrophe. “People, people, people, people.” Yet India’s birth rate has contracted astonishingly quickly, and with it Indians’ notions of the ideal family. On average, city-dwelling Indians now believe that 1.9 children is perfect (see chart 1).



Globescan, a consultancy, has polled 19 countries on behalf of The Economist. We began by asking people to specify their ideal family size. We asked how many children they had and how many more they expected to have. We then asked people to explain why they had (or were on track to have) fewer or more children than their ideal, and how their success or failure to hit the mark had affected them. These are universal human questions. But people answer them in startlingly different ways.

More like pandas than rabbits

Our poll shows that the ideal family in Asia’s three largest countries (China, India and Indonesia) is now smaller than the ideal family in Britain or America. We also find that access to birth control is seldom much of an issue. Few young people will have more children than they want because reliable contraception was not available to them. The poll also signals a global shift. Judging by the collective desires of parents and would-be parents, more suffering is caused by having too few babies than too many.

Of the 19 countries we polled, eight are overshooting—that is, the ideal family size is smaller than the number of children people expect to have. Nigerians have gone furthest awry: on average, they think the ideal family contains 5.4 children but are on course to have 7.7. Eleven countries are undershooting. A few barely miss the target, but others fall well short. Russians regard 2.3 children as ideal; Spaniards favour 2.4; Greeks think 2.6 best. In all three, people reckon that they will end up with 1.7 children on average. Because the replacement fertility rate is about 2.1, the difference between the ideal and expected number of children in these countries is the difference between healthy natural population growth and natural decline.

Greeks are painfully aware of the gap between desire and reality. Dafni Vitali, a curator in Athens with a young son, says she feels guilty about the prospect of raising a child without a sibling but might end up doing so. Greece’s long economic crisis has shaken her confidence in the future. Perhaps life will be just as difficult in 15 or 20 years’ time, she says; perhaps it will even be worse. A man who gives his name as Nikos, who once wanted four children but has only one, says the ailing economy has greatly raised the cost of raising a large family. Although he was educated in a state school, he now regards private education as essential. The state schools have deteriorated too much.

Having the “wrong” number of children has psychological consequences, though not always bad ones. In America 39% of people who reckon they will exceed their ideal number of children report that they are more satisfied with life as a result, whereas just 8% feel sorry for themselves (see chart 2). Indians and Pakistanis are even more cheerful about overshooting their ideal family size, as many do. (Admittedly, Indians and Pakistanis who have fewer than the ideal number of children are also pleased, suggesting they are just rather sanguine.)



In all but one of the Western countries we polled, though, undershooting is more often felt to be bad than good. In America 15% of those who have fewer than the ideal number of children think that their life is better as a result, whereas 21% say it is worse. Having no children at all is especially painful. A 34-year-old American woman, Angela Bergmann, who has been trying to get pregnant for a decade, moved to a bad neighbourhood to scrape together the money to pay for treatment. An ectopic pregnancy left her severely depressed. “It’s hugely draining on you as a couple,” says Emily Ansell, a 30-year-old university worker in Sheffield who has twice miscarried. Many couples suffer in silence: infertility still carries a stigma.

More than anything else, people blame financial pressures and the cost of housing for having fewer children than they think desirable. Greece is not the only country where economic turmoil has put people off having children. The fertility rate in America, Australia and most of Europe has dropped since 2009. In many countries the financial crisis has been especially hard on young people, delaying the independence that many think necessary for starting a family. José Luis Marin of porCausa, a journalism and research outfit in Madrid, points out that the average Spanish man now leaves home and sets up his own household at the age of 30.

Oddly, people who live in buoyant countries like China and Mexico are even more likely to cite financial pressure as the reason for their small families. In China 80% of our respondents say that two children is ideal—an admirably cussed consensus, when one considers the fierceness with which the state enforced a one-child policy until last year. Many will not manage two, says Feng Wang, a demographer at the University of California. China’s fertility rate has fallen to 1.6, which Mr Feng ascribes mostly to urbanisation, rising university attendance and the opportunity cost of having babies in a country that is quickly becoming richer. China’s economy has been like a rocket: it can be unwise to let go even for a year.

People who have more children than they think ideal usually say that their partners wanted more, that they reckoned they could afford it or simply that they love babies. Only 13% explain that they did not use birth control or that it was unavailable. And this seems to be a shrinking problem. Whereas 21% of people aged 55 or over blame their larger-than-ideal families on a lack of reliable contraception, only 6% of people under 35 do so.

In India roughly half of married women use birth control, and in much of Africa the rate is far lower. But many people who do not use contraceptives see no need for them. In some countries, such as Nepal and the Philippines, many husbands and wives live apart because one partner is working abroad. In others women of childbearing age are often trying to get pregnant, are actually pregnant or recently gave birth. The Guttmacher Institute in New York estimates that, although 85% of married women in Nigeria are not using birth control, the proportion who have an “unmet need” for it is just 16%.

“In our place they believe in many children,” explains Esther Okafur, a mother of nine who lives in Ajah, a slummy suburb of Lagos. In Nigeria’s rural districts, where children start working young, a large family means a more productive farm—“like you have a tractor on it”, says a driver from Mrs Okafur’s neighbourhood. As well as having a culture of large families, Nigeria is patriarchal and pious. Men say that babies are God’s will; women report that they have little say in the matter, at any rate.

But Nigerians are no more immune to the family-shrinking pressures of urbanisation and economic change than Europeans or Asians have been. Mrs Okafur followed her husband to Lagos two months ago to look for work. In the city her large brood is a burden. She says she would like to send her children to school but cannot afford it. Other urbanites increasingly desire smaller families, which helps explain why the ideal family size in Nigeria is two children smaller than people’s expectations. Especially in the mostly Christian south, wealthy Nigerians are marrying later, says Olayinka Akanle, a sociologist at the University of Ibadan. Bank advertisements targeting monied folk paint a picture of two-child domestic bliss.

Reliable contraception is important, and will become even more so in countries like Nigeria where couples increasingly seek smaller families. But the assumption that family planning should be all about birth control is a 1960s relic. In a growing number of countries, the problem of getting hold of contraception is giving way to the problem of getting pregnant. As Mr Feng puts it, unmet need is being replaced by unmet demand.

As our poll shows, people in wealthy countries consistently want bigger families than they get. Couples start having children late and find it increasingly difficult. A 30-year-old woman has a roughly 20% chance of getting pregnant each month, falling to about 5% by the age of 40. The resulting baby shortfall is painful for couples and alarming for governments, which worry about the long-term solvency of old-age-pension systems.



In poorer countries infertility is more often caused by infections—some of them sexually transmitted, others picked up following childbirth. It is often a social emergency, especially for wives—“You can be sent out of the house and buried in a different graveyard,” says Joe Leigh Simpson, head of the International Federation of Fertility Societies (IFFS). Gradually, though, poor-world infertility is changing from a kind of random crisis visited upon some people to a broad difficulty affecting many.

That change can be seen in the Mumbai suburb of Thane, in the Cocoon fertility clinic run by Anagha Karkhanis. Some of the patients Dr Karkhanis sees would be unfamiliar to European or American fertility specialists. Couples who have been married little more than a year visit to ask about IVF (almost invariably, they assume the problem lies with the wife rather than the husband) with a mother-in-law or another close relative in tow. Some of the women are as young as 24. Couples frequently ask whether she can help them to have a boy. Sex selection is illegal in India but common, and is usually done by aborting female fetuses.

But Dr Karkhanis also sees the kind of people who fill waiting rooms in Western fertility clinics—couples who got going on family life rather late, having devoted years to their careers, and are now finding it hard to conceive. Some are handicapped by diseases of affluence: they drink too much alcohol, smoke, or are obese. She tries to dissuade women over the age of 50 from IVF treatment, although other clinics do not. The IFFS estimates that India now has 1,000 fertility clinics—more than any other country. Good clinics are appearing in African cities too, according to Mr Simpson.

The people who fretted about an exploding population half a century ago made two mistakes. They failed to imagine that agriculture could become far more productive. They also failed to predict that birth rates would fall so sharply. That is to their discredit, but it is understandable. Almost nobody could have believed that a country like India would end up suffering a shortage of children.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21705678-our-poll-19-countries-reveals-neglected-global-scourge-number-would-be-parents-who/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

In vitro fertilisation

An arm and a leg for a fertilised egg

Doctors have spent decades trying to make IVF more effective. Now they are trying to make it cheaper

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



LOUISE BROWN was conceived in a Petri dish placed under a dome-shaped glass jar that looks a bit like an old-fashioned cake dish. She was the first baby created by in vitro fertilisation (IVF). Today’s IVF babies are made in fancy laboratories where computers monitor the temperature, sterility and a finely tuned mix of medical-grade gases. Sophisticated techniques, such as testing embryos for genetic diseases, promise hopeful parents a greater chance of a healthy baby.

But the price tag is hefty, ranging from $2,000-3,000 per cycle in India to $12,000-15,000 in America. In England the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, a government body, says the state should offer infertile couples three cycles of IVF. But tight budgets mean that over half of IVF patients pay out of pocket. In America, where insurers rarely pay for IVF, only a quarter of couples who need it to conceive actually get it, by one estimate. Globally, the figure is less than a tenth.

Can IVF be made cheaper? Experts see two ways to try. The first is to cut the use of drugs, tests or procedures that for many couples are clearly unnecessary. The second is to work out how the cost and effectiveness of simpler methods compare with those of the standard package. For a health problem that affects one in six to seven couples, solid studies on this trade-off are shockingly rare.

A clue about the scale of wasteful over-prescribing comes from new data on the use of intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), a procedure to insert sperm into the egg in cases of male infertility. In 2010 this was used in nearly 70% of IVF cycles globally, though faulty sperm affects only 40% of infertile couples. Other bells and whistles include various tests to find out what causes infertility, such as sperm analysis using expensive machines (inspection under a simple microscope is often enough). Such extras are overused partly because many doctors and patients mistakenly believe that they make a big difference.

Some cost-cutting techniques could make IVF less effective. However, in some cases the trade-off may be worth it, says David Adamson of the International Committee Monitoring Assisted Reproductive Technologies. Lower doses of pricey IVF drugs, for example, reduce the chance of conceiving a baby on each try. But the time it takes to bring home a baby is, on average, similar and the total cost lower under such a regimen, some studies suggest (you simply try the cheaper intervention more often). It also results in fewer complications from the IVF drugs and fewer multiple births. This “mild IVF” approach is increasingly popular in some countries, including Japan, France and the Netherlands.

Two IVF technologies developed in recent years do without the expensive laboratory where embryos are grown before they are placed in the uterus. INVOcell, which was licensed in America last year, is a plastic chamber the size of a champagne cork. The gametes (eggs and sperm) are placed inside and fertilisation occurs when the device is placed in the vagina for three to five days. Some clinics offer IVF with the device at half the price of conventional IVF. One small study showed that pregnancy rates are similar.

Another breakthrough is a shoe-box-sized IVF laboratory. The gametes are placed in a cheap glass tube connected to another tube, in which the carbon dioxide needed for fertilisation is produced using baking soda. So far 51 babies have been born this way in trials in Belgium, with success rates similar to those for conventional IVF. More trials are under way in England, Portugal and Ghana. In Europe this method can cut IVF costs by three-quarters, says Willem Ombelet of the Genk Institute for Fertility Technology in Belgium.

However, many couples desperate for a child will continue to remortgage their houses to pay for conventional IVF until there is enough evidence that these new offerings will give them the same chance of a baby for less money. Even if results from larger trials show that is the case, dispelling the notion that low cost means low quality will be a challenge, says Mr Adamson.

In poor countries only an approach that combines all of these cheaper methods can put IVF within reach of most infertile couples—and government health budgets. Testing low-cost IVF packages in such places is tough, however. One challenge is to persuade health ministries of the need. Infertility is hardly ever on their radar screen. The World Health Organisation had no guidelines on the matter until last year. Western IVF charities struggle to set up low-cost laboratories. A common problem is that the only local expert recruited for such efforts jumps ship to establish a private practice offering conventional IVF to the rich. Some groups are turning to training nurses instead.

Politicians speak with reverence of motherhood (not to mention apple pie), yet infertility research struggles to attract funds. One reason, ironically, is that IVF has grown so much more effective since Louise Brown was born. This has led to complacency, says Geeta Nargund, a campaigner for cheaper IVF.

The recent shift of focus from chasing success at any price to curbing costs is as welcome as it is overdue. If momentum is lost, however, most of the world’s 48m couples longing for a child have only hope on their side.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21705676-doctors-have-spent-decades-trying-make-ivf-more-effective-now-they-are-trying-make-it/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





United States




Immigration economics: Wage war

Alaskan agriculture: Growing farmers

An American mystery: Down in the valley, up on the ridge

Lexington: Clinton Republicans





Articles Sections Next

Immigration economics

Wage war

Who are the main economic losers from low-skilled immigration?

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



ILLEGAL immigration from Mexico is not quite a century old. A law of 1917 was the first to regulate the southern border. Stricter controls gradually followed all through the 20th century, often during the low points of a recurring cycle of sentiment towards immigrants. Economic booms have lured workers across the Rio Grande, encouraged by American firms. Downturns have led to demonisation of “wetbacks”. The 1930s and 1950s both saw indiscriminate mass-deportations; in 1976 President Gerald Ford wondered how best to “get rid of those six to eight million aliens who are interfering with our economic prosperity”.

The latest bout of Trumpian immigrant-bashing fits the mould in one respect: it comes on the heels of an economic downturn. But it is also strange, because the undocumented population levelled off after 2007. In 2015 there were just 188,000 apprehensions of Mexicans at the border, down from 1.6m in 2000 (see chart). This is partly because the recession reduced the magnetism of America’s labour market. But it also reflects a much more secure border—the number of border agents quintupled between 1992 and 2010—and changing demography in Mexico, where the birth rate has been falling since the early 1970s.



Nonetheless, undocumented immigrants still constitute 5% of America’s labour force. Distinguishing their impact from that of other immigrants is hard, because they are tricky to identify. Instead, researchers typically just rely on nationality. There is almost no way for low-skilled Mexicans who lack American relatives to migrate north legally. As a result, Mexicans make up about half of all illegal immigrants, but only a fifth of all legal ones.

Mexicans tend to be less educated than other immigrants. In 2014 nearly 60% had less than a high-school education, compared with less than 20% of immigrants from other countries, according to the Pew Research Centre, a think-tank. Undocumented migrants are more likely than legal ones to work in unskilled occupations like services and construction.

There is a vigorous—and sometimes ill-tempered—debate among academics about the impact of low-skilled migration, both legal and illegal, on wages. Most recently this has centred on a dispute between two economists, David Card at the University of California, Berkeley, and George Borjas, at Harvard University, over the effect of an unexpected surge in Cuban migrants to Miami in 1980 (the so-called “Mariel boatlift”). In 1990 Mr Card found this influx had no effect on the wages of low-skilled workers in Miami; Mr Borjas has now revisited the analysis, and claims that wages of high-school dropouts in fact fell substantially.

This dispute, however, is only part of a much broader debate. Most other research finds that immigrant flows harm at least some workers, as economic theory usually predicts they should when immigration changes the balance of skills in an economy. The debate is over precisely who suffers, and how much.

The findings depend on two factors. The first is how to define unskilled workers. Mr Card and others like to include both high-school graduates and dropouts. In 2014, there were 64m such workers aged between 25 and 64 in America. Mr Borjas prefers to treat high-school dropouts separately in his research, so that the lowest-skilled migrants compete with fewer existing workers: 20m, at last count.



The second factor is whether, among those with similar education, migrants and native workers are substitutes or complements for each other. In 2011 a study by Gianmarco Ottaviano and Giovanni Peri, two economists, found that immigrants seem to compete mostly with other immigrants, even when controlling for age and education. One possible explanation is that unskilled natives respond to an increase in migration by specialising in work that makes better use of their command of English. Messrs Ottaviano and Peri concluded that between 1990 and 2006 immigration had a small positive effect on the wages of unskilled American-born workers, but reduced the wages of previous generations of migrants by 6.7%.

Mr Card says the “worst-case scenario” is that immigration has cut the wages of high-school dropouts by about 5% over 20 years, which, compared with the effect of technology and other trends, is not much. Mr Borjas says larger effects are possible. But everyone agrees that the more workers and new immigrants can substitute for each other, the more likely it is that immigration will change relative wages.

If the workers most comparable to illegal Mexican immigrants are legal ones, they will be most likely to have seen their wages depressed by illegal migration. Any such effect would probably have been compounded by the fact that firms who hire undocumented workers off-the-books need not pay them the minimum wage or adhere to other regulations. One survey of low-wage workers in Chicago, Los Angeles and New York in 2008 found that 37% of undocumented workers had been paid less than the minimum wage, compared with 21% of legal migrant workers.

Illegal migrants also may find it hard to move jobs, especially in states that require employers to check their papers. Their immobility could reduce their bargaining power. It certainly seems to stunt their wage growth. In 2009 Pew found that among those who had been in the country for less than ten years, legal migrants earned 18% more than illegal ones; among those with more than a decade under their belts, the gap was fully 42%. It is possible, though, that the wages of both these groups had still been dragged down relative to those of native workers.

The flipside of low wages for illegal immigrants, though, is greater economic benefits for those who are not competing with them for work. A rare study of the effect of illegal immigrants specifically found that in Georgia, a one-percentage-point increase in undocumented workers in firms boosted wages by about 0.1%. One explanation is that such firms benefit from a richer mix of skills within their workforce. Another explanation is that they are sharing the spoils of the savings that stem from hiring workers on the black market.

Were a President Trump to deport all illegal immigrants, the economy would suffer greatly. Just ask Arizona, where a crackdown on illegal immigrants in 2007 shrank the economy by 2%, according to a private analysis by Moody’s, a ratings agency, for the Wall Street Journal. The incomes of most workers would fall. Yet strangely enough, those best placed to benefit from a mass deportation would be those who had crossed the border legally.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21705699-who-are-main-economic-losers-low-skilled-immigration-wage-war/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Alaskan agriculture

Growing farmers

Tunnel vision in the chilliest state

Aug 27th 2016 | HOMER, ALASKA | From the print edition

The tropics, when under plastic

ALASKA’S state fair, which runs until September 5th, began as a celebration among residents of the Matanuska Colony, a New Deal scheme under which 200 down-and-out midwestern farm families were moved to Alaska to see whether agriculture could gain a foothold in the coldest state. The state fair lives on, but little more than a decade after the start of the colony most of the participants had abandoned their frigid farms. The project was widely seen as a flop.

In this state, glaciers cover 300 times more acres than farms. Only 5% of the food consumed is grown locally, compared with 81% nationwide. The growing season is short and summer temperatures chilly. Tomato plants wither. Fruit trees, in most parts of the state, are just a dream.

Enter the high tunnel: a greenhouse consisting of a curved metal frame with plastic sheeting stretched across it. There is even a federal programme to pay for it. The scheme, which seeks to extend growing seasons and improve soil health, is open to farmers across the country. But it is Homer, a town of about 5,000 souls 200 miles south of Anchorage, that has become the high-tunnel capital of America, officials say. Residents have put up more than 120 federally funded greenhouses—far more per person than anywhere else.

Kyra Wagner heads the local Soil and Water Conservation District, a small-scale partner of the federal Department of Agriculture, which finances the effort. Ms Wagner has been a champion of the high-tunnel programme since it began in 2010. The structures, she explains, do not merely extend the growing season, they are “climate extenders”. “Pretty much, you’ve gone to southern California,” she says.

Only a few millimetres of plastic separate crops in the high tunnels from the great outdoors. But this is enough for Alaskan growers to produce tomatoes as well as sweetcorn, aubergines (eggplant), peaches, nectarines and kiwi fruit, and to boost production of crops by a quarter or more.

These results have brought new people to farming, sometimes accidentally. “We always liked gardening, then everything kept growing,” says Donna Rae Faulkner, owner with her husband, Don McNamara, of Oceanside Farms. Mrs Faulkner used to be a high-school biology teacher; her husband is a carpenter-turned-farmer. The couple have eight tunnels measuring 32 feet by 70 feet a few miles from Homer’s main street and grow corn, tomatoes, grapes, strawberries and leeks, among other things. They went commercial six years ago when they put up their first high tunnel. Now they harvest about 500lb (227kg) of vegetables each week.

In a place where no one blinks if you call yourself a fishermen, drill-rig roustabout, tugboat captain or gold miner, an increasing number of Alaskans are thinking of themselves as people who grow food. Since the start of the programme, the number of farms registered with the state has nearly doubled. Local restaurants have begun shaping their menus around what neighbouring farms can grow. Homer’s hospital subsidises the cost of produce boxes from nearby farms for its employees and encourages patients to buy from them.

High tunnels have sprouted on the tundra of western Alaska to Fort Yukon, a small village north of the Arctic Circle where winter temperatures dip to -40°F. And although the high-tunnel programme has not yet shifted the barometer of food independence significantly, dinner plates across Alaska are beginning to look different. Eight decades ago, the federal Matanuska Colony tried to turn farmers into Alaskans. Today, the high tunnels are turning Alaskans into farmers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21705605-tunnel-vision-chilliest-state-growing-farmers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

An American mystery

Down in the valley, up on the ridge

An Appalachian people offers a timely parable of the nuanced history of race in America

Aug 27th 2016 | VARDY, TENNESSEE AND BIG STONE GAP, VIRGINIA | From the print edition



HEAD into Sneedville from the Clinch river, turn left at the courthouse and crawl up Newman’s Ridge. Do not be distracted by the driveways meandering into the woods, the views across the Appalachians or the shadows of the birds of prey; heed the warnings locals may have issued about the steepness and the switchbacks. If the pass seems challenging, consider how inaccessible it must have been in the moonshining days before motor cars.

Halfway down, as Snake Hollow appears on your left, you reach a narrow gorge, between the ridge and Powell Mountain and hard on Tennessee’s north-eastern border. In parts sheer and wooded, it opens into an unexpected valley, where secluded pastures and fields of wild flowers hug Blackwater Creek—in which the water is not black but clear, running, like the valley, down into Virginia. This is the ancestral home of an obscure American people, the Melungeons. Some lived over the state line on Stone Mountain, in other craggy parts of western Virginia and North Carolina and in eastern Kentucky. But the ridge and this valley were their heartland.

The story of the Melungeons is at once a footnote to the history of race in America and a timely parable of it. They bear witness to the horrors and legacy of segregation, but also to the overlooked complexity of the early colonial era. They suggest a once-and-future alternative to the country’s brutally rigid model of race relations, one that, for all the improvements, persists in the often siloed lives of black and white Americans today. Half-real and half-mythical, for generations the Melungeons were avatars for their neighbours’ neuroses; latterly they have morphed into receptacles for their ideals, becoming, in effect, ambassadors for integration where once they were targets of prejudice.

The two big questions about them encapsulate their ambiguous status—on the boundaries of races and territories, and between suffering and hope, imagination and fact. Where did the Melungeons come from? And do they still exist?

Last of the Phoenicians

At a recent gathering of the Melungeon Heritage Association (MHA), in Vardy, a hamlet in the valley, and over in Big Stone Gap, Virginia, family trees and photographs of swarthy ancestors were compared. But the underlying preoccupation was the Melungeons’ origins—a subject comprised more of legend than of evidence. They are said to be the progeny of Phoenicians who fled the Roman sacking of Carthage, or of pre-Columbian Turkish explorers (making them America’s first Muslims). They descend from wayward conquistadors, from a doomed colony established on Roanoke Island by Sir Walter Raleigh, or from Moorish galley slaves abandoned there by Sir Francis Drake. They were sired by shipwrecked pirates or by Madoc, a 12th-century Welsh explorer. They are a lost tribe of Israel.

Native Americans often feature as consorts in these narratives, such as the fable in which Satan briefly cohabits with a Cherokee woman in the mountains of Tennessee. Etymology is as vexed as genealogy. The name Melungeon derives from mélange, an appellation bestowed by early French settlers on the Clinch river. Alternatively, Italian pioneers in Virginia used their word for aubergine to disparage the Melungeons’ skin colour. It comes from melas, Greek for dark or black, from the Turkish expression melun can, meaning “cursed soul”, or from melungo, a West African term for shipmate. Or from an old English word for trickery found in Spenser’s “The Faerie Queene”.

One of the most widespread beliefs is that they are offspring of Portuguese mariners who arrived in early colonial times; or, as some 19th-century Melungeons would have put it, on the rare occasions when they spoke for themselves, they were “Portyghee”. A newspaper report of 1848 said the community was established by “a society of Portuguese Adventurers”, and now lived in “a delightful Utopia” of primitive disinhibition. (The Melungeon story has mostly been told in the calumnies and hearsay of outsiders.) A sub-theory sees them as exiled conversos, Iberian Jews who hid their faith to escape the Inquisition before fleeing to the New World.

For much of American history, of course, Mediterranean lineage was a valuable asset to anyone with an olive complexion, often, in this case, combined with aquiline features and sometimes blue eyes: it meant the people in question were not black. In a trial of the late 1840s, for example, a group of Melungeons were accused of illegal voting, a right withdrawn from free blacks in Tennessee in 1834. Their lawyer maintained they were Portuguese, reportedly introducing as evidence their feet, which—supposedly unlike negroes’—“were as delicate and nice as a lady’s”. He is said to have invited the prosecutor to remove his own shoes for a comparison. The prosecutor declined; the defendants were acquitted. In a case in 1872 involving marriage and inheritance rights, a lawyer convinced Tennessee’s Supreme Court that the Melungeons were “pure-blooded Carthagenians, as much so as was Hannibal and the Moor of Venice”. Such judgments and affidavits were invaluable precedents, like imprimaturs for forged works of art.

Robert Davis, a Mediterranean-hued attendee at the MHA meeting, recalls his mother receiving an anonymous note, in the 1920s, informing her that blacks weren’t welcome at her church. Race was fodder for private vendettas as well as official discrimination. Before the civil war, “free people of colour”, as many Melungeons were described in the census of 1830, were threatened by re-enslavement and repatriation (several later got themselves reclassified as white). In the Jim Crow era such designations determined which schools their children attended. After the passage of Virginia’s “one drop” law in 1924, whereby anyone with a trace of blackness was classified accordingly, Walter Plecker, the monstrous registrar of the Bureau of Vital Statistics, singled the Melungeons out for persecution. To American eugenicists like him, such liminal groups were degeneration incarnate.

Among the Portyghee

No wonder that, today, the children of segregation-era Melungeons report a familial anxiety about going dark in the sun. But, in a narrow respect, Plecker may have been right—at least according to one purported solution to the origin mystery. In 2012 a DNA study disclosed that those Melungeons who took part descended largely from African men and white European women. That corresponds with research by Tim Hashaw, a Texan author who has traced the line to a cargo of Africans delivered to Jamestown in 1619—a year before the arrival of the Mayflower. Coincidentally or otherwise, the itinerary of those souls echoes some Melungeon myths: they were captured by Portuguese raiders in Angola, then poached by English pirates.

Daughter of Appalachia

Some were indentured servants, not lifelong vassals: chattel slavery had yet to be codified. At liberty, some such early arrivals married white serving-women.

As Mr Hashaw says, accounts of this period in which blacks appear only as slaves are “not the real story”: there were free black people in the colonies from the beginning. This episode also dispels another simplification, in which mixed-race relationships were publicly tolerated only recently. In truth, attitudes were more open in the mid-17th century than they were for most of the 20th. And, while feelings are hard to discern across centuries, unlike the innumerable master-slave rapes that followed, these intermarriages seem to have been voluntary.

Before long, alas, sentiments and laws sharpened, until interracial couples risked fearsome punishments. Still, the Melungeons offer an insight into a lost but documented history in which America’s race relations were less hierarchal than they shortly became.



Today, among former denizens of the ridge and valley, several explanations are given for their ancestors’ decision to settle there. A wagon wheel fell off en route to the Mulberry Gap; a child on a wagon trail died, and the grief-stricken parents refused to budge. But the most plausible is that noxious treatment forced them out of Virginia and the Carolinas and, around the end of the 18th century, into what became Hancock County, Tennessee. As their legal predicament deteriorated there, too, this remote nook, on the edge of the state’s jurisdiction, was a good place to lie low. Now, as then, it is as isolated as it is beautiful, featuring lonely farmsteads, some weather-beaten barns and a few clapboard churches.

Isolated, beautiful—and poor. Hancock County remains one of Tennessee’s poorest and among the nation’s. Some of its residents resorted to the usual shifts of penury, moonshining and the like. Those exigencies, combined with a reputation for bushwhacking during the civil war—and, above all, the enduring queasiness about miscegenation—turned the Melungeons, in their neighbours’ imaginings, into renegades and bogeymen. As a sensationalist report of 1891 put it, they were “a synonym for all that is doubtful and mysterious”.

Naturally, nobody wanted to be one. Wayne Winkler, an author of Melungeon descent, says his grandparents’ generation wouldn’t utter the word, which, to them, connoted shiftlessness and dishonesty as much as racial instability. Clarke Collins, who grew up in Vardy in the 1930s, says he never encountered the term until 1948. Returning from college and asking his mother about it, he was told never to say it again.

Then, beginning in the late 1960s, in the wake of the civil-rights movement, its valency changed. First, Hancock County staged “Walk Towards the Sunset”, an outdoor drama about the Melungeons that ran for six seasons. In the 1990s, as the internet ignited a genealogy craze, a new consciousness blossomed. Activists sought to reclaim the Melungeons’ identity from vilification; an influential book cast them as victims of “an untold story of ethnic cleansing”. Amid the enthusiasm Abraham Lincoln and Elvis Presley were outed as crypto-Melungeons.

Events since exemplify the web’s power both to bring people together and to drive them apart. Disagreement over the Melungeons’ provenance turned rancorous after the DNA study of 2012. Stalwarts of the MHA, an ecumenical outfit with the motto “One People, All Colours”, had always been aware of the family tree’s black branches. But, perhaps inevitably after centuries of denial, a few avowed Melungeons were less sanguine about the findings. Some were keen to corroborate a Native American component; some coveted Jewish or Muslim connections, while others repudiated them. People wanted to vindicate family lore, or simply to be proved right. The Portuguese and Turkish hypotheses were noisily championed. A fledgling community was riven by in-fighting.

In fact, a surprising number of the rival theories are, if not plausible, at least not impossible. Those DNA tests have proved no more unifying than has the internet: other samples have yielded Native American, Middle Eastern, North African and South Asian strands. Part of the trouble is that by the time the Americas were colonised, the European gene pool had already been augmented by invasions, expeditions and enslavements. Stir in the improvisational nature of marriages on the colonial frontier, plus the patchiness and misrepresentations of old records, and refuting all but the wildest fantasies becomes tricky.

Ketchable, not fetchable

A key sticking point concerns who should be tested: where the Melungeons have ended up is almost as contentious as where they came from. The ridge, the valley and their environs, runs one answer: “We that descend from [their former residents] are Melungeons,” says Mr Davis. Others consider surnames more important. Today’s Melungeons, they think, bear the ones that recur in the valley’s cemeteries, in which lizards dart among the Collins, Mullins, Gibson and Goins gravestones, beside a road dissolving into dirt on its way into Virginia.

Then again, a hard-core “ridge only” faction repudiates the valley-dwellers. Still others reasonably note that, especially during the exodus of Appalachians after the first world war, many Melungeons moved away. Racism, and the chance to “pass” for white elsewhere, gave them an added impetus. A Presbyterian missionary school provided some with the means to escape, education’s bittersweet one-two of opportunity and deracination.

Gallingly, there is little by way of culture to distinguish them—except, perhaps, their mini-pantheon of folk heroes. One is Vardemon Collins, variously recorded as Cherokee and Portyghee, who married “Spanish Peggy” and moved to the valley. He allegedly set himself up by selling into slavery a pal who, as planned, promptly escaped. Later came Mahala (“Big Haley”) Collins Mullins, moonshiner and mother of 20, whose house burned down when Confederates came to kill her sons. She grew so fat that, when a deputy tried to arrest her, she couldn’t be pried from her cabin: “She’s ketchable,” he reported, “but she ain’t fetchable.” The cabin has since been moved from the ridge to the valley; DruAnna Overbay, of the Vardy Community Historical Society, indicates its arched windows, with their hint of Moorish style, as a distinctive Melungeon touch.

In general, though, the ways of the people known as Melungeons were similar to their Appalachian compatriots’. They practised the same crafts and the same Christian faith, relying on the same ingenuity and hardiness. Their experiences overlap, too, with other mixed-race groups in the south-east, such as the Red Bones of Louisiana or the Brass Ankles of South Carolina. “There is no distinct ethnic identity or cultural heritage,” concludes Melissa Schrift of East Tennessee State University. Physical markers—cranial bumps, sixth fingers—are more rumour than reality.

Eternal peace among the hills

Given this cultural elision, the inconclusive DNA and physical dispersal, firm membership criteria are elusive. Hence a final, telling twist in the Melungeon saga. As Mr Winkler says, in the days when they formed a semi-coherent group, no one claimed or accepted the label for themselves. But that cohort, and the injustice they faced, are mostly gone. That sort of loss often sets off a belated urge to know more about the passing generation. In this case, the void also represents an opening. Because, now, a claim to Melungeon extraction is difficult to deny.

And, despite the online ructions, in recent years some Americans have laid such claims. Whereas formerly “Melungeon” was a slur to be renounced, it has become an allegiance to be embraced. Once the Melungeons were a barometer of discrimination, their situation shifting with the law’s caprices, the forebearance of strangers and their own canniness, chutzpah and skin tone. Now they are emblematic of a 21st-century urge to belong. “Some people think a mystery is something that has to be destroyed,” says Paul Johnson, the MHA’s registrar. “Other people think it’s something that has to be preserved.”

The fabric of America

Those who feel this way share some characteristics. Most (though not all) are fair-skinned. Several report suspicious silences about their families’ pasts, plus a childhood sense of not quite fitting in. Sometimes there are foreign names among their forebears. And, very often, they had never heard of the Melungeons until middle age.

Nan Tuckett, for instance, was raised amid whispers of Cherokee blood; a strand of her family had dark skin and hair and roots in Virginia. As an adult she both converted to Judaism and discovered an affinity with the Melungeons. “They’re such an open loving people,” she explains at the MHA event. “I want to be able to go into any group of people and feel like I belong”. Kathy Lyday, a board member of the MHA, believes she has Indian blood on both sides of her family; on her mother’s there were dusky folk with Hispanic names such as Alfonso and Carlos. She came to the Melungeons through her academic work (she teaches American literature); initially she wanted to establish a link, but now is simply intrigued. “We’re all mixed race to some degree, if you grow up in this part of the world”, Ms Lyday reasons.

It is easy to be sceptical of such a discretionary association. As Ms Schrift says, it bestows on those who choose it an ethnic loyalty at once exotic and, these days, stigma-free. It dissociates them from white America’s past sins, replacing that guilty legacy with the afterglow of trials overcome, plus a mantle of victimhood that may properly belong to others. In one interpretation, such feel-good ethnic tourism threatens, as Ms Schrift puts it, to render the term Melungeon “so elastic that it really has no meaning at all.” To join the Melungeons, she says, is to acquire “a skeleton key to identity”.

On the other hand, there may be a deeper honesty, and a kind of idealism, in this voluntary embrace of a mixed-ethnic background—a make-up common to millions of Americans, but which many remain reluctant to acknowledge. And there is something optimistic and timely about the vision of race that the Melungeons imply. These days, on university campuses and beyond, the old, humanistic faith that everyone is the same at heart has been ousted by an essentialist idea of black- and whiteness, which sees the experiences of each as distinct, even mutually incomprehensible. The grievances that underpin this attitude are often legitimate, but the result is that race in America can sometimes seem like a prison. The notion of racial categories as fluid and optional, even invented, is a refreshing counterpoint to this ossifying sense of unbridgeable difference.

Scott Withrow, the MHA’s hospitable president, says he, too, never heard of the Melungeons as a child, discovering them only as an adult. He has traced an 18th-century North Carolinian ancestor named Collins, one of the core Melungeon surnames, who may have been related to the Collinses of Hancock County, though incomplete records mean Mr Withrow can’t be sure. He hasn’t done a DNA test—though what, really, would it prove? His tolerant organisation does not require a pedigree: “We don’t get into who’s more Melungeon than others.” The Melungeons, he says, inarguably, “are part of the fabric of Appalachia. The fabric of America.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21705639-story-appalachian-people-offers-timely-parable-nuanced-history-race/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

Clinton Republicans

Donald Trump is driving professional women away from the Republican Party

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



HILLARY CLINTON’S campaign has a new TV ad suggesting that Donald Trump’s ego is too large and his head too hot to entrust him with nuclear codes. The ad—which ends with the whistle of a falling bomb, roaring jet engines and a doomy sounding narrator intoning: “Because all it takes is one wrong move”—is built around clips of Mr Trump himself, boasting that he knows more about Islamic State than “the generals” and inviting opponents to “go fuck themselves” (with the expletive bleeped out). By way of serene contrast, the ad shows Mrs Clinton reading briefing books in what looks like a night-time White House.

This invites comparisons with “Daisy”, an attack ad from 1964 implying that a vote for Barry Goldwater, that year’s hardline Republican nominee, was a vote for nuclear war. “Daisy” (so called after its opening images of a child picking the flowers) quoted the sitting president, Lyndon Johnson, paraphrasing W.H. Auden’s line: “We must love one another, or die,” as atomic blasts filled the screen. In this less poetic age, Mrs Clinton’s spot offers a recording of Mr Trump vowing to “bomb the shit” out of foes.

Mr Trump’s snarling, chin-jutting approach to national security is one reason why he is currently losing a voting bloc—white college graduates—won by every Republican presidential candidate since 1952. Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster, reports that many graduates are “extremely concerned” about someone of Mr Trump’s temperament and inexperience becoming commander-in-chief. Among an important sub-group, college-educated women, Ms Lake finds extra angst about Mr Trump’s record as a bullying misogynist, and about what his rise might “legitimise in the workplace”. White women college-graduates (who overlap with suburban women, a much-wooed pool of swing voters) had a brief, narrow flirtation with Barack Obama in 2008; but some recent surveys have Mrs Clinton crushing Mr Trump among them by staggering margins of 57% to 38%, or more.

William Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, has calculated that—if those trends hold—this would translate into a 4m net gain at the general election for Mrs Clinton. According to Mr Frey’s number-crunching, such a score among white women with college degrees would be enough to offset even a (highly improbable) 99% turnout rate among Mr Trump’s most ardent supporters, white working-class men.

The Clinton campaign has noticed. Its strategists crafted the new ad with such groups as “national-security moms” and suburban independents in mind. A companion advertisement, entitled “Role Models”, shows wide-eyed children catching news clips of Mr Trump calling Mexicans rapists, mocking a disabled reporter or suggesting that a woman journalist’s judgment is addled by menstruation. The founder of Republican Women for Hillary, a group for women fleeing Mr Trump, was given a speaking slot at the Democratic National Convention.

Despite all this, most white college-educated men still favour Mr Trump, though his lead with them is smaller than the Republican norm. To understand the shift among well-educated women, Lexington headed this week to Chesterfield County, Virginia, a leafy, mostly conservative suburb of Richmond. There he met seven members of the Women’s Business Council of the Chesterfield Chamber of Commerce, most of whom call themselves lifelong Republicans. Only one is sure to vote for Mr Trump, and that will be a vote “for the party”. Some are considering the Libertarian candidate, Gary Johnson. Three are steeling themselves to vote Clinton (maybe “with a big glass of wine”). Erica Giovanni Baez, a divorce lawyer, has “huge concerns” about the Democratic nominee’s probity, citing alleged access-peddling at the Clinton Foundation, a charity founded by ex-president Bill, while Mrs Clinton was Secretary of State. But she worries more about Trump-induced global chaos. For her, “the prime issue is safety”.

Polls show a big gender gap when Americans are asked if they want an outsider-president, with men much likelier to take a “screw the experts” line. For Chesterfield’s professional women, qualifications are a form of battle-armour as they navigate the world of work. Woman must be “ten times more qualified” than men to land a promotion, argues Anne Moss Rogers, co-owner of a marketing firm. She thinks the country would never tolerate a woman candidate for president as inexperienced as Mr Trump.

All the little Trumps

In suburbs like Chesterfield County, not a few Trump-loathing women share homes with men who like the tycoon. That makes it important to avoid stigmatising Trump voters as bigots, says Candace Graham, a retired teacher volunteering at the Chesterfield County Democratic Committee. She thinks it clever when the Clinton campaign uses Mr Trump’s own words against him.

Lots of educated whites will doubtless return to the Republican Party if Mr Trump loses—or will do as long as defeat in November empowers the sort of leader they like, such as Paul Ryan, Speaker of the House of Representatives. But there are reasons to think that educated women, in particular, may shift camp more durably, prompting talk of “Clinton Republicans” starting to offset the left’s loss of blue-collar “Reagan Democrats” in the 1980s.

For one thing, all graduates are, on average, more likely to see big social and economic changes as an opportunity, not a threat, making them less receptive to Trump-style nativism. Women in general—especially unmarried women and the young—lean Democratic, and college-educated women are an increasingly young group. Back in the late 1960s, just one in 12 adult women had a college degree. Today one-third do, and indeed women now outnumber men on college campuses. Meanwhile the 2012 election marked the first time that whites with a high-school education or less were not a plurality of eligible voters. If Mr Trump had set out to alienate the future America, he could hardly be doing better.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21705698-donald-trump-driving-professional-women-away-republican-party-clinton/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Colombia’s peace accord: Unlearning war

Chile’s pensions: The perils of not saving





Articles Sections Next

Colombia’s peace accord

Unlearning war

A chance to become a normal country

Aug 27th 2016 | TORIBÍO | From the print edition



GNARLED beams and splinters of wood are all that remain of many houses in Toribío, a town high in the Andes that saw some of the worst of the violence in Colombia’s war against the FARC, a left-wing guerrilla army. On one dwelling’s surviving wall graffiti in bold yellow letters reads: “I hate your war.” Over its 52 years, perhaps 220,000 Colombians died and 7m were displaced.

Now Latin America’s longest-running military conflict is over. On August 24th negotiators representing Colombia’s government and the FARC announced that they had reached a final agreement after four years of talks in Havana. Although violence subsided in recent years, especially after the FARC declared a unilateral ceasefire in 2015, the war’s formal end will allow Colombia at last to become a normal country, and to focus its attention on improving the lives of its 48m citizens. “Today marks the beginning of the end of the suffering, the pain and the tragedy of war,” said Colombia’s president, Juan Manuel Santos.

Now he will ask congress to convoke a plebiscite on October 2nd to seek voters’ approval. Meanwhile, the FARC will hold their tenth, and presumably last, congress as an armed group before transforming themselves into a non-violent political party. Mr Santos, and the FARC’s top commander, Rodrigo Londoño-Echeverry (known as “Timochenko”), will sign the agreement, probably towards the end of September. Even before the plebiscite, the FARC’s 6,500 troops and 8,500 militia will gather in 23 designated zones and begin handing their weapons to UN observers.

Some of the six points covered by the pact gave negotiators little trouble. They agreed years ago on programmes to foster development in rural regions, where poverty is rife and infrastructure is inadequate. The accord widens opportunities for small political movements, such as the FARC, to participate in elections. The FARC has committed itself to dismantling drug-trafficking operations, which channelled billions of dollars to the insurgents over the past 30 years, and to discouraging the cultivation of coca, the raw material for cocaine.

Far trickier was the question of how to bring to justice FARC fighters and pro-government forces who had committed crimes during the war. Under the agreement, the FARC is to help make reparations to victims of its crimes, which included kidnapping, mortar attacks on towns and villages and mass expulsions. It establishes a system of “transitional justice”, under which FARC fighters who confess will be sentenced to up to eight years of “restricted” movement and community service, but not to jail. The same penalties apply to Colombian soldiers and civilians who admit to having committed atrocities.

These stay-out-of-jail provisions are the most contentious parts of the peace agreement and may yet cause it to founder. Many Colombians are enraged that the FARC do not face harsher punishment. Their cause is being championed by Álvaro Uribe, a former president whose government waged all-out war against the FARC from 2002 to 2010. He is leading a campaign against the accord. He wants it to require jail time for insurgents who committed war crimes and to bar them from holding public office. A “No” vote in the plebiscite would be a “political mandate to renegotiate the deal”, says Carlos Holmes Trujillo, a leader of Mr Uribe’s Centro Democrático party.

He is mistaken. The FARC were weakened but not defeated by Mr Uribe’s offensive. They would not have signed an agreement that would have put their leaders behind bars. If the accord is defeated in the plebiscite, the FARC will return to their jungle and mountain camps, says César Gaviria, another former president, who is campaigning for “Yes”. “It’s hard to imagine that the FARC are going to go off to have picnics.” Opinion polls suggest the vote will be close. The most recent shows a dead heat between “Yes” and “No”, and a third of voters planning to abstain.

Not conflicted about peace

For residents of Toribío and towns nearby, there is little disagreement about how to vote. “It’s the people in Bogotá who say No because they don’t know what this war has been like,” says Javier Escobar, a businessman and farmer in Corinto, another town in Cauca province. They have never seen a tatuco, a homemade rocket often used by the guerrillas, he says. War did sometimes erupt in the capital, as in 2003, when a car bomb at a fashionable club killed 36 people. But in Toribío violence was an everyday event. Firefights between government forces and guerrillas could break out at any time. In July 2011 the FARC detonated a bus bomb that killed three people, wounded more than 100 and destroyed the police station and dozens of houses. The station was rebuilt, but the houses were not. “For the longest time you couldn’t sell a single brick in this town,” says Alcibiades Escué, the mayor.

Already, Toribío is enjoying the blessings of peace. The government stopped bombing rebel camps after the FARC declared its ceasefire. Homeowners have started razing ruins in order to rebuild, helped by government subsidies. Children who were told to run home after school now gather in Toribío’s shady square to do homework and share ice creams.

A “No” vote is not the only threat to peace. Colombia’s smaller guerrilla group, the ELN, says it wants to settle its conflict with the government but has shown no signs of being serious about it. It continues to kidnap civilians and bomb oil pipelines. Farmers in Cauca say the ELN is already taking over areas that the FARC are preparing to abandon, along with the marijuana and coca crops that grow there. Criminal gangs that grew out of right-wing paramilitary groups are another menace.

Another fear is that the government will renege on its promises to invest in infrastructure, health and education. A congressional committee estimates that the government will have to spend $31 billion on these and other peace-related projects, including reintegrating FARC fighters into society. The drop in the price of oil has slashed government revenues. Mr Santos plans to raise taxes, but not until after the plebiscite is safely over. The day when grumbles about tax drown out the screams of war will be a good one for Colombia.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21705851-chance-become-normal-country-unlearning-war/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Chile’s pensions

The perils of not saving

A pioneering system, now in need of reform

Aug 27th 2016 | SANTIAGO | From the print edition

I’d like someone else to pay my pension

PALLBEARERS bearing coffins scrawled with the legend “No+AFP” joined tens of thousands of Chileans in Santiago on August 21st to protest against the country’s privatised pension system. Organisers—a mix of unions, pensioners’ associations and consumer-advocacy groups—say that a million demonstrated nationwide (perhaps an exaggeration). Pensions are too small, the marchers complain. After “years of abuse…the people have finally woken up,” says Ernesto Medina Aguayo of Aquí La Gente, a pressure group.

The scheme they revile, launched by the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet 35 years ago, was a model for other developing countries such as Peru and Colombia. Rather than saddle the government with an unaffordable pay-as-you-go system, in which today’s taxpayers support today’s pensioners even as the population ages, Chile created one in which workers save for their own retirement by paying 10% of their earnings into individual accounts. These are managed by private administrators (AFPs).

In some ways, the system worked. Contributions to the AFPs flowed into capital markets, which boosted growth. Annual GDP growth from 1981 to 2001 was 0.5 percentage points higher than it would have been without the investment, according to one study. This helped lift millions of people out of poverty.

Alas, benefits have not measured up to people’s unrealistic expectations. The scheme’s founders told workers that if they contributed continuously throughout their careers they would receive a generous 70% of their final salaries upon retirement. And indeed, men who chipped in for 30 years or more earned an average pension of 77% of their final salary. But most workers contributed far less. Women took time off to raise children (and retire earlier than men). Many Chileans spent time in informal jobs or unemployed. On average, they contribute for only 40% of their prime working years.

For most people the 10% contribution rate, just half the average in the OECD, a club of mainly rich countries, is too low. As a result, the typical benefit, including a supplement paid to poor people, is 45% of a pensioner’s final salary, well below the OECD average of 61%. Women are worst off. They take home pensions worth 31% of their final salaries, compared with 60% for men. In 2008 the government decided to reward mothers for each child they raised by topping up their pensions, but that does not fully compensate for the shortfall.

Chileans with other grievances have latched onto the pensioners’ cause. Some decry the system’s dictatorial origins. Sceptics of capitalism grumble that the scheme has enriched dodgy fund managers. Two former owners of AFP Cuprum are being investigated on charges that they made irregular campaign contributions to dozens of right-wing politicians. The system has generated high returns for pensioners, averaging 8.6% a year between 1981 and 2013. But the AFPs’ high fees have bitten a huge chunk out of those returns, reducing them to 3-5.4%.

The complaints thus have some merit. The AFPs and the government failed to stress enough that the normal contribution level, interrupted by spells of non-employment, would not purchase pensions that meet the 70% target; just 0.2% of workers top up their contributions. Competition among the AFPs was desultory, allowing them to keep commissions high. Several reduced them after a reform in 2010, in which the AFP offering the lowest commission is awarded all the new contributors.

Some marchers want Chile’s president, Michelle Bachelet, to replace the private pension scheme with a state-funded pay-as-you-go system offering defined benefits. Many experts favour a less drastic reform. Several countries that adopted the Chilean model have moved to a mixed system, in which the state supplements but does not replace private funds, notes Nicholas Barr of the London School of Economics.

Chile is already moving in this direction. A tax-funded scheme introduced in 2008 for Chileans with relatively low incomes, 60% of the population, will pay out more than half the country’s pension bill by 2030, says David Bravo, who led a government commission on pensions last year. On August 9th Ms Bachelet proposed further reforms, including a 5% contribution to be levied on employers, which will go toward topping up the lowest pensions. A new state-owned AFP will provide more competition to private ones. Hidden charges will be eliminated. Rather than bury Pinochet’s pension scheme, Ms Bachelet may give it a second lease of life.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21705850-pioneering-system-now-need-reform-perils-not-saving/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Kashmir: Vale of tears

Communists in the Philippines: Rebels in their dotage

Karachi: Slammer dunk

Leafy Singapore…: Move over, Merlion

…and sooty South Korea: Bad air days

Learning English in Japan: Talk like a gaijin





Articles Sections Next

Kashmir

Vale of tears

The fierce repression of protests is only stoking Kashmiris’ resentment

Aug 27th 2016 | SRINAGAR | From the print edition



OWAIS GULAB has not left home for seven weeks. The college where he studies computing is closed, as are all but a few local shops. His phone, like others across the Kashmir Valley that use a pre-paid SIM card, cannot make calls. The hostel his family runs stands empty. It overlooks Dal Lake, whose hundreds of pleasure craft, normally packed with summer tourists, sit idle.

It is not just curfews, strikes and clashes between police and protesters that make Mr Gulab feel trapped. He fears leaving the valley, he says, because in other parts of India police routinely harass young Kashmiris. Musing over tea on the 46th afternoon of his confinement, what perturbs Mr Gulab is that he too now thinks in terms of “us” and “them”. “Someone my age with a 21st-century outlook should not be saying ‘those Indians’ and ‘their army’, but then you look at the headlines,” he says, pointing to a local newspaper that lists those killed in the latest round of violence.

There are now 68 names on that list. The number of injured approaches 10,000, some 460 of them wounded in the eyes by pellets from the shotguns the police use to quell riots. Most are young men, shot during the repeated confrontations with security forces that have broken out since the funeral, on July 9th, of Burhan Wani, an Islamist guerrilla from the south of the valley who had become a hero for young Kashmiris resentful of India’s seven-decade-long rule.

In the months before Indian troops killed Mr Wani, Kashmiris had warned of rising anger. The predominantly Muslim, Kashmiri-speaking people of the valley have long felt reluctant citizens of a huge, predominantly Hindu country that has repeatedly broken promises of special treatment. Neighbouring Pakistan, which claims natural title to Kashmir, has exploited this discomfort. Its dispatch of armed jihadists in the 1990s and 2000s, ostensibly to aid their co-religionists, prompted a massive and brutal, albeit successful, Indian counter-insurgency. That fighting left some 40,000 dead, by Indian estimates. It transformed the valley into an armed camp; perhaps half a million Indian troops still dwell among its 6m-7m residents.



The unrest, which briefly erupted again in 2008 and 2010, undermined the tourism-dependent economy of what had been one of India’s richest states, with massive floods in 2014 adding to the misery. Indian general elections that year brought the Hindu-nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party into power, leaving Kashmiris further estranged. Local elections that followed in Jammu and Kashmir, a state that joins the valley to adjacent regions with very different ethnic and religious make-up, then made things worse: the new state government was a slim, ungainly coalition between the BJP and the valley-based People’s Democratic Party. In the valley itself, many had heeded the calls of separatist leaders to boycott the polls.

In Delhi none of this seemed to matter. When trouble erupted in July the knee-jerk response was to blame Pakistan and to clamp down hard on the protests. India’s finance minister, Arun Jaitley, described stone-throwing as “a new form of attack by Pakistan on India’s unity and integrity”. The state’s chief minister, Mehbooba Mufti, herself a Kashmiri, insisted that a mere 5% of Kashmir’s people backed the protests. In an address on India’s independence day, August 15th, the prime minister, Narendra Modi, avoided mention of Kashmir and instead lashed out at Pakistan, accusing it of human-rights violations in its own restive region of Balochistan.

Mountain prayer

In recent days, however, alarm has grown in Delhi. With senior army officers, India’s supreme court and opposition leaders all suggesting that security measures alone cannot solve the problem, Mr Modi broke his silence on August 22nd, expressing “deep concern and pain” at the loss of life. In a meeting with Kashmiri politicians he stressed the need for all parties to work together towards a “lasting solution to the problem within the framework of the constitution”. Mr Modi also sent his home minister, Rajnath Singh, to Srinagar for talks with local leaders.

Calming tempers, let alone finding a more lasting settlement, will not be easy. True, casualty rates have fallen in recent weeks and security forces have loosened strictures on movement and communications. Yet even as India’s government sends in politicians for talks, it has also sent in more troops. Some of them have taken over schools as barracks, despite a vow by the state’s education minister to reopen them for classes.

And while Mr Modi’s call for dialogue may be sincere, there remain the crucial questions of whom to talk to, and about what. Over the years, complains a human-rights worker in Srinagar, Indian governments have undermined the credibility of every local politician who has tried to work with them. The latest unrest has made things worse: the valley’s mainstream parties are torn between appeasing burning rage in the streets and upholding law and order, as Delhi sees it. As for parties that demand Kashmir’s separation from India, who far better represent the current mood, Mr Modi’s government has so far refused to engage with them: their leaders are under house arrest.

What is more, Kashmir’s decades of turmoil have left its society bitterly divided. A painstaking opinion poll published in 2010 by Chatham House, a British think-tank, revealed very low support in the valley for armed militancy, for joining Pakistan or for remaining a part of India. Instead, between 75% and 95% of respondents favoured Kashmiri independence. Gratifying such urges seems impossible, given the bounds of India’s constitution, the crushing rivalry between India and Pakistan and the disarray of Kashmir’s own politics. “The situation won’t get better,” concludes a weary plainclothes police officer in Srinagar. “The government doesn’t know what it is doing, and the separatists don’t know what they are doing.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21705823-fierce-repression-protests-only-stoking-kashmiris-resentment-vale-tears/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Communists in the Philippines

Rebels in their dotage

A 30-year-old peace process resumes

Aug 27th 2016 | MANILA | From the print edition

A long way from the Netherlands

WHEN negotiators sat down together in Oslo this week in an effort to end the Philippines’ 47-year-old communist insurgency, they expressed the hope that a peace deal could be wrapped up within a year. That is optimistic: the two sides have been talking on-and-off for 30 years, without success. Their jerky progress towards the negotiating table in recent weeks is an ominous portent.

The Philippines’ new president, Rodrigo Duterte, had promised to resume talks during his election campaign, and declared a unilateral ceasefire within a month of his inauguration in late June. But the communists failed to reciprocate immediately. Instead, communist guerrillas ambushed some government militiamen in the southern Philippines, killing one and wounding four. Mr Duterte promptly called off the truce, just before the communists declared their own ceasefire, which was subsequently rescinded. It was only after the government released some insurgents, and the communists reciprocated, that the two sides reinstated the ceasefires, allowing the talks to go ahead.

The man the government regards as the leader of the communists is Jose Maria Sison. Mr Sison founded the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) in 1968, and later an armed wing called the New People’s Army (NPA), with the aim of overthrowing Ferdinand Marcos, the president of the day. The insurgency blazed when Mr Marcos imposed martial law on his way to becoming a kleptocratic dictator. The NPA boasted of its thousands of armed guerrillas. The Philippines looked as if it might become the next South-East Asian domino to fall to communism—until Mr Sison was captured and imprisoned.

When Mr Marcos was overthrown in 1986, the new government freed Mr Sison. But he spurned the government’s peace overtures and sought refuge in the Netherlands, where he still lives. He is now 77 years old, and the most prominent communist at the talks.

Mr Sison’s revolution has become a hopeless cause, thanks both to the restoration of democracy and infighting within the communists’ ranks. But the NPA remains a deadly nuisance, especially in rural areas on the southern island of Mindanao. It extorts money from businesses, typically setting fire to equipment belonging to construction companies or blowing up base stations belonging to mobile-phone networks that refuse to pay its revolutionary “taxes”. But its guerrillas failed to mount a single big operation last year, and their number had dwindled to fewer than 4,000 by the end of the year, according to the army. They tend to avoid combat, so outbreaks of fighting are rare and brief.

Previous efforts at making peace have been thwarted by the insurgents’ insistence on the release of detainees they regard as political prisoners but the government considers common criminals. Among the 20 prisoners the government freed to allow the latest talks to proceed were a married couple, 65-year-old Benito Tiamzon, the suspected chairman of the CPP, and 63-year-old Wilma Tiamzon, the suspected secretary-general. Both were released on bail despite facing multiple charges of murder, attempted murder and kidnapping. They immediately went to Oslo to join the communist negotiating team.

The communists will press for the release and pardon of more such figures. But the government will be sceptical that the ageing negotiators, long separated from their fighters by exile or prison bars, still have the authority to order a permanent end to nearly half a century of conflict.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21705824-30-year-old-peace-process-resumes-rebels-their-dotage/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Karachi

Slammer dunk

The new mayor is a jailbird. His city is a battleground

Aug 27th 2016 | KARACHI | From the print edition



FOR decades the fleshy features of Altaf Hussain have glowered over Karachi. The leader of the mighty Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM) may have fled to London 25 years ago, but his image remains plastered on the streets of the city he controls. But it is becoming harder to find the posters and party flags that once fluttered from every streetlight. Mr Hussain has gradually been losing sway over Pakistan’s largest city to the Rangers, a notionally civilian security force under the control of the army.

In 2013 the government ordered the Rangers to rid Karachi of Islamist militants and criminal gangs. Last year they turned their attention to the MQM, a party successive governments have accused of deep involvement in Karachi’s criminal economy. Although it is ostensibly a relatively liberal and staunchly anti-Islamist political outfit, the authorities claim it runs a shadow organisation of extortionists and kidnappers. As evidence of the party’s unsavoury side, the Rangers point to weapons they discovered when they raided its “Nine Zero” headquarters last year.

The MQM, in turn, accuses the Rangers of kidnapping and killing dozens of blameless political activists. Last month saw the arrest of Waseem Akhtar, a leading MQM politician accused of numerous crimes, including instigating riots in 2007 which killed more than 40 people. This week the city council, which the MQM controls, elected Mr Akhtar as Karachi’s new mayor. He may serve his entire term from a cell.

Mr Hussain himself has been questioned in connection with British investigations into money-laundering and the killing in London in 2010 of Imran Farooq, a disgruntled MQM leader. The Pakistani authorities are incensed by Mr Hussain’s speeches, which are delivered by telephone from Edgware, a dowdy London suburb, and played on loudspeakers to crowds of MQM supporters. Last year he called for Pakistan’s arch-enemy, India, to come to the aid of downtrodden Karachi-ites. That led the courts to ban media coverage of Mr Hussain’s outbursts.

This week Mr Hussain was at it again, with a speech in which he railed against television stations that had denied him coverage. One person was killed and several were injured when angry supporters ransacked the offices of two media companies. In response, the Rangers arrested senior MQM officials and shut Nine Zero. The police lodged a treason case against Mr Hussain, who had described Pakistan as a “cancer” in his speech. The interior minister complained to the British government about the conduct of Mr Hussain, who became a British citizen after fleeing an earlier crackdown on the MQM.

Mr Hussain issued a fulsome apology and said he had been under “immense mental stress”. It was not enough to avoid an unprecedented rebuke from Farooq Sattar, the MQM’s leader in Pakistan. All future decisions will be taken by the party’s leadership in Pakistan, he said, not from London. Mr Hussain appears to be acquiescing to this demotion: he has issued a statement promising to hand over “complete power”.

Sceptics say Mr Hussain will never willingly relinquish his grip. He stepped aside once before, in 1992, only to re-assert himself a few months later. But a comeback will be harder this time. The battering the Rangers have given the party’s heavies has greatly diminished his clout. His regular demands for citywide strikes used to turn Karachi into a ghost town. Shops now stay open, for the most part.

Yet the MQM’s local leadership will not want to cut all ties to Mr Hussain. He is the most charismatic figure in a party increasingly challenged by rivals, including the splinter Pakistan Sarzameen Party, which was set up by a former MQM mayor in March with, many believe, the support of the security services.

The MQM draws its support from the mohajir community—Urdu-speaking Muslims who fled India in 1947 and their descendants. They have remained a dependable vote block despite the many hair-raising claims made about the party, in part because they fear they will lose out to the city’s other ethnic groups, not least the fast-growing Pushtun community. For many mohajirs, the Rangers’ crackdown has only made Mr Hussain more popular. “Altaf is like the head of a family who has been fighting for us for 30 years,” says Mujahid Rasool, a 50-year-old shopkeeper. “Even when the eldest son starts taking more responsibilities, it doesn’t mean he is the family’s guardian.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21705835-new-mayor-jailbird-his-city-battleground-slammer-dunk/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Leafy Singapore…

Move over, Merlion

The return of long-absent otters is a sign of the city’s greening

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Otterly entrancing

WHEN Australia’s prime minister came to visit Singapore last year, his local counterpart took him to visit not the Merlion, a statue of a mythical creature adopted decades ago as a national mascot, but the Bishan Ten—a photogenic family of otters that have become something of a national obsession. In early August Singaporeans chose the Bishan Ten as the official emblem of their country’s 51st year. A state media firm has produced a documentary on the family, narrated by Sir David Attenborough. And the city-state has just hosted the 13th International Otter Congress.

Otters had disappeared from Singapore by the 1970s, as rubbish, farm waste and sewage clogged its few short rivers. But in 1977 Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore’s independence leader, ordained a clean-up, as part of his vision to turn Singapore into a “garden city”. “The river went from black to clear in less than a decade,” says Sivasothi, also known as Otterman, a lecturer at the National University of Singapore.

As the rivers grew cleaner, fish populations returned. By 1998, the first otter families began to return to Singapore. Most stuck to the island’s less developed north coast, along the border with Malaysia. It was not until 2014, when the Bishan Ten colonised a park near the city centre, that the otters really began to loom in the public consciousness.

Groups sprang up on social media to trade sightings and suggest good otter-spotting locations. Singaporeans gasped collectively on the day the otters were separated from one of their pups, Toby, and sighed with relief when they were reunited, with Mr Sivasothi’s help. They tutted and chuckled when the otters were accused of scoffing $60,000 of designer carp.

The return of otters to the city is proof of the success of Singapore’s efforts to green itself. Although it is the world’s second-most densely populated country (after Monaco), the government has set aside approximately 8% of its 719 square kilometres (277 square miles) for parks and other green space. It has promised that 85% of Singaporeans will live within 400 metres of a park by 2030. An area of rooftops equivalent to roughly 100 football pitches has been planted, with more on the way. The city-state is becoming what Mr Lee, who died last year, always thought it otter be.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21705834-return-long-absent-otters-sign-citys-greening-move-over-merlion/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

…and sooty South Korea

Bad air days

Policymakers are beginning to address an asphyxiating problem

Aug 27th 2016 | SEOUL | From the print edition



AFTER the sun sets, Seoulites can glance at the illuminated N Seoul Tower atop one of the peaks surrounding the city to check the quality of the air they are inhaling. The tower has a palette of four colours: if blue or green, go for that jog. But if it glows yellow or red, beware not only of high levels of coarse soot, but also unhealthy concentrations of fine dust that can cause grave damage to the lungs.

South Korea began publishing nationwide readings on PM2.5, as the dust is known, only last year. It stood at 27 micrograms per cubic metre on average—half the level in nearby China, but over two-and-a-half times higher than the World Health Organisation’s recommended limit, and well above the levels in other rich Asian countries. Seoul is far sootier than Tokyo (see chart). And these readings may be optimistic: an adviser says the government regularly discards high readings as “anomalies”. South Korea ranks 173rd out of 180 countries in an index of air quality from Yale University (China came in next-to-last). Its problems with pollution are likely to grow: the OECD, a group mostly of rich countries, projects that on the current trajectory the number of premature deaths each year due to dirty air will triple by 2060 to 1,100 for every million inhabitants.

Most South Koreans shrug all this off as an inevitable consequence of being so near to China, says Ha Seung-soo of the Green Party, set up in 2012. The government estimates that 30-50% of PM2.5 drifts into the country from China, and possibly more during the dry, windless winters, when a blanket of smog tends to settle over Seoul. But activists complain that the government has used Chinese pollution as an excuse to tolerate the home-grown sort. It is building 20 new coal-fired power plants, at a time when most rich countries are cutting back on coal. A fine of 26m won ($24,000) levied on five plants that exceeded emission limits in 2013 was “ridiculously low”, says Greenpeace, a pressure group.

There are signs that South Koreans are becoming less tolerant of this approach. “Dust Out”, an online forum set up in May, already has over 13,000 members. In a survey conducted in June by Realmeter, a local pollster, three-quarters of respondents said they were unhappy with current fine-dust policies.

The government’s response has been muddled. In 2014 it decided to regulate barbecue joints and bathhouses that use charcoal as worrying sources of pollution; this year it gave warning that fumes from home-grilled mackerel, a popular local dish, were harmful to health. But it is reluctant to raise taxes on diesel, the source of almost a third of Seoul’s PM2.5. From next year, at least, Seoul will ban certain old diesel vehicles from its roads unless they are fitted with filters. Drivers who scrap such cars will also be given subsidies for new ones. And there are subsidies for new filters for the barbecue joints too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21705852-policymakers-are-beginning-address-asphyxiating-problem-bad-air-days/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Learning English in Japan

Talk like a gaijin

The government hopes to boost the economy with English lessons

Aug 27th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition

Got it?

ITS buses and trains arrive on the dot. Its engineers are famously precise. But when it comes to English, Japan is uncharacteristically sloppy. Signs are often misspelled. Taxi drivers point at phrasebooks to communicate with foreigners. Shops that take an English name to be trendy often get it horribly wrong: witness “Poopdick”, a second-hand cosmetics outlet.

English-speakers are much less common in Japan than in most rich, globalised countries. In 2015 Japan’s average score in the TOEFL, a popular test of proficiency for non-native speakers, was 71 out of 120, lower than in all East Asian countries except Laos and Cambodia. Companies seeking English-speakers tend to look for people who studied or grew up abroad, on the assumption that locally schooled candidates will not cut the mustard.

The government wants to change this. Earlier this month it announced plans to overhaul the teaching of English. Children may soon start learning the language two years earlier, when they are eight instead of ten. Lessons will emphasise communication over reading, writing and grammar.

All this, it is hoped, will help Japan play a bigger role in a world where English is the lingua franca. “We need English to understand other cultures and explain ourselves to them,” says Hideyuki Takashima of Tokyo University of Foreign Studies. And, particularly important to the government of Shinzo Abe, English is needed to boost the economy. Japanese companies, which are increasingly expanding abroad as the local population shrinks and ages, need English to prosper outside, and to attract talented workers to Japan.

Some businesses have taken matters into their own hands. Sony has long insisted that workers be able to explain the workings of its products in English. Six years ago Hiroshi Mikitani, the Harvard-educated boss of Rakuten, an e-commerce giant with operations in 30 countries, decreed that English should become the firm’s main language; it no longer conducts any meetings in Japanese. Rakuten provides tuition in English for all its staff. Honda, a carmaker, said last year that by 2020 it too will make the linguistic shift.

Tweaks to the education system alone will not be enough; cultural barriers abound. Many Japanese don’t see the need to use English because they rarely travel abroad and work in jobs that don’t require it. American films and music are not as widespread as in Europe, Africa or the Middle East. Traditionalists, eager to maintain the purity of Japanese culture, would be happy for things to stay that way.

Kensaku Yoshida, a professor at Sophia University in Tokyo, reckons the biggest obstacle is a lack of confidence. Many Japanese are so embarrassed by the inevitable mistakes that a non-native speaker makes that they prefer not to try at all. Many also struggle with English sounds: their language does not differentiate between “l” and “r”, for instance. The many English words used in Japanese are often so changed as to be unrecognisable to a native speaker: aidoru (idol), Makudonarudo (McDonalds), bareboru (volleyball). “We need to accept that we don’t have to talk like native speakers,” says Mr Yoshida. “We just have to communicate.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21705853-government-hopes-boost-economy-english-lessons-talk-gaijin/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Sexual abuse of children: A horror confronted

Banyan: A spot of localist bother





Articles Sections Next

Sexual abuse of children

A horror confronted

China has millions of sexually abused children. It is beginning to acknowledge their suffering

Aug 27th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



HUANG YANLAI was 74 when he first raped 11-year-old Xiao Yu. He threatened her with a bamboo-harvesting knife while she was out gathering snails in the fields for her grandmother in Nan village, Guangxi province, in China’s south-west. Over the following two years, Xiao Yu (a nickname meaning Light Rain) was raped more than 50 times, her hands tied and a cloth stuffed in her mouth. She was a left-behind child, entrusted to relatives while her parents worked in distant cities. Her father returned home once a year. Told that his daughter was in trouble, he asked her what was wrong but she was too frightened to tell him. So he beat her up.

Her abusers bribed her to keep quiet, giving her about 10 yuan (about $1.50) each time they raped her, threatening that “if this gets out, it will be you who loses face, not us.” They were right. When Xiao Yu finally confided to her grandmother and went to the police, the villagers called her a prostitute and drove her out of town.

Xiao Yu’s story came to national attention after it was reported by state media. At the end of May it formed part of a study released by the Girls’ Protection Foundation, a charity in Beijing founded to increase awareness of child sexual abuse, a crime officials preferred not to discuss openly until recently. The study said there had been 968 cases of sexual abuse of children reported in the media between 2013 and 2015, involving 1,790 victims. Wang Dawei of the People’s Public Security University said that, for every case that was reported, at least seven were not. That would imply China had 12,000 victims of child sexual abuse during that period. “I have never seen this many child sexual-assault cases, ever,” ran one online reaction. “Why is it such things were hardly heard of five years ago,” asked another, “and now seem all over the media?”

China is no exception

The answer is that social attitudes are changing; it is no longer taboo to discuss the problem. In 2015 Fang Xiangming of China Agricultural University, in a report for the World Health Organisation (WHO), estimated, using local studies, that 9.5% of Chinese girls and 8% of boys had suffered some form of sexual abuse by adults, ranging from unwanted contact to rape. For boys the rate is as high as the global norm, for girls it is slightly less so. Because of the country’s size, however, the absolute numbers are staggering. Perhaps 25m people under 18 are victims of abuse.

Chinese pride themselves on the protectiveness of their families. That children suffer even an average level of abuse is a surprise to many. But, as everywhere, children hide their experience. In 2014 Lijia Zhang, a journalist, wrote a first-hand account in the New York Times of sexual abuse at her school in the city of Nanjing in the 1970s. She said it never occurred to her and other victims to report the teacher. “We didn’t even know the term sexual abuse.” Even in Hong Kong, where sex is more openly discussed, a study of university students found that 60% of male victims and 68% of female ones surveyed since 2002 had not told anyone about their abuse. These rates of non-disclosure are considerably higher than in the West. Mr Fang, the author of the study for the WHO, says that if Chinese girls were more open, then the true rate of female sexual abuse might turn out to be as high as elsewhere, just as it is for boys.

In any country, child sexual abuse is hard to measure. China has never conducted a nationwide survey, though it is talking about holding one in the next couple of years. There are many provincial or citywide studies. But as in other countries, researchers use different measures and standards. And there are no studies of abuse over time, so it is hard to detect trends. Even so, there are reasons to believe that children are at growing risk.

First, China has huge numbers of “left-behind” children, like Xiao Yu. According to the All-China Women’s Federation, an official body, and UNICEF, the UN agency for children, 61m people below the age of 17 have been left in rural areas while one or both parents migrate for work. Over 30m boys and girls, some as young as four, live in state boarding schools in villages, far from parents and often away from grandparents or guardians. (A growing number of rural children whose parents are still at home have to board, because of the closure of many small schools in the countryside as village populations shrink.) Another 36m children have migrated with their families to cities, but their parents are often too busy to look after them properly.

Time for new thinking

About 10m left-behind children see their parents only once a year and otherwise rely on the occasional phone call. “Every time my mother called, she would tell me to study hard and listen to my teachers,” said one victim of sexual assault by a mathematics teacher at a school in You county, in the central province of Hunan. “I could not bring myself to tell her over the phone what was happening.”

How much abuse is inflicted on left-behind children is not known. Researchers complain that schools with large numbers of them often refuse to allow sexual-abuse surveys. But given their vulnerability, left-behind children are likely to be victims of such abuse more frequently—possibly much more so—than average.

Another risk factor is a mixture of ignorance, shame and legal uncertainty that makes it very difficult for children to defend themselves. Fei Yunxia works for the Girls’ Protection Foundation, the NGO that released the recent study of abuse cases. She travels to schools, giving sex-education classes. “No one tells these students about their bodies or how to protect themselves from harm,” she told Xinhua, a government news agency. Sex education in China is rare and never touches on abuse. The NGO says that 40% of 4,700 secondary-school pupils polled in 2015, when asked what was meant by their “private parts”, said they did not know. When cases are reported to the authorities, little is done, either because of legal loopholes, or because officials refuse to recognise the problem, or because they cover up for colleagues.

It does not help that China’s statute of limitations is only two years. Wang Yi of Renmin University says this is too short for cases involving child sexual abuse: victims often remain silent for years. There is no national register of sex offenders, though Cixi, a city in Zhejiang province, aroused controversy in June when it said it would publish “personal information” about major sex criminals after their release to let the public monitor them (some commentators worried about an invasion of privacy).

The lack of well-developed sex-crime laws means victims are often failed by the justice system. In Liaoning province eight school girls aged between 12 and 17 were kidnapped, stripped, beaten, and forced to watch and wait their turn while men who had paid $270 per visit raped them repeatedly in hotel rooms. The men were charged with having “sex with under-aged prostitutes”, a charge that shamed the victims into silence. The law that allowed child-rape victims to be classified as prostitutes was scrapped in 2015. But a women’s legal-counselling centre in Beijing, which had led a campaign against it, was itself closed earlier this year as part of a crackdown on civil society launched by China’s president, Xi Jinping. No wonder that, as a lawyer in the You county case put it, “silence is the preferred solution.”

A shift in moral assumptions about sex presents another challenge. China is in the middle of a sexual revolution. Sex before marriage is more common. The age of first sexual experience is dropping. Most researchers into child abuse think there may be a link between such changes and sexual violence against children, if only because the revolution in mores seems to go hand in hand with changes to the traditional child-rearing system that, through intense surveillance, may limit abuse.

Ye Haiyan, challenging abuse

When a country confronts the problem of child abuse it typically goes through three stages, argues David Finkelhor of the University of New Hampshire. First the public and media become alert to the problem. This is happening. With the help of social media, and thanks to a greater willingness to speak out on social matters, campaigners have begun to organise. Ye Haiyan (pictured), known online as “Hooligan Sparrow”, helped arouse public awareness with her protests in 2013 against the rape of six girls aged between 11 and 14 by their school principal. In the next stage the government becomes concerned and starts to tighten laws. Then the police, social workers and public prosecutors begin to deal with problems on the ground. China is moving into this third stage.

Make them safer

Since early this decade, prosecutors and police have been spelling out how cases of abuse should be handled, from the collection of evidence to support for victims and procedures for separating a child from his or her parents. At the end of 2015 China adopted its first domestic-violence law. It says that preventing this is the “joint responsibility of the state, society and every family”. All this, says Ron Pouwels, UNICEF’s head of child protection in China, means that “China gets it and is determined to do something about it.”

But much more work is needed. For example, there are very few social workers. The government has set a target of 250,000 properly qualified ones by the end of 2020. But only 30,000 take up such jobs each year. Crucially, Mr Xi needs to reverse his campaign against civil society and his efforts to stifle media debate. Further improving public awareness of the problem will need the help of NGOs and a freer press (free, for example, to point out that abusers are often people in authority—Ms Ye, the activist, was harassed by officials for trying to do so). Over the past 30 years, China has enhanced the life prospects of millions of children by providing them with better education and health care. Now it is time to protect them from sexual violence, too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21705848-china-has-millions-sexually-abused-children-it-beginning-acknowledge-their-suffering/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

A spot of localist bother

How Hong Kong sees itself has changed profoundly, in just a couple of years

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



OFFICIALS in Hong Kong say they want to cover up the royal insignia on the cast-iron letterboxes from the territory’s colonial era. A small thing, you might think, and let’s not get mawkish about British rule. But it would be a telling move. Anson Chan, the city’s most respected figure, calls the boxes “part of our collective memory”. And many young people to whom Banyan has spoken since recently moving to Hong Kong echo what Mrs Chan calls an “insidious chipping away at our values and our lifestyle” by China’s rulers and those who do their bidding. The issue is a central one in elections for the Legislative Council (Legco) that will be held on September 4th.

Its prominence was guaranteed after the electoral commission insisted that all candidates “confirm” that Hong Kong is an “inalienable” part of China. Some refused, or the commission did not believe their declaration. They are part of a growing “localist” movement seeking to preserve Hong Kong’s autonomy and a culture distinct from China’s. On August 5th over 2,000 people gathered in support of the disqualified candidates. It was, in effect, Hong Kong’s first ever pro-independence rally.

A profound change of mood has overtaken the territory in the past couple of years. The guarantees made when an open society passed to a Communist dictatorship in 1997 are no longer so widely believed. Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, the Basic Law, held that the city’s way of life was to remain unchanged until at least 2047. The champion of “one country, two systems”, Deng Xiaoping, who died just months before the handover, had said there was no reason why it should not hold for a century. As head of the civil service before and (for nearly four years) after the handover, Mrs Chan was an embodiment of the guarantees.

But under “C.Y.” Leung Chun-ying, a property man with strong ties to the mainland who has led Hong Kong since 2012, it is no longer clear what is being done in the territory’s best interests. True, Mr Leung has taken steps to see that elderly people are better provided for; they have long been shamefully neglected, as those who can often be seen eking a bent-backed living collecting scrap cardboard can attest. But Mr Leung’s mission is essentially a political one: to help China keep Hong Kong’s sense of the territory’s distinctiveness in check. From the moment when he made his inaugural speech in Mandarin rather than Cantonese, the local language, the direction of travel under a man assumed to be a closet member of the Communist Party has been clear.

This has created increasingly stark choices for Hong Kong, as was evident during the “Occupy” or “Umbrella” movement two years ago. It grew in response to China’s legislature handing down long-awaited rules for the election in 2017 of Hong Kong’s next leader. Universal suffrage had been promised in the Basic Law. But China insisted on being able to vet the candidates through an “election committee” dominated by the party’s sympathisers in Hong Kong, who could be counted on to exclude popular democrats (such as Mrs Chan). A semi-democratic Legco rejected the package. Student-led protests erupted, blocking streets in busy commercial areas for over two months.

Mr Leung faced down the protesters. Since then a hard line has crept into Hong Kong’s affairs, undermining the old guarantees. Last year the University of Hong Kong’s recommendation of a legal scholar, Johannes Chan, as its deputy vice-chancellor was vetoed by a governing council packed with outside members appointed by Mr Leung. It looked like punishment for Mr Chan’s support for pro-democracy movements. Since then, academics say a chill of self-censorship has descended on campuses.

Perceptions of other much-admired institutions are also changing for the worse. One such body is the Independent Commission Against Corruption. It is accountable only to the chief executive, which is why the sudden transfer and resignation in July of a highly regarded official running an investigation into Mr Leung’s business dealings has led to turmoil and dismay within the commission. Across the civil service, morale is ebbing.

Dogmatism is creeping in, too. The education department recently issued a ban on independence even being discussed in schools. The most notorious incident occurred late last year with the disappearance of five men involved with a Hong Kong bookshop specialising in salacious material about China’s leaders. One of the men seems to have been bundled out of Hong Kong by Chinese state-security goons. Even Britain, which under David Cameron was fixated on commercial gain in China and downplayed anxieties in Hong Kong, was moved to protest. It took a while longer for Mr Leung to go through the motions.

Mainland officials harrumph that in Hong Kong there has been way too little “decolonisation” and too much “desinification”. A hard line and “patriotic” education are their remedy for a spoiled and ungrateful populace. But can’t they see? That is why people are talking about independence in the first place.

For some young people, 2047, when all bets are off, seems not such a long way away. “Prepare for the worst, hope for the best,” says Joshua Wong Chi-fung, a 19-year-old who was one of the Occupy leaders and wants self-determination. Two years ago he was seen as radical. Now a small but growing share of the young sees peaceful disobedience as quaint.

A brief history of lamp-posts and revolutions

So, yes, the letterboxes are small stuff. But small things these days can blow up. Take the riot that was sparked when officials tried to close down unlicensed hawkers selling snacks during the Chinese new-year holiday in February. The “fishball revolution” was condemned by China as the work of splittists and black hands. Meanwhile on Lugard Road on the Peak, a famous sightseeing route named after a British governor, they have not yet started dismantling the wonderful old lamp-posts. But someone has written on every one: C.Y. (Leung), step down.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21705857-how-hong-kong-sees-itself-has-changed-profoundly-just-couple-years-spot-localist/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




The war in Syria: Smoke and chaos

The Brotherhood returns: The ballot and the Book

Religion in Zimbabwe: Tithing troubles

The Central African Republic: Nostalgia for a nightmare

Mining in the Democratic Republic of Congo: The richest, riskiest tin mine on Earth





Articles Sections Next

The war in Syria

Smoke and chaos

The battlefield in Syria grows more complicated

Aug 27th 2016 | CAIRO AND ISTANBUL | From the print edition



AS IF the war in Syria did not have enough combatants, yet another country has entered the fray. On August 24th Turkey sent tanks, warplanes and special forces soldiers over the border, driving Islamic State (IS) out of Jarabulus, an important supply node for the jihadists.

Turkey’s mission has the backing of America, which is leading an anti-IS coalition. But it is already raising concerns inside Syria, where a five-year-old civil war has killed perhaps 500,000 people. Lately the fighting has become more chaotic. Alliances are shifting and peace, already a dim prospect, now seems even further off.

The situation in Hasakah, in the north-east, is indicative of the changing landscape. Until recently, the Syrian army of Bashar al-Assad, the country’s blood-soaked president, had mostly steered clear of Kurdish militias—and, at times, seemed to work with them—in order to confront Sunni Arab rebels. The Kurds, for their part, have focused their fire on IS and tried to consolidate their self-declared semi-autonomous region, called Rojava, in the north. But in Hasakah the government and the Kurds recently came to blows.

That fighting appears tied to warmer relations between Russia and Iran (which have long backed Mr Assad) and Turkey (which has not). Tension between Russia and Turkey reached a peak in November 2015 when Turkish F-16s shot down a Russian jet that had violated Turkish airspace. But a recent detente between the two, coupled with Turkish concerns over Kurdish power and IS terrorism (a suicide-bombing killed 54 people at a wedding in Turkey), have changed the dynamic. Binali Yildirim, Turkey’s prime minister, now says that Mr Assad might play a “transitional” role in Syria (rather than being forced out as soon as possible).

In turn, the Syrian government has expressed unease with Kurdish aspirations to carve out land. The Syrian army echoes Turkish statements linking the main Kurdish party in Syria, known as the Democratic Union Party (PYD), with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which has waged a long guerrilla war against Turkey. Little is now made of the Syrian government’s role in fostering the PKK. But the Syrian foreign ministry has also condemned Turkey’s operation as a breach of its sovereignty. Russia said it was “deeply concerned”.

America has tried to stick to the narrow mission of defeating IS. But it risks being drawn into the wider conflict. Air strikes by Syrian planes around Hasakah on August 18th came close to American soldiers supporting Kurds in their fight against IS. America sent in its own jets, which arrived as the Syrian bombers were leaving. Now it is patrolling the skies over the city, where a ceasefire is in place. “The Syrian regime would be well advised not to do things that place [anti-IS coalition forces] at risk,” said Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman.

America’s support for the Kurds in Syria has strained its relationship with Turkey. Unfounded Turkish suspicions that America was involved in a coup attempt have increased the distrust. “Turkey has determined that America is not in a position to guarantee its interests [in Syria],” says Emile Hokayem of the International Institute for Strategic Studies, a think-tank. New evidence came earlier this month, when the town of Manbij, an important hub for IS, was liberated. America had assured Turkey that Arab fighters would lead the way into the city, but the PYD forces were in the vanguard. Now the Kurds refuse to leave.

A bridge too far

The jihadists retreated north and west, towards Jarabulus and al-Bab. Now the Kurds have set their sights on al-Bab, which would allow them to link up the eastern and western portions of Rojava (see map). But some had also hoped to capture Jarabulus, where the Turks now appear intent on installing thousands of non-Kurdish Syrian rebels. Many Kurds think the Turkish mission is really aimed at blocking them from gaining a contiguous piece of territory along the Syrian frontier.



There is a risk that the Turkish offensive will meet Kurdish resistance, pitting an American ally against an American proxy, with American fighter jets providing air cover. Turkey’s minister of foreign affairs, Mevlut Cavusoglu, has warned the Kurds to return east of the Euphrates river. “America gave its word they would do so,” he said. “Otherwise we as Turkey will do what is needed.” At a press conference in Ankara America’s vice-president, Joe Biden, warned that the PYD risked losing American support if it did not move back.

They aren’t going quietly. “Turkey has much to lose in the Syrian swamp,” said Saleh Moslem, a co-leader of the PYD, on Twitter. The Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces says it is “prepared to defend the country against any plans for a direct or indirect occupation”.

Turkey’s machinations have also led to fears in Aleppo, where earlier this month rebels broke a government siege. Some of them now worry that Turkey, in deference to Mr Assad’s foreign backers, will cut its support. “We need these supply routes [to Turkey] to stay open. Otherwise things will get even worse for civilians in the city,” says a local activist. Fierce fighting has left much of eastern Aleppo cut off from food, water and medicine. Efforts to reach a ceasefire deal have come to nought. Stephen O’Brien, the top aid official at the UN, has called the crisis the “apex of horror”.

Such suffering, and a new UN report that documents Mr Assad’s continued use of chemical weapons (as well as a mustard gas attack by IS) after he had promised to export and destroy them, have some hoping America will intervene more forcefully to protect civilians and punish the regime. But that might benefit rebel outfits such as Jabhat Fatah al-Sham, which only recently shed its affiliation with al-Qaeda (and changed its name from Nusra Front) in order to appear more moderate. “America risks becoming the air force of jihadist groups,” says Thanassis Cambanis of the Century Foundation, a think-tank.

Russia, meanwhile, is establishing a more durable presence in the region, by making its air base in Latakia permanent and working closely with Iran. The Middle East has become “the platform for Russia’s ambitions as a 21st-century great power”, says Dmitri Trenin, the director of the Carnegie Moscow Centre, a think-tank. But it risks getting bogged down in Syria’s intractable and expanding war. Permanence, in that case, may not be desirable.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21705658-battlefield-syria-grows-more-complicated-smoke-and-chaos/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Brotherhood returns

The ballot and the Book

On both sides of the Jordan river Islamists are tiptoeing back to elections

Aug 27th 2016 | AMMAN AND RAMALLAH | From the print edition

“WHOOPS!” seems to be all aghast officials can say. On either side of the River Jordan, the Hashemite kingdom and the Palestinian Authority have called elections expecting easy wins. Instead, to their surprise, the local arms of the Muslim Brotherhood, an Islamist group, have ended their boycotts of the ballot and are now the front-runners. The king’s men in Jordan anticipate that the Islamic Action Front (IAF), the brothers’ political arm in Jordan, will emerge from the general elections on September 20th as the largest single party. In adjacent Palestine, ministers speculate that Hamas, the Brotherhood’s Palestinian offshoot, might sweep all eight of the West Bank’s cities in municipal elections set for October 8th.

This would mark a turn for democratic Islamism, which had seemed on the verge of oblivion in the Arab world after the Brotherhood’s Muhammad Morsi was overthrown as president of Egypt in 2013. Hounded into hiding and despairing of electoral politics, Sunni Islamists across the region abandoned the ballot box for bullets and boats to Europe. King Abdullah of Jordan declared the Brotherhood “a Masonic cult” and banned it (although he eschewed the mass arrests that have taken place in Egypt). Now, both the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, and King Abdullah will have to engage with the Islamists again. “We’re not Cairo,” proffers a Jordanian official.

After preaching revolution and gaining little from it, many Islamists crave the legitimacy that elections offer. They are unlikely to regain the close relationship with power they enjoyed under King Abdullah’s father, Hussein, when he ruled both sides of the Jordan. But in both Jordan and the West Bank mayhem and infighting in the ranks of the ruling parties have bolstered the brothers’ chances.

By contrast, the IAF’s headquarters is a hive of strategists and statisticians calculating campaigns and polls. It is fielding candidates in 15 of Jordan’s 23 electoral districts. Its nearest rivals struggle to muster a handful. “Only the Brotherhood has the social support, the political platform and the cross-country organisation to get out the vote,” says Curtis Ryan, an American political scientist.

Pragmatism is also helping their cause. In both Jordan and the West Bank the authorities sought to stack the ballot against the Islamists by reserving a disproportionate number of seats for groups such as Christians, Circassians and women. But the Islamists have outwitted them by reaching out to minorities. Five Christians are on the IAF’s list and Hamas, for the most part, has sidestepped the usual bombast about “resistance” and cast itself as a technocratic alternative to Mr Abbas’s corrupt and sclerotic faction, Fatah. They have also wooed Christian candidates. “The Brotherhood is going to taste the sweetness of being not just Islamist leaders but national leaders,” says Leith Shubeilat, a veteran Islamist and scourge of the Jordanian royal family.

The king and IAF

The elections may be a barometer of popular sentiment, but they will have little real impact. In Jordan gerrymandering ensures that East Bank Bedouin get the lion’s share of seats. At best, says an IAF candidate, the Islamists will gain 25% of the seats. Moreover, King Abdullah prefers to rule through his security agencies and has clawed back most of the power parliament and the government once had. When legislators prove troublesome, he dissolves parliament and rules by decree.

In the West Bank Mr Abbas also rules by decree, having suspended parliament a decade ago and overrun his own mandate by seven years. Municipal elections have been a rare exception to this democratic deficit. Electoral billboards plaster the roadsides and, despite Hamas’s participation, Mr Abbas insists the vote will go ahead. But his police have jailed dozens of Islamist campaigners and he may yet look to Israel’s army, which occupies the West Bank, to annul the ballot for him. After Hamas won legislative elections in 2006 Israel jailed most of its parliamentarians to give Fatah a majority. Foreign donors, too, may influence the outcome, should they again withhold funding for municipalities run by Hamas. “They believe elections should only be a means to Fatah’s victory,” says Salah al-Bardawil, a Hamas official.

Yet there may be some benefits to getting the Islamists into parliament. A growing number of young Jordanians are idling towards violent opposition: in less than a year jihadists acting in the name of Islamic State have struck the security forces three times. And despite vast dollops of aid, Jordan’s economy is sliding into insolvency. Public debt has climbed from 82% of GDP in 2014 to 94% and the king will find it easier to sell painful cuts if backed by a government with broad representation.

Indeed, much needs to be done to rebuild public trust in state institutions. Turnout at elections is often low and many take to the streets instead to voice their frustrations. “What’s the point of a parliament which is not a parliament?” is a common refrain in Jordan. Better to keep the Islamists pliant within.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21705838-both-sides-jordan-river-islamists-are-tiptoeing-back-elections/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Religion in Zimbabwe

Tithing troubles

Even the most popular preachers of prosperity are facing tougher times

Aug 27th 2016 | HARARE | From the print edition



THE booming voice of Apostle Rodney Chipoyera, the pastor of the Kingdom Prosperity Ministries, fills a decrepit cinema-turned-church in Harare, Zimbabwe’s capital. Yes, times are tough, he tells his congregants, who sit in broken chairs wearing their Sunday best. The country may be bust, but if you stop tithing—giving a full tenth of your income to his church—you will be cursed. “You tithe, He blesses,” proclaims Mr Chipoyera. “You keep the tithe, the curse is initiated.” The congregation responds in ardent agreement: “I refuse to rob God in tithes and offerings!”

Strutting across the stage, Mr Chipoyera is at pains to defend his shiny car and fashionable clothes. Nobody wants their pastor to look poor, he declares with a laugh. “I represent God,” he says. “I dress well to show who I represent…I don’t want to be one of those pastors on a bicycle.”

On Sunday mornings Harare booms with the sound of preaching. White-robed apostolic sects worship in fields and by the roadside; wealthier folk attend gleaming megachurches. Pastors starting from scratch find space in schools and even nightclubs. Traditional denominations have lost members to Pentecostal and apostolic groups, many of them promising prosperity to those who truly believe—and open their wallets to prove it. American dollars are preferred, but mobile money is acceptable too.

Some of the more enterprising priests sell miracles. Blessed ballpoint pens help you pass exams. Miracle bricks will help you acquire your own home. Local newspapers carry regular reports of miracles. “Churches—the only business in Zimbabwe that’s growing,” scoffs a journalist.

But even the prosperity churches have suffered setbacks recently. As the economy melts down, donations have dwindled. One church has been accused of seizing property and equipment from members who have failed to pay their tithes. The government, ever ravenous for cash, has started to tax some church proceeds. Bishop Rodger Jeffrey, who founded a church in a poor Harare suburb eight years ago, says he used to get about $2,000 a month from his congregation. Nowadays donations have halved. “We must encourage them to be entrepreneurs,” he says. To help things along, an upcoming church conference will include lessons on starting a business. “No one wants to be poor,” says Bishop Jeffrey. “Poverty is the devil.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21705839-even-most-popular-preachers-prosperity-are-facing-tougher-times-tithing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Central African Republic

Nostalgia for a nightmare

He fed his opponents to crocodiles. Yet people miss Emperor Bokassa

Aug 27th 2016 | BANGUI | From the print edition

What’s on the menu later?

HE CALLED himself the Emperor of Central Africa. Others dubbed him the Butcher of Bangui. Jean-Bédel Bokassa seized power in a coup on December 31st, 1965 and ruled what is now the Central African Republic (CAR) until he was ousted by French soldiers in 1979.

In his early years in office he was corrupt, brutal and chummy with France. (President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing often came to slaughter elephants in one of his wildlife reserves.) With time, however, Bokassa’s behaviour grew even worse. He fed his enemies to lions and crocodiles. He ordered all schoolchildren to buy new uniforms made by his family firm, rounded up those who protested and massacred at least 100 of them—reportedly joining in the beatings himself. After the French lost patience and overthrew him, the dismembered remains of a maths teacher were found in his fridge. His successor accused him of cannibalism. He always denied it, though at a state banquet he once told a French diplomat: “You never noticed, but you ate human flesh.”

Bokassa died in 1996. Strangely, he is now enjoying a surge of posthumous popularity in his homeland. Last month a group of admirers recovered and restored what is left of the bejewelled throne on which he crowned himself emperor, Napoleon-style, in 1977 (see picture). The gems and gold-plated eagle that once adorned it are gone. But the frame has been repainted bright yellow and was displayed beside one of the busiest roads in Bangui, the capital, for a few days until the authorities removed it.

“We want this throne to be exhibited and looked after in a museum honouring Jean-Bédel Bokassa,” says Héritier Doneng, a leader of Patriotes Centrafricains, a group that aims to “defend the country’s cultural values” in part by praising the late emperor, whom it credits with building a university and schools.

A tentative rehabilitation of Bokassa has, in fact, been under way for some time. Although he was twice sentenced to death, he served just seven years in prison and was freed in 1993. In 2010 the then-president, François Bozizé, formally rehabilitated him, awarding him the state’s grandest medal of honour. Bokassa had “given a great deal for humanity”, said Mr Bozizé who, like Bokassa, had grabbed power in a coup and later lost it the same way.

Nostalgia for tyrants is not unusual—witness the cults of Stalin and Mao. In the CAR, a rosy view of the 1970s thrives partly because most people have no memory of that decade (the median age is 20). Also, the present is so nasty that many think the past must have been better. The country has been at war more or less constantly since 2004. Perhaps 20% of its people have fled their homes.

A fragile peace allowed the inauguration this year of President Faustin-Archange Touadéra, who promises peace, unity and development. As his interior minister, he has appointed Jean-Serge Bokassa, the son of you know who.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21705837-he-fed-his-opponents-crocodiles-yet-people-miss-emperor-bokassa-nostalgia/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Mining in the Democratic Republic of Congo

The richest, riskiest tin mine on Earth

Can an ambitious mine make a difference in eastern Congo?

Aug 27th 2016 | BISIE | From the print edition

More than a river to cross

DEEP in the jungle of North Kivu, a lawless province in the Democratic Republic of Congo, a new road is being cut through the canopy. As birds chirp, hand saws cut noisily through trees. Men with shovels dig out roots and flatten the ochre-red earth. A sturdy new log bridge crosses a stream. On it stands Boris Kamstra, a South African in a plaid shirt and bucket hat. “This is great road-building material,” he booms, gesturing at the stones.

Mr Kamstra is the boss of Alphamin Resources, a Canadian-funded company that is trying to build perhaps the most improbable mine in Africa. The site, on a hill called Bisie, is about 60km (37 miles) from the nearest settlement of any size, a town called Walikale. Before Alphamin arrived there was no road connection: anyone hoping to reach it faced a full day’s hike. Getting to Goma, the nearest border crossing, would take another two days on a road lorries cannot use. In the immediate area are three armed rebel groups. The nearest government post is at Walikale—and consists of one rather squat office.

Congo’s soil is bursting with buried treasure. Its long civil war, which ravaged the east for the best part of a decade, was financed largely by metals extracted from hills like Bisie (see article). Congo’s tin, tantalum and tungsten are used in electronics around the world. Although some of these minerals come from big industrial copper mines in Katanga, Congo’s south, and a gold mine in South Kivu, there is not yet a single modern mine in North Kivu.

Tin, tin in the Congo

Until now the province’s metal has been dug out almost entirely by hand. Yet Alphamin hopes to show that it can run a modern industrial mine in a part of the world that scares other modern miners away.

Alphamin says that the investment is attractive—even at a time of low commodity prices—because the ore that it plans to extract is richer than that found anywhere else in the world. Behind the company’s camp on the hill are stacks of carefully ordered cylinders of rock drilled out to map the riches beneath the mountain. (Like almost everything else in the camp, the drill rig had to be lifted in by helicopter.) The ore they contain is 4.5% grade. That means that for every 100 tonnes of ore extracted, the firm will be able to sell 3.25 tonnes of tin (not all the tin can be extracted from the rock). Most other mines would be happy to produce 0.7 tonnes.

Such a rich deposit ought to make Bisie a very cheap producer, but its advantages are offset by the other costs and risks of working in eastern Congo. These are hefty, even before the first load of tin has been extracted. The helicopter “makes confetti of $100 bills”, jokes Mr Kamstra. Exploratory drilling costs more still (roughly $250 for every metre, of which the company has drilled 40,000 to prove to investors that it has lots of tin in the ground). Building a new road 32km through the bush is not cheap: it involves 450 workers. The firm is also rehabilitating an existing road to Goma so that it can carry lorries.

Once exploration is completed it will take some $135m to build the mine. Recouping that investment may not be easy in a place as insecure as North Kivu. Congolese authorities granted a permit for exploratory drilling in 2006. But the firm was not able to operate until 2012 because there was too much fighting nearby. Since then its base camp has been attacked by armed groups four times. In 2014 a police officer was killed and research work worth hundreds of thousands of dollars was wrecked. The camp now has 30 police officers living on site. UN peacekeeping helicopters sometimes keep a watchful eye on it, too.

If the gamble pays off Alphamin’s investors will make juicy returns. But to do so they may have to convince locals that the project is in their interest. If not, they risk protests and sabotage.

In 2007 some 18,000 people lived at Bisie, working the site with pickaxes and shovels. They produced some 14,000 tonnes of tin that year—or perhaps 5% of world production. To get it to market people carried concentrated ore on their heads through the jungle to an airstrip where small planes could land to carry it out. It was back-breaking work but lucrative for many Congolese. That era began to come to an end in 2011, thanks in part to an American law.

Under the Dodd-Frank act, a law aimed mainly at tightening bank regulation, firms operating in the United States must be able to show where the minerals used in their products came from. The idea was to stop rebels in poor countries from selling gold and diamonds to fund wars. The law all but shut down artisanal mining in much of eastern Congo.

Elsewhere in eastern Congo artisanal mines have gradually reopened thanks to a verification scheme under which the UN and the government check mines and allow certified ones to “tag and bag” minerals. The site at Bisie has, however, never been certified. And although Alphamin will provide some well-paid jobs to locals, as well as pay taxes to the central government, its mechanised operations will never employ anything like the thousands of people who once toiled there with pick and shovel. Alphamin has promised to fund local projects, such as a new school, that are intended to benefit 44 villages.

The mine could help local people indirectly, too, by bankrolling a cash-strapped government. When production begins a truck carrying tin ore will rattle every day from Bisie towards Goma. Each one will pay both a toll for the road as well as royalties to the provincial government. For the first time, the government will have a financial incentive (and some revenue) to provide security in the area. Insecurity is not just the biggest threat to Alphamin’s investors; it is also the biggest cause of suffering to the locals.

In much of Africa having natural resources has often proved to be a curse. Gems and minerals have funded rebel armies and kept conflicts burning. Governments that can raise big bucks from oil or mineral royalties, rather than by fostering broad-based growth and taxing people’s incomes, have had little incentive to govern well. The ruling class have devoted their energies to divvying up the easy money rather than actually governing.

In eastern Congo the state has all but collapsed, leaving vast tracts of territory lawless. The locals have discovered that even bad government is better than no government at all. It will take more than a tin mine to change that, but you have to start somewhere.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21705860-can-ambitious-mine-make-difference-eastern-congo-richest-riskiest/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




Turkey’s anger at the West: Al-Malarkey

Sarkozy returns: The revenant

Croatian stagnation: Pining for the partisans

An earthquake in Italy: Beauty and tragedy

War and peace in Ukraine: Fighting for position





Articles Sections Next

Turkey’s anger at the West

Al-Malarkey

President Erdogan’s threat to realign towards Russia is more bark than bite

Aug 27th 2016 | ISTANBUL | From the print edition



THE presidential palace in Ankara is a 1,150-room modern fortress of stone pillars and sheet glass, completed for President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in 2015 at an official cost of $615m. For Mr Erdogan’s supporters, it is an emblem of Turkey’s energy and will. For his opponents it represents the president’s autocratic instincts and lust for power. During the attempted coup of July 15th, mutinous fighter pilots dropped bombs near the complex. On August 24th, Joe Biden, America’s vice president, went there to apologise to Mr Erdogan for America’s failure to show more solidarity with Turkey in the coup’s aftermath.

Mr Biden did his best to mend fences. He compared the failed coup attempt to the September 11th attacks in America, expressed regret for not coming earlier, and paid his respects to the coup victims. Yet Mr Erdogan seemed unimpressed. Sitting alongside Mr Biden, looking less like an old friend than an estranged relative, the Turkish leader complained that Fethullah Gulen, the American-based Muslim cleric who his government claims masterminded the plot, was still free. “Under Turkey’s extradition agreement with the United States, such people should at least be taken into custody,” he said. “But at this very moment this man continues to manage a terrorist organisation.”

The American vice president’s visit was part of an effort to repair a relationship that has gone badly wrong. Turkish officials do not just feel insufficiently appreciated: many actually think that American intelligence had foreknowledge of the coup. For weeks, the pro-government press has charged that America’s army or the CIA directed the plot. Polls show that a large majority of Turks now believe that the United States had something to do with it.



America’s failure to arrest Mr Gulen at his compound in Pennsylvania is a big reason why. Mr Gulen’s sect, known as the cemaat, administers a global network of schools, charities, and businesses, and has placed followers throughout the Turkish bureaucracy. It was allied with Mr Erdogan and his Justice and Development (AK) party until the two groups fell out in 2013. Western analysts are divided on whether the coup was a cemaat operation or whether other groups in the army also played a role, but Turks mostly blame the Gulenists.

For weeks, American officials have explained to the Turkish government and public that the request for Mr Gulen’s extradition will be handled in the courts, like any other. “We apply the law without exception… That’s what’s called the separation of powers,” Mr Biden told a Turkish reporter who suggested America was sheltering Mr Gulen. Such explanations cut little ice. Most Turks “live in a conspiracy-theory view of the world. They do not believe in the separation of powers,” says James Jeffrey, a former American ambassador to Ankara.

A second source of friction has been criticism of Turkey’s crackdown after the coup, both from America and Europe. Western governments and human-rights advocates were already wary of Mr Erdogan’s growing authoritarianism in recent years. As his government began rounding up thousands of suspected Gulenists and other opponents, the suspicion grew that he was using the failed putsch as an excuse to cement his hold on power. Two days after the coup, John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, and Federica Mogherini, the EU’s foreign minister, starting warning Turkey to respect human rights.

This rubbed many Turks, who were in the midst of a national celebration after defending a civilian government against a military takeover, the wrong way. Some American diplomats now feel they got the tone wrong. “What would your reaction have been if the president of another country came to New York five weeks after (September 11th) and lectured us about the Patriot Act?” asked an American official in a briefing before Mr Biden’s visit.

You never visit

A final issue was the lack of post-coup solidarity visits by Western leaders to Ankara. Europeans, still smarting from Mr Erdogan’s tough negotiations over the refugee deal in March (and his efforts to have their citizens prosecuted for reciting insulting poems about him), were in no mood to pat him on the back. The numbers swept up in the purges have swelled to 80,000; a visit to Turkey might seem like an endorsement.

The Europeans are right to worry. The purges have “little to do with respect for due process and basic rights”, says Sezgin Tanrikulu, an opposition parliamentarian and human rights-lawyer. A government decree passed after the coup permits holding suspects for up to 30 days without hearing charges. Access to lawyers is limited. The authorities are not looking to document suspects’ links to the coup, says Mr Tanrikulu, but to the Gulen movement.

Turkey’s reaction to Western criticism has been to threaten to turn away from the West entirely. Vladimir Putin was one of the first foreign leaders to express support for Mr Erdogan during the coup attempt, and the first to be visited by Mr Erdogan afterwards. Turkey has long supported overthrowing Syrian President Bashar Assad, who is backed by Iran and Russia, but recently said he could stay temporarily (see article). Mr Erdogan’s way of “pushing America and the EU and signalling that he has options is rapprochement with Russia and Iran,” says Gonul Tol of the Middle East Institute.

Yet strategically, Russia is no alternative to the Western alliance for Turkey. The two are historic enemies and rivals for influence in the Caucasus, the Middle East and the Black Sea. NATO is far more valuable. Indeed, as Mr Biden arrived in Ankara, Turkish forces were moving into Syria under American air cover for the first time, preparing to attack Islamic State. Turks are livid with the West for its response to the coup, and most suspect America of backing the cemaat. But they will not turn their backs on America or Europe just yet.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21705842-president-erdogans-threat-realign-towards-russia-more-bark-bite-al-malarkey/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sarkozy returns

The revenant

Given up for politically dead, France’s former president is back in the race

Aug 27th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



WHEN Nicolas Sarkozy failed in his bid for re-election as president in 2012, the French thought they had seen the back of him. He vowed to retire from public life. But the promise never rang entirely true. Sure enough, this week the Sarko tornado began once again to tear its way through France: the Gaullist former president declared that he would seek his party’s nomination at a primary in November. For now, Mr Sarkozy trails his rivals for the post. But it is almost always a mistake to underestimate the pugnacious ex-president.

Mr Sarkozy formally announced his decision in a new book, “Tout pour la France” (Everything for France), published on August 24th. The next day he was due to take to the stage in the south of France for his first campaign rally. Mr Sarkozy’s platform, as outlined in the book, is a hallmark mix of economic liberalism (lower taxes, longer working hours, later retirement) and right-wing identity politics (tighter citizenship and immigration rules, a tougher stance on Islam and integration).

On the face of it, Mr Sarkozy’s chances of securing the nomination for “Les Républicains” (the Republicans), and getting his old job back, are not high. In polls among voters on the centre-right, he consistently trails Alain Juppé, a patrician former prime minister. A recent poll by TNS Sofres puts the gap at 30% to 37%, with François Fillon, another former prime minister, at just 8%. A broader sample of French voters also expects Mr Juppé to come top, by a big margin. Mr Sarkozy’s head-spinning mercurial style, and his tendency to prefer grandiose gestures over policy follow-through, have lost him support among centrists, who see Mr Juppé as a less divisive figure.

Yet Mr Sarkozy is also a past master of the political comeback. After supporting a losing presidential candidate, Edouard Balladur, in 1995, and later securing a miserable 13% of votes for his party, which he led into European elections in 1999, Mr Sarkozy was widely written off. But he won the presidency eight years later. More recently, his prospects have been damaged by various judicial inquiries into affairs such as a breach of party-financing rules. Some of these cases are still outstanding. But so far none of the charges has managed to stick to him.

Above all, Mr Sarkozy’s calculation is that, after 18 months of deadly terrorist attacks, voters on the right want a hard line on security and political Islam. France is currently tangled in a row over the “burkini”, a cross between a burqa and a swimsuit, which a dozen mayors of seaside towns have banned on their beaches this summer. Such bans, which have been challenged by civil-liberties groups in the courts, fall partly under a long French secular tradition of keeping conspicuous religiosity out of public places. But they also reflect wider tensions over Islamism and public order.

A former interior minister who once set up a ministry of national identity, Mr Sarkozy has more of a record on such matters than does Mr Juppé. And, unlike Mr Juppé, he has no qualms about trampling over ground occupied by the ultra-nationalist Marine Le Pen. Mr Sarkozy wants, for example, a ban on headscarves in state universities (under France’s secular rules, they are already banned in state schools) and, even more controversially, the preventive detention of those listed as “dangerous” by intelligence services, whether or not they face charges. How was it possible, he asked, that one of the assassins who cut the throat of a Normandy priest in July had been released from prison with an electronic tag when he launched his barbaric attack?

The French return next week for la rentrée, the start of the school year, with the country still under a state of emergency. Given such stress, political divergences are readily amplified. The primary campaign, and the election next spring, could turn out to be ugly as identity politics are thrust to the fore. Already, the heavy-handed enforcement of the burkini ban by policemen in Nice has divided opinion. Rivalry among Republicans is all the greater given the stakes. Polls currently suggest that the party’s nominee will go on to face a second-round run-off in 2017 against not a Socialist, as is traditionally the case, but Ms Le Pen. It would take an immense upset for her to win. More probably, the winner of the Republican primary will end up as the next president of France. La rentrée looks set to be tense and turbulent.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21705845-given-up-politically-dead-frances-former-president-back-race-revenant/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Croatian stagnation

Pining for the partisans

Where politics are stuck in the 1980s, if not the 1940s

Aug 27th 2016 | ZAGREB | From the print edition



KOKI the parrot is a shrewd old bird. He used to belong to Marshal Josip Tito, Yugoslavia’s longtime communist leader, who died in 1980. Koki lives on the Croatian island of Brioni, where Tito spent six months of the year, and where the villas are still reserved for Croatia’s leaders. If visitors are lucky, Koki will swear at them, or squawk “Tito! Tito! Tito!” If Koki had a bigger vocabulary, he would doubtless enjoy revealing Croatia’s darkest state secrets, which he has surely overheard. On August 16th Croatia lurched into a new election season, and it is a measure of the country’s frozen politics that some of the key campaign issues hinge on conversations Koki might have eavesdropped on decades ago.

Take the murder of Stejpan Djurekovic, who was shot and hacked to death with a meat cleaver in Germany in 1983. Mr Djurekovic was an émigré active in Croatian nationalist circles. On August 3rd a German court sentenced Josip Perkovic and Zdravko Mustac, two former Yugoslav secret-service agents, to life imprisonment for organising his death.

Croatia’s main parties, the Social Democrats and the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), disagree furiously about what this means. Zoran Milanovic, the head of the Social Democrats, who was prime minister from 2011 until this year, fought hard to prevent the extradition of the two men now convicted. So supporters of the HDZ say that the Social Democrats were protecting the men who killed a Croatian nationalist. The Social Democrats retort that the killers had close links to Franjo Tudjman, independent Croatia’s first prime minister in 1991 and the co-founder of the HDZ.

The two parties are distinguished not so much by their current platforms as by their histories. The Social Democrats claim the anti-fascist credentials of Tito’s communist partisans, who battled Nazi occupiers in the second world war. In contrast, many in the HDZ admire the wartime Ustasha, a Nazi-quisling movement. The German verdict has added an extra layer to their historical quarrels. Another recent spat concerns HDZ ministers who attended the unveiling of a monument to a Croatian nationalist whose accomplishments included murdering the Yugoslav ambassador to Sweden in 1971. Some saw this as poor form.

All this folklore distracts from more important issues. Croatian politics have been a mess for months. The previous election was in November, but the resulting HDZ-dominated coalition government collapsed in June over a corruption scandal involving the national oil company. The HDZ then jettisoned its leader, who had allowed the party’s Ustasha-admiring elements to the fore. The new leader, Andrej Plenkovic, is a moderate member of the European Parliament. He wants to wrench his party back to the centre, and says he deplores the populism that is sweeping Europe. As for historical issues, he says, Croatia needs “sober debate” about the crimes of both Ustashas and Communists.

One reason to stick to the past may be the two parties’ dreary records in the present. The Social Democrats had a disastrous economic record during their years in power, from 2011 until January 2016: the economy shrank four years out of five. In the years before that, the HDZ gained a reputation for corruption, which its most recent term did nothing to dispel. The HDZ is trailing in the polls, and neither party will gain enough votes to govern alone after the September 11th election. Some analysts predict a grand coalition between the two major parties, though Mr Plenkovic says this is “not an option”. The obsession with history makes it perhaps less odd that, in a televised campaign debate, Mr Milanovic attempted to win over HDZ voters by proudly revealing that his grandfather had been an Ustasha.

Such tactics appal many. Boris Miletic is the head of a regional party that runs Istria, the area where Koki lives (see map). Tourism is a mainstay of the economy; this season, Mr Miletic says, has been “fantastic, perhaps the best since the war” (referring to Croatia’s conflict with Serbian forces from 1991 to 1995). But then his mood darkens. Arguing about Ustashas and the past is “really embarrassing”, he says. “We need to talk about the future.” He lists reforms which the HDZ and Social Democrats have promised for years: decentralising power, rationalising territorial divisions, and so on. Unfortunately, in Croatia, the main political parties seem incapable of anything but parroting the same old lines.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21705844-where-politics-are-stuck-1980s-if-not-1940s-pining-partisans/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

An earthquake in Italy

Beauty and tragedy

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



Beauty and tragedy, the contrasting faces of Italy, came together in deadly fashion on August 24th when a 6.2 magnitude earthquake struck villages in the picturesque uplands north-east of Rome. At least 247 people died. In 2009 an earthquake devastated the city of L’Aquila, less than 30 miles (50km) away. The lethal impact of the disaster is likely to have been magnified, as it was around L’Aquila, by houses built decades, if not centuries, ago that do not meet modern anti-seismic standards. The earthquake presents Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, with a new headache as he strives to win a referendum, probably in November, on changing Italy’s constitution.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21705684-beauty-and-tragedy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

War and peace in Ukraine

Fighting for position

An escalation in violence may mean Russia wants to renegotiate the terms of a stalled peace process

Aug 27th 2016 | KIEV | From the print edition

Putin spends rubles, makes rubble

AS COLUMNS of soldiers marched through the centre of Kiev to mark 25 years of Ukrainian independence this week, Larissa Nikitina could not help but think about the price of sovereignty. Some 9,500 Ukrainians have been killed in fighting in the country’s east since early 2014, and there are more casualties every week. “We fought for this holiday, we are fighting for it, and we will have to keep fighting for it,” she said. Tensions have flared around Crimea and eastern Ukraine in recent weeks, and many worry that another round of fighting is on the horizon.

The Minsk peace process, which has sought since mid-2014 to broker an end to the conflict, has been at a standstill all summer, and violence has been escalating. International monitors have noticed Ukrainian government and Russian-backed separatist forces creeping closer along the line of contact; heavier-calibre weaponry and artillery have come back into use. Earlier this month, Russia claimed that Ukraine tried to stage a terrorist attack on Russian-occupied Crimea, a charge Kiev denied. While events remain murky, Vladimir Putin’s rhetoric was ominously clear: “We will not let these things pass.” Ukraine’s president, Petro Poroshenko, put his troops on high alert.

Ukraine’s worries have been compounded by Russian sabre-rattling along its borders. Mr Putin led a meeting of his security council in Crimea last week, as the Black Sea Fleet staged war games. Large-scale exercises in the Southern Military District, encompassing Crimea and part of the border with Ukraine, are scheduled for September. Ukrainian observers have noted that Russian exercises provided cover for assaults on Ukraine in 2014 and Georgia in 2008.

Nonetheless, an all-out invasion by Russia remains unlikely. The Pentagon says it has not seen evidence of “troop movements that are so large that we’re concerned about those on their own”. Occupying Ukrainian territory would be bloody and costly. “Russia could enter, but getting in does not mean getting out,” says Colonel General Ihor Smeshko, a former head of Ukraine’s Security Service (SBU). Partisan resistance would be fierce. And Ukraine’s army, while still lagging Russia’s, has improved from the hollowed-out force it was when Russia annexed Crimea in early 2014. Then, Ukraine could field just 6,000 combat-ready infantry. During the ensuing war, officials say, some 300,000 soldiers have seen time on the frontline.

Instead, Russia hopes to use the threat of war to extract concessions at the negotiating table. “Tensions along the border create a discourse in the West and Ukraine,” says Alex Ryabchyn, a Ukrainian MP from the Donetsk region. “Putin wants the West to think about what would happen if war restarted.” The agreements require Ukraine to hold elections in the secessionist territories, but are ambiguous about the sequencing. Moscow accuses Kiev of balking. Ukraine and the West insist that a stable ceasefire and the withdrawal of Russian forces must come first.

Pressing forward with the political elements of the Minsk protocol carries grave domestic risks for Ukraine’s leadership—a fact not lost on the Kremlin. When constitutional amendments foreseen under the Minsk deal were first raised in parliament last summer, nationalist protests outside the Rada turned violent, leaving four dead. Passing election laws and constitutional changes while soldiers are still dying in the Donbas would be “disastrous” for Ukraine’s political stability, says Ivanna Klympush-Tsintsadze, the country’s Vice Prime Minister for European and Euro-Atlantic Integration. While the West often pushes for more compromise, she adds, “there are serious red lines” where Ukraine cannot make further concessions.

Ultimately, Russia may be seeking a favourable renegotiation of the whole peace deal. As diplomats bicker over a “road map” for implementation, Russian propositions amount to a “rephrasing” of the original Minsk agreements, says Sergei Rakhmanin, deputy editor of Zerkalo Nedeli, a Ukrainian weekly. Mr Putin has accused the Ukrainians of “turning to terror” and abandoning the Minsk plan, and suggested that further meetings in the Normandy negotiating format of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany are senseless. When Angela Merkel and François Hollande meet Mr Putin on the sidelines of the G20 summit on September 4th, they may do so without Mr Poroshenko.

For Russia, the time to regain advantage by changing facts on the ground appears ripe. More military drama would provide a welcome distraction from Russia’s economic struggles ahead of its mid-September parliamentary elections. Barack Obama wants to get closer to resolving the Ukraine crisis before his term ends. Ms Merkel and Mr Hollande are eyeing their own upcoming elections next year, and remain preoccupied with the fallout from the migrant crisis and Brexit. The current timetable for Minsk implementation will run out at the end of the year, as will European Union sanctions against Russia.

The West will need to muster political will to extend both. Many expect pressure to escalate further before talks in Minsk on August 26th and at the G20 on September 4th-5th. Ukrainians believe the aim is to lure them into overreacting. “They’re trying to provoke us to go on the attack and give them a reason to abandon Minsk,” says Yuri Biryukov, a presidential advisor. With so many men and so much materiel along the front, even small provocations risk spiralling out of control.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21705843-escalation-violence-may-mean-russia-wants-renegotiate-terms-stalled-peace/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




Scottish education: Not so bonny

Brexit and immigration: Raising the drawbridge

Olympic success: The brass behind the gold

Football iconography: Put out more flags

Television subtitles: Read my lips

Political comedy: Laugh or cry?

Bagehot: The 2016 vintage





Articles Sections Next

Scottish education

Not so bonny

Scotland’s schools were once among the best in the world. What went wrong?

Aug 27th 2016 | EDINBURGH | From the print edition



THE Royal High School, a state-run secondary in Edinburgh, is a good example of Scotland’s tradition of egalitarian education. It was founded in around 1128 to prepare children for a life in the church. In 1505 it was described as a “high school” in the first recorded use of the term. In the early 19th century it served as a model for America’s first public secondary school.

Its results are still among the best in Scotland. But on a visit before the summer break, Pauline Walker, the school’s enthusiastic head, apologised to your correspondent for the mess. She was speaking in a cramped, makeshift office; many of her pupils were being taught in Portakabins, dotted in soldierly rows across the school’s car park. The inconvenience was a result of an inspection in April that found some of the school’s buildings to be unsafe. Only when pupils returned to school two weeks ago did things get back to normal.

There are parallels with Scottish education as a whole. Once splendid, it is now slightly shabby. Even before the devolution of a wide range of political powers to Edinburgh in 1999, Scotland had an education system distinct from those of England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The national curriculum introduced by Margaret Thatcher in 1988 did not apply north of the border. Testing was less common. In the early 2000s Scottish children came near the top of the rankings in the OECD’s PISA tests for 15-year-olds. That reflected Scotland’s long-standing focus on education. Its teachers’ reluctance to embrace the “progressive” education styles that were fashionable in the 1960s-80s, instead focusing on the basics, also helped, says Lindsay Paterson of Edinburgh University.

Since then, however, Scotland has dropped down the tables. Its PISA scores are now only a little above average. In 2007 the government pulled out of the TIMMS and PIRLS numeracy and literacy check-ups for younger children, in which Scotland was lagging behind England. There has been a small increase in the proportion of children achieving five good results in the exams taken at age 15 and 16, compared with big improvements in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, albeit from a low base (see chart). Fewer Scottish children stay in education post-16 than in any other country of the union.



To critics, this is proof that Scotland missed out on reforms enacted elsewhere in Britain. They point to England, where the Labour governments of 1997-2010 focused on improving failing schools. They introduced more frequent testing and monitoring of pupils’ performance, as well as a focus on basic standards, setting time aside each day in primary schools to improve literacy and numeracy.

In Scotland, a new curriculum was phased in from 2010 by the ruling Scottish National Party (its development began under the previous Labour government). It is an “idealistic, almost Utopian” approach to education, says Mr Paterson. According to the official rubric it hopes “to achieve a transformation in education in Scotland” and includes “the totality of experiences which are planned for children and young people through their education”. It seeks more pupil contribution in lessons and less prescription from teachers.

The government, as well as many teachers, argues that in secondary schools with good leadership the new curriculum has allowed pupils flexibility in their final years at school (some, for instance, spend a few days a week on work experience or in an apprenticeship). But, says Carole Ford, a former head of School Leaders Scotland, a head teachers’ union, any benefits have come at the expense of a more rigorous education. Even some supporters of the new curriculum suspect that more time spent in class discussions, and less on basic skills, is to blame for falling standards. In primaries, standards of literacy and numeracy have fallen every year since national measurements were introduced in 2011.

Ms Ford says that teachers are swamped by the number of “outcomes” that have to be met, despite the curriculum’s claims to free them to teach how they see best. Similarly, although the number of year-end exams has been cut, there is now a barrage of tests throughout the year. Teachers report that children are stressed and that the need for constant resits makes planning ahead futile. A survey by the Scottish Qualifications Authority, which runs exams, found that 89% of teachers believe the new approach to assessment is not working well.

School leaders find it difficult to respond to such problems because of more bureaucracy and less money. Education spending in Scotland fell by 8% in 2010-2014, while in England school spending grew by 3%. Hiring and firing staff is difficult. And since there are caps on class sizes, head teachers are restricted in how they can deal with their lower budgets.

The Scottish government has woken up to its underperforming schools. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, has asked to be judged on her success in closing the gap between rich and poor pupils, as well as in raising attainment across the board. She is considering reforms including giving more money directly to schools; national assessments in primaries; a streamlined curriculum and reduced local-authority control. A government adviser says ministers have noted the success of some charter schools in America and of London’s schools, which were boosted by more funding but also greater autonomy (see article). Yet the membership of a recently appointed panel of education advisers points in a less radical direction.

Much depends on Ms Sturgeon’s willingness to take on the Scottish educational establishment. Doing so would require a role reversal. Historically, Scottish ministers have acted as cheerleaders for schools under their control, whereas English ones have acted as critics. Her party’s strong position in the Scottish Parliament offers an opportunity for change. If she is serious in her desire to improve Scotland’s schools, Ms Sturgeon must take it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21705866-scotlands-schools-were-once-among-best-world-what-went-wrong-not-so-bonny/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit and immigration

Raising the drawbridge

Hopes of a cost-free cut in European Union migration are illusory

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



HOSTILITY to immigration was a key driver of Britons’ vote on June 23rd to leave the EU. Theresa May has duly said that freedom of movement from the EU cannot continue as before. Yet curbing migration will be both tricky and costly.



It is numbers that cause the most trouble. In both 2010 and 2015 the Tories said they would cut annual net immigration to the tens of thousands. Yet the figure for 2015, published before the referendum, was 333,000, almost half of it from the EU. Such high EU immigration is relatively new, caused in large part by the accession of ten eastern European countries in 2004 and 2007 (see chart). Figures released on August 25th showed that net immigration in the year to March was still running near record levels.

One issue is what to do about 3.5m existing EU migrants. British Future, a think-tank, finds that 84% of Britons want them to stay, yet the government remains wary of commitment. Mrs May has said she first needs a reciprocal promise for 1.2m Britons living abroad in the EU. There is also some dispute over whether to have a cut-off date, perhaps June 23rd. In reality there is little chance of any deportations, which would surely be illegal. EU migrants have a right to permanent residence after five years in Britain; given how long Brexit may take, that should cover most already there.

Next is the question of what sort of controls to have for new arrivals. Most Brexiteers favour an “Australian” points system similar to that applied to non-EU migrants, which lets in only the skilled and educated. Yet Australia is no longer satisfied with the way its points system works.

According to the Social Market Foundation, another think-tank, only 12% of EU migrants would qualify under the current rules for non-EU migrants. But slashing the number of unskilled could be costly. The food-processing, farming and hospitality industries rely on low-cost labour from eastern Europe. Cutting it off would create labour shortages that would force firms to adapt their business models: more automation, higher wages or just closing down. Employers may also demand a scheme to admit temporary low-skilled workers.

The administrative burden of new restrictions would be heavy. Data on EU migrants range from scanty to non-existent. National-insurance numbers are unreliable, as more are issued than used. The government is unlikely to bring in travel visas, still less identity cards. So enforcement of any system of work permits would rely on employers, landlords and public services, meaning more red tape. The Home Office would have to increase its enforcement role. With its current staffing, it would take 140 years to process all existing EU migrants’ requests for permanent residence, says the Migration Observatory at Oxford University.

Given also the potential backdoor via Ireland, which will keep free movement within the EU but has no border controls with Britain, a big risk is that tighter migration controls will simply mean more illegal migration. Illegal immigrants are less likely than legal ones to pay taxes, receive the minimum wage or secure normal employment or health-and-safety protections.

The supposed economic gains from cutting EU migration are also doubtful. Brexiteers have argued that migrants push down wages, increase pressure on health and education services, take jobs from Britons and make it harder for young people to afford housing. Yet researchers at the Resolution Foundation, another think-tank, dismiss most of these claims.

They argue that there may have been a small downward impact on wages in some industries, but it is dwarfed by the impact of recession. Far from stealing jobs, EU migrants take ones that natives spurn; Britain’s employment rate is at a record high. Since they tend to be young, employed and taxpaying, migrants are net contributors to the state. For that reason they should ease, not raise, pressure on public services and housing—though there is a case for a “migrant impact fund” to channel their taxes towards more local public spending.

Post-Brexit curbs on migration will do economic damage. Other EU leaders have made clear that they also imply more limited British access to the EU’s single market, delivering a further hit to the economy. British Future’s report calls the current system broken and proposes a “national conversation” on immigration policy. Ensuring that politicians (and voters) understand that tougher controls will impose significant costs on the economy would be a good start.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21705870-hopes-cost-free-cut-european-union-migration-are-illusory-raising-drawbridge/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Olympic success

The brass behind the gold

More cash, ruthlessly funnelled to winners, explains a record medal-haul

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Next stop: Tokyo

BRITONS worried about their country’s global standing after Brexit might take solace from the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. Team GB arrived home on August 23rd with 27 gold medals, second only to America. Its total haul of 67 gongs was its best in a century, and an Olympic first: no other country has increased the number of medals it has won immediately after hosting the summer games, as London did in 2012.

History suggested that Britain would not match its performance in London, when it finished third with as many golds as France, Germany and Japan combined. Hosts typically enjoy an “Olympic bounce”: most increase their returns in the run-up to a home games, peak on their own turf, and then fade (see chart). A likely explanation is that hosts increase spending on sport ahead of the event, not wanting to flop at their own party. British success has increased in line with total funding since 1996, when Team GB won just one gold medal in Atlanta on a shoestring budget.



Beefed-up Olympic programmes allow countries to enter more competitors. And hosts are guaranteed spots in some disciplines, such as rowing and football. The British team that competed in Rio was one-third smaller than the one in London, making its achievement all the more surprising.

Luck helped. Britain benefited from the inclusion for the first time in Rio not only of rugby sevens (in which it picked up a silver medal) but also of golf, where Justin Rose won in a field thinned by the absence of several of the world’s top players who stayed away for fear of the Zika virus. Some countries questioned Team GB’s rapid improvement in the velodrome. Britain won no events at the 2015 Track Cycling World Championships, but six out of ten in Rio. British Cycling, the sport’s governing body, says it focuses on Olympic victories: Britons won seven golds in London.



But the main cause of Britain’s success is a ruthlessly efficient allocation of resources. The lion’s share of the £350m ($540m) pot of National Lottery money divided among British teams in the four years leading up to the Rio games went to those with a track record of success. Cyclists, rowers and sailors, who won 26 medals in 2012, received £88m to spend on better equipment, facilities and training. Britain’s struggling gymnasts received just £1.8m before the Beijing games, but beat their medal target in 2012 and so earned a budget of £14.6m for Rio, with which they produced their first Olympic champion. Weightlifters, fencers and archers, who won nothing in London, were given just £8.8m. This unforgiving approach earned Britain one gold medal for every 14 athletes competing in Rio, its best ratio since 1908.

The remorseless focus on the elite has drawbacks. For one thing, Lottery revenues come disproportionately from low-income households, whereas the beneficiaries of Olympic funding are a posh bunch. A quarter of the British team in Rio were privately educated. Worse, the success of Britain’s star athletes is in contrast to the lardy state of the general population. The London Olympics was supposed to inspire greater participation in sport. But in England weekly sports participation has fallen by 0.4% since 2012. Time to stop watching sport and start playing it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21705872-more-cash-ruthlessly-funnelled-winners-explains-record-medal-haul-brass-behind/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Football iconography

Put out more flags

Why Palestinian banners are flown in a Scottish stadium

Aug 27th 2016 | GLASGOW | From the print edition



FANS of Hapoel Be’er Sheva, an Israeli football team that visited Scotland on August 17th to play Glasgow Celtic in a European Champions League qualifier, were greeted at the Parkhead stadium by a sea of Palestinian flags. Europe’s football authority, UEFA, took a dim view. It bans “messages that are of a political, ideological, religious, offensive or provocative nature” and has ruled the Palestinian flag “illicit” before. The return leg, in Israel on August 23rd, passed without incident. Celtic may still face a sanction. It would not be the first time: two years ago the club was fined €20,000 ($27,000) after its fans flew the Palestinian standard at a match against KR Reykjavik.

Why do Glaswegian football fans take such an interest in Middle Eastern politics? Their club, founded in 1887 by poor Irish Catholic immigrants, rapidly became associated with political causes, from campaigns against economic discrimination suffered by Catholics in Scotland to the fight for Irish home rule.

Most supporters are acutely aware of this history. “What Ireland went through, that’s what Palestinians are going though now,” says a woman in a Parkhead bar clutching precious tickets for a game against local (and Protestant) rivals Rangers. “They want their freedom back, that’s why Celtic fans go with Palestine.”

This link has been fostered since 2006 by fans branding themselves the Green Brigade, who now number about 500. Feeling home games lacked passion (partly a result of campaigns to stamp out Catholic-Protestant sectarianism, a noxious feature of Celtic-Rangers matches), they mimicked Italian “Ultra” fans and adopted political causes. They have sent food to migrants in Calais and organised an anti-discrimination football tournament. The Irish tricolour and Basque ikurrina have both fluttered at Parkhead.

The Green Brigade is now crowd-funding cash to pay Celtic’s expected UEFA fine and make a matching contribution to Palestinian charities. Remarkably, the kitty passed £140,000 ($185,000) in three days. And much as the club vainly pleaded for Palestinian flags to be left at home, it may have noted that the fallout has attracted worldwide attention, and no little support. “A club like no other”, declare giant drapes cladding the stadium. Quite.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21705869-why-palestinian-banners-are-flown-scottish-stadium-put-out-more-flags/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Television subtitles

Read my lips

As on-demand programming replaces broadcast, deaf viewers are left out

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



CATCHING the latest episode of a television series no longer requires a reminder in the diary. British audiences, like those elsewhere, increasingly feed their TV habit using “on-demand” services like Sky, Netflix and Virgin TiVo. By one estimate, conventional broadcast television now accounts for less than half of the video consumed by 16- to 24-year-olds. It is through such an on-demand service that Kimberley Lucas’s boyfriend has lately been watching “The Wire”, a cops-and-robbers drama. But Ms Lucas, who is deaf, cannot join in. Whereas she could have watched the series with subtitles when it was originally broadcast, the helpful transcriptions have fallen away during the move online.

The hard of hearing (as well as those who struggle with the Baltimore accents in “The Wire”) are well served by broadcast television in Britain. Ofcom, the regulator, has overseen a rise in subtitling to more than 80% of programming on most channels. But its rules do not apply to on-demand television, which by comparison is a “Wild West”, says Matt Simpson of Ericsson, a firm that provides subtitles. More than 150,000 hours of on-demand content are published each year without captions. Some platforms, such as the BBC’s iPlayer—which started to offer live online subtitling, a world first, just in time for the Rio Olympic games—do far better than others. Almost all of the BBC’s on-demand content carries subtitles. Just 15% of the services available through Sky were similarly accessible in 2015, according to Action on Hearing Loss, a charity.

Sky has promised to bring that figure up. But years of complaints from Britain’s 900,000 deaf people have done little to budge on-demand providers. In 2013 the government promised to consider legislation if there had not been “progress” by July 2016. But the threat was withdrawn before the end of last year, by which point just 22 of Britain’s 90 on-demand providers were offering subtitles. Deaf Britons look enviously at America, where the government enforces equal service across broadcast and on-demand TV.

Modern subtitles are simple to create, and curiously human. In a booth in west London, Jon Luke, one of 400 “re-speakers” with Ericsson, repeats every word of a BBC programme into a microphone, adding punctuation vocally. Producing subtitles in this way is easier than hiring stenographers, as was common a decade ago, and more accurate than relying on machines to turn words into text.

But whereas subtitles made this way work well with television broadcasts, they do not fit with on-demand platforms. The format is based on Teletext, an all but obsolete technology. So engineers must copy the original into the 18 formats used by the various on-demand players, from Apple to Xbox. Neither programme-makers nor broadcasters want to foot that bill.

Ofcom may step in if the stalemate persists. This month it hinted that it would gradually align its rules for broadcast and on-demand television. That would frustrate the industry. But it would allow viewers like Ms Lucas to catch up with everyone else at last.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21705868-demand-programming-replaces-broadcast-deaf-viewers-are-left-out-read-my-lips/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Political comedy

Laugh or cry?

The farcical state of the left is splitting sides at the Edinburgh Fringe

Aug 27th 2016 | EDINBURGH | From the print edition

More free seats than the shadow cabinet

IT IS a case of bad comic timing. The Edinburgh Fringe Festival, which runs through August, is normally a chance for political stand-up comedians to throw carefully honed jokes to reliably liberal audiences. Yet the speed of events since the June 23rd EU referendum, which triggered a change of prime minister and a leadership contest in the Labour Party, has left comics rewriting shows as they go along. One compares the task to wrestling a lubricated dolphin in a bathtub.

Trickiest is negotiating a new ideological cleavage in audiences. Labour’s hard-left leader, Jeremy Corbyn, is disliked by many Labour voters and most of his own MPs (this week the Labour mayor of London and the head of the party’s Scottish wing became the latest to withdraw their support). Yet he is wildly popular among young idealists. The lefty Fringe audience is therefore split as never before. Do comics dare to mock Mr Corbyn?

Some have been ruthless. One self-described Corbynite gasped as Ahir Shah tore into the Labour leader with an unprintable joke about his fiddling while the left burned. Another stand-up, Andy Zaltzman, accused the Eurosceptic Mr Corbyn of campaigning for Remain “with all the ferocity of a cornered blancmange”. Matt Forde, an unfashionably forthright Blairite, did an impression of Labour’s leader sniffing constantly, “as if someone is cooking a delicious meal in the room next door”.

Others have thrown their weight behind him. Robin Ince, Jeremy Hardy and Mark Steel have joined a fund-raising tour entitled “JC4PM”. And there were more jokes about his opponents. Mr Forde described Theresa May’s “occasional haunted look in her eye...like she’s just remembered she killed someone”. Alex Kealy said David Cameron listing his achievements in his post-Brexit resignation speech was like “if someone dies at your house party but you just bang on about how great the guacamole was”.

Most stand-ups have played it safe by studiously avoiding the Corbyn question. Not that it matters when jokes about Labour’s hapless leader seem to write themselves. On August 23rd, a week after he had filmed himself humbly sitting on the floor of a “ram-packed” train carriage, the rail company in question released CCTV footage of Mr Corbyn walking past empty seats on the way to film his piece.

Some stand-ups are changing tactics. Josie Long and Jonny Donahoe have responded to the accusations of preaching to the left-wing choir by starting a tour designed for conservative audiences. Defying talk of a “post-truth” politics, they are even bringing a retinue of live fact-checkers along with them. Comedy has become a serious business indeed.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21705660-farcical-state-left-splitting-sides-edinburgh-fringe-laugh-or-cry/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

The 2016 vintage

Forget the Olympics. Wine should guide Britain’s approach to Brexit

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



“I LOOKED at my dad. We couldn’t believe it,” says Simon Roberts. Mr Roberts and his father, the founder of the Ridgeview vineyard, were at the Royal Opera House for the Decanter World Wine Awards in 2010. They had assumed they had been seated too far from the stage to have won. Champagne makers had always nabbed the “top sparkling wine” award before. It was stated that the winning wine was a blanc-de-blancs (a sparkling wine made only from white grapes). The Roberts family were baffled: that described none of the French wines on the shortlist. It was only when the announcer remarked that the wine was English that the penny dropped. Ridgeview had become the first ever non-French wine to win the prize.

The result sent shocks through the wine world and vindicated the gamble taken by the Roberts family 16 years earlier, when they sold their computer business to buy a fledgling vineyard near the Sussex coast. Their rationale was simple: the mild days would nurture the sugar in the grapes, the cool nights would bring on the acid, the South Downs would shelter the vines and the result would be a sparkling wine that could take on Champagne.

Today Ridgeview wines sell in Scandinavia, the Netherlands, America and even—whisper it—Bordeaux. They are served in Downing Street and Buckingham Palace. Ridgeview is building a new cellar to cope with a rise in production from 250,000 to 600,000 bottles a year. Obsessiveness perfumes the place: in the spring staff hurry out at 2am to light giant candles under the vines to keep the frost from the buds. This perfectionism has won medals: at the Texsom International Wine Awards in Dallas in March, Ridgeview took bronze, silver or gold for all five of its entries.

These days Britain is preoccupied with gongs of a different sort. Politicians have tortured the country’s storming performance at the Olympic games for lessons about Brexit. Lefties think public money and teamwork are the key. The right prefers tales of elite rewards for elite performances. Both sides have a point. But both should also look to their country’s booze boomlet. It hints at a happy middle ground.

In the decade to 2014 the acreage of vineyards in England and Wales rose from 1,879 to over 4,500. Wine exports are expected to increase from £3.2m ($4.9m) in 2015 to over £30m in 2020. Two French firms—Taittinger and Vranken Pommery Monopole—have recently invested in southern England. On August 19th the first full container of English fizz departed for America. “New York sommeliers always want something new to talk about,” observes Frazer Thompson of Chapel Down, a producer in Kent. He says the difference between English sparkling wine and Champagne is like that between Vivienne Westwood and Chanel: the former is a funky and fresh alternative to a traditional rival.

Winemakers are uncertain about Brexit. The wine industry is vulnerable to regulation. For example, American winemakers must relabel their bottles for export because they list alcohol content to one decimal point more than the EU deems permissible, bizarrely. Winemakers like the Roberts family buy bottles, barrels and machinery from France. It is a borderless business. “We can have breakfast in Sussex and lunch in Épernay,” boasts Mr Roberts. Meanwhile they benefit from the EU’s single farm payments, the harmonisation of standards across the union, its tariff-free market and its trade deals with other countries.

For such producers the priority is continuity. Winemakers would like a guarantee of the status quo. That means British substitutes for existing EU agricultural and rural funds; comprehensive free-trade agreements with the EU and other trading partners; and ongoing co-ordination of standards between Britain and the union. “There is a compelling case for reducing customs tariffs to zero,” reckons Simon Stannard of the Wine and Spirit Trade Association. The government, he says, might also establish a planning regime guaranteeing all vineyards agricultural status and secure the status of local brands. “The EU has hundreds of protected wine names and we will want those names to continue to be respected once the UK leaves the EU,” says Mr Stannard.

A little hiccup

It is easy to be blasé about all this. In the run-up to Britain’s EU referendum campaigners for Brexit talked endlessly about German carmakers and French wine producers. Their point was that the continentals would not seek a strict trading regime with Britain, which buys so many of Europe’s wares. Yet this overlooked that Britain also has plenty to sell, from cars and financial services to jet engines and bubbly. The notion that other EU governments would fall to their knees to maintain access to the British market was always a fantasy. Doubtless, Britain should use its consumption-heavy economy to its advantage while negotiating Brexit. But it should not forget that it is the supplicant.

Millions of its jobs depend on exports. The Article 50 process (which is likely to be invoked in 2017) allows a member state just two years to negotiate exit terms. So Britain faces a real risk of leaving the union before it has been able to make new trading arrangements. All of which militates for ongoing British membership of the single market, perhaps as a member of the European Economic Area, like Norway, for the period between its departure from the EU and the establishment of its new status.

Theresa May and her ministers must thus move fast to clarify certain basic details—about Britain’s future trading relationships, its regulatory parameters, its domestic policies—to give firms like Ridgeview the confidence they need to continue investing. The Chardonnay grapes on its vines today will hit the shelves as sparkling wine in 2019 or 2020. Before they ripen it is up to Mrs May to light the proverbial candles, to head off the chilling effects of Brexit. If the negotiations go well and Brexit succeeds, Bagehot will raise a glass of the 2016 vintage to them. If they go badly he may drain the bottle.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21705867-forget-olympics-wine-should-guide-britains-approach-brexit-2016-vintage/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




School reform: After freedom, what?





Articles Sections Next

School reform

After freedom, what?

Liberating schools to run their own affairs produces some great ones, but also plenty of dross. The priority now is to spread success

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



AS THE new school year approaches, most pupils in Detroit and New Orleans are preparing to return to desks in charter schools. First permitted by Minnesota in 1991, charter schools are found in 43 states; in a few cities they have become mainstream. Their equivalents in England, academies, were set up later but have grown faster. Just 14 years after the first one opened in London, a quarter of all English state schools, and two-thirds of secondaries, are now academies (see chart).



These schools remain the great hope of education reformers in both countries—and beyond. Though charters and academies differ in many ways, they were both conceived as an alternative to schools run directly by local government. They are publicly funded but operated by charities or, in some American states, by companies. This model of public-private partnership has inspired several other countries including India, Kenya, Liberia, South Africa and Uganda.

International evidence suggests that schools do best when freed from government control. Competition from newly founded schools tends to raise others’ standards. But in both America and England, researchers have recently produced some troubling numbers. Although some charters and academies have achieved spectacular results, on average they appear to be little better than other schools when pupil characteristics are taken into account.

As a result, reformers are thinking afresh about autonomous schools. They are seeking ways to ensure that they are held to account, that they are well-led and that the exceptional teaching found in the best becomes the norm.

Class acts

The American cities that embraced charters in the 1990s saw them as a way of injecting entrepreneurial zeal into moribund school districts. John King, the federal education secretary, co-founded a charter school in Boston in 1999. He recalls that they were set up to showcase new ways of running schools and teaching pupils in otherwise “one size fits all” districts. Since charters usually did their own hiring and firing, they were less beholden to—and ferociously resisted by—America’s mighty teaching unions. They were concentrated in poor parts of big cities, where results had long been dire.

Before he was elected president, Barack Obama pledged to increase funding for charter schools. (There are still about 1m children on charter waiting lists nationwide, and 23 of the 43 states that allow charter schools limit their growth.) Race to the Top, a programme passed as part of the 2009 fiscal stimulus package, offered cash to areas that encouraged charters, introduced common standards and put in place measures to evaluate teachers.

The main motivation for creating the first group of academies in England was to raise standards for poor children, recalls Conor Ryan, an adviser to Tony Blair, the prime minister of the day. Many attended awful schools run by local authorities. So, in 2002, the Labour government said that failing schools would become academies, with more control over recruitment, timetabling and finances. When Labour left office in 2010 there were 200 such schools in England. (Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have distinct education systems, and no academies.)

Under the coalition government that followed, academies spread rapidly. Ordinary schools received cash to convert. The expansion continued after the general election in 2015. Earlier this year Nicky Morgan, then the education secretary, said that she wanted all schools, including primaries, to become academies.

Yet political enthusiasm seems to be waning on both sides of the Atlantic. Hillary Clinton is less keen on charters than Mr Obama. In England teachers, and even many Conservative MPs, fiercely opposed Ms Morgan’s policies. Theresa May, the new prime minister, has yet to comment on her plans for education.

The scepticism is partly a result of research suggesting that the impact of school autonomy is less impressive than advocates had hoped. A study in 2013 by the Centre for Research on Education Outcomes (CREDO) at Stanford University compared the results of pupils at charters with those of similar children at ordinary state schools. CREDO concluded that pupils at charters on average progressed by the equivalent of just eight additional days of learning per year (admittedly, many American charter schools get by on less money than other schools).

In England, academies are found at the top and bottom of the league tables that rank school success. As Lucy Heller, the chief executive of Ark, a charity that runs a successful group of academies, notes: “Autonomy provides a licence to do well, but also the freedom to do badly.” A study published in July by the Education Policy Institute (EPI), a British think-tank, found that converting from being council-run to an academy had little effect on mid-ranking schools. But the EPI also found that conversion led to improvements among both the best and worst schools.

Where charters and academies have done particularly well is in teaching poor children in cities. A follow-up study by CREDO in 2015 found that across 41 urban areas, children in charters were learning the equivalent of 40 more days of maths and 28 days of English every year than pupils in traditional schools. Black and Hispanic children performed especially well. And although charters have not thrived in every city (see map), where they have worked, as in Washington, DC and New York, pupils can make gains worth almost 100 days of extra learning in a year.



Reformers are now trying to work out why such huge variation exists. One lesson that has been learned in both America and England is that autonomy needs to be coupled with a way of ensuring schools are still accountable for their performance. CREDO found that in states where charters expanded with little oversight, such as Arizona, there were many failures and results were worse than in ordinary schools. The biggest successes in England were in the early years of academies, when they were few and ministers could keep track of them, says Mr Ryan.

Accountability requires clear standards, transparent ways of measuring whether schools are meeting those standards, and the ability to reward schools that succeed and sanction those that fail. One way to ensure it is with central-government oversight. Forty years ago a British prime minister would not have dreamed of keeping tabs on individual schools. Today the education department has a “delivery unit” monitoring around 100 performance indicators. America’s federal government has far less control over education, but it can influence schools through initiatives such as Race to the Top and Common Core, a nationally recognised set of school standards.

Many charter schools and academies are also accountable to the school chains they are part of. Harris Federation, a high-performing group of 41 academies, is one example. Forty specialist “subject consultants” sit at the centre of its operation, writing lesson plans, setting the curriculum, reviewing data and, most important, observing and training teachers. The process for getting new schools up to speed is quite rigid, says Sir Daniel Moynihan, the Harris Federation’s chief executive. Only when standards have improved are head teachers given more freedom.

The second lesson reformers have taken from the past 25 years of school autonomy is that leadership matters. The best charter organisations and academy groups are slick operations. A paper in 2014 by Nick Bloom of Stanford University and others found that schools using the sorts of practices common in excellent companies, such as clear targets, performance tracking and incentives for good employees, achieved better test scores. These practices were much more common in charter schools and academies than in either normal state or private schools.

For David Laws, Britain’s schools minister from 2012 to 2015, the leadership and firm governance brought by academies mattered more than their freedoms. This partly explains why the best ones were able to take advantage of greater autonomy whereas middling ones did not, he suggests. Indeed, a report in 2014 by the Department for Education found that few academies had taken much advantage of their freedoms. Some 55% had made changes to the curriculum, but only 8% had changed the length of the school day.

A successful charter organisation such as KIPP (Knowledge is Power Programme) opens a new school only when it spots a leader capable of running it. This has held back growth. England’s school chains are suffering from similar constraints. Some organisations, however, are trying to plug the gap. Future Leaders works with schools to spot, recruit and train potential head teachers. In March the government said that it would develop new voluntary qualifications to prepare those soon to be in charge of academy groups and their finances.

The third lesson being drawn by reformers is about how to spread the types of education provided by the best charters and academies. Initially, the main approach was to expand their reach. In the early years of the coalition some groups “took on any school the government gave them”, says Jonathan Simons of Policy Exchange, a British think-tank. Soon enough, standards slipped.

Many of the best English chains are wary of growing too fast. Taking on a failing school is expensive, says Sir Daniel. Turning it around will require a great deal of time and attention. He has therefore limited Harris to growing by between three and five schools a year.

The best schools increasingly resemble laboratories, where reformers try to distil the essence of success. In 2011 Roland Fryer and Will Dobbie, both then at Harvard, summarised the five qualities of the best charter schools. These were: frequent feedback for teachers, tutoring, longer school terms and days, the frequent use of data to track pupils’ progress and a “relentless focus on academic achievement”.

A follow-up paper published in 2014 found that these attributes could be developed in an average public-school system (in this case, Houston). What is required, though, is for more talented people to enter teaching and for them to be taught how to do their jobs well, rather than subjected to the abstract theorising common on many teacher-training courses.

Many charter-school pioneers now argue that reforming education across an entire school system is as much about improving the quality of teaching as about tinkering with structures. “The first generation of charter schooling was about proving that poverty wasn’t destiny,” says Orin Gutlerner of Match, a group of Boston charters. “The second was about trying to scale up those schools. But the third is about human capital.”

The most innovative schools are currently rethinking their focus on behaviour management and relentless test preparation. Partly, this reflects a private recognition among advocates that although charters have transformed education in some poor areas, they would think twice about sending their own children to them. They worry that although these schools can provide the discipline missing in their pupils’ lives, they can also stifle creativity.

The shift in emphasis also reflects a growing concern that even graduates of the best charter schools could be doing better. Like others, they often drop out of university—and, even more worrying, do not seem to be thriving at work.

Lessons for life

In a new paper, Mr Dobbie and Mr Fryer found that although the best charter schools in Houston did better than equivalent state schools in tests and college admissions, attending one had no discernible impact on wages. They suggest that charters need to work just as hard to develop children’s soft skills and character as to boost their test scores. Doing that will require the freedom to innovate. But politicians are increasingly impatient. If the schools do not move quickly, autonomy could prove short-lived.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21705697-liberating-schools-run-their-own-affairs-produces-some-great-ones-also-plenty/print





Articles Sections Next





Technology Quarterly




Remaking the sky: A sudden light

Satellites: The small and the many

Earth observation: Anywhere and everywhere

Launchers: Getting a lift

The role of robots: Construction and destruction

Human space flight: The orphans of Apollo

Brain scan: Space chips





Articles Sections Next

Remaking the sky

A sudden light

New capabilities, new entrepreneurialism and rekindled dreams are making space exciting again, says Oliver Morton

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



SHORTLY after sunset there had been juddering green stabs of lightning to the south, but by a quarter to one in the morning there is nothing in the warm, wet July air over Cape Canaveral but a thin patchwork of moonlit cloud. And then, precisely at the time it was meant to happen, there is a sudden light on the horizon, some 18km away. A light that rises.

A 550-tonne machine taller than a 20-storey building is throwing itself into the sky. Its initially unhurried ascent burnishes the clouds bronze. As the rocket climbs above them, its pace quickening, the roar of its engines speaks to its power as the sharp line of its exhaust illustrates its precision.

Two minutes and 21 seconds after launch, 61km above the Atlantic and still well in sight, the first-stage engines shut down. The two stages of the rocket—a Falcon 9, built by a company called SpaceX that is seeking to reinvent space travel—separate; the single engine of the second stage ignites, driving its cargo ever faster to the east where it is quickly lost to sight. When, nine minutes after departure, that engine is turned off, the rocket will be in orbit 240km above the Earth, travelling at 7.5km a second. Two days later its cargo of provisions and scientific experiments will be delivered to the International Space Station (ISS).

Will ye no come back again?

The spectacle, though, is not over. Shortly after separation, at an altitude of more than 100km and while still climbing, the rocket’s first stage slews around before bringing three of its engines back to life to change its course. It reaches the highest point of its trajectory and starts to fall back to Earth, engine-end first. A bit more than halfway there, the engines fire again to cushion the shock of its re-entry.

When it is about 10km up, and still falling at well over the speed of sound, the engines fire for the last time. The rocket’s return has none of the stateliness of its departure; the bright light plummets to the horizon with swift purpose. As it reaches the ground, a flat, fiery flower spreads out from its base. Four landing legs the size of oaks smack into the concrete pad. A second later the double whipcrack of its sonic boom signals the end of the eight-minute journey.

Next year it will be 60 years since people first witnessed the majesty of a satellite being launched into orbit: Sputnik 1, hurled into the night sky in Kazakhstan early on October 5th 1957. Such knocking on heaven’s door remains a thrilling experience, and probably always will. The heavens themselves, though, have over that time become significantly more pedestrian.

Just 15 years separated the launch of the first satellite and the return of the last man from the moon, years in which anything seemed possible. But having won the space race, America saw no benefit in carrying on. Instead it developed a space shuttle meant to make getting to orbit cheap, reliable and routine. More than 100 shuttle flights between 1981 to 2011 went some way to realising the last of those goals, despite two terrible accidents. The first two were never met. Getting into space remained a risky and hideously expensive proposition, taken up only by governments and communications companies, each for their own reasons.



Now SpaceX, founded in 2002 by Elon Musk, an entrepreneur who around the same time also set up Tesla, a car company, is trying to provide the cheap, reliable, routine route to orbit that the shuttle could not. It is the first company since the 1980s to enter the launch business with newly designed rockets, and has developed some completely new tricks. Though the July lift-off of its ISS-resupply mission was the sort of thing Cape Canaveral has seen hundreds of times, the successful return of a rocket’s first stage had been witnessed there only once before, late last year.

Mr Musk intends to keep up the pace of innovation. Late this year or early next his company will launch a rocket with three reusable stages, the Falcon Heavy, capable of handling bigger payloads than any other launcher working today. SpaceX is also developing a rocket engine more powerful than any previously developed for a commercial programme. More striking still, before the end of 2017 it is due to start delivering human space travellers to the ISS—the first private company to do so, unless Boeing, which has a similar contract with NASA, pips it to the post.

Impressive as its prospects are, SpaceX is only one contender. Blue Origin, a company backed by Jeff Bezos, the boss of Amazon, has a sub-orbital rocket, the New Shepard, that can come back from the edge of space to land under power in the same way the first stage of a Falcon 9 does. It may well take a capsule with people on board into space next year. A number of other new companies with unmanned rockets are entering the launch business, too.

New rockets, though, are not the only exciting development. The expense of getting into space during the 1980s and 1990s led some manufacturers to start shrinking the satellites used for some sorts of mission, creating “smallsats”. Since then the amount a given size of satellite can do has been boosted by developments in computing and electronics. This has opened up both new ways of doing old jobs and completely novel opportunities.

The 24 satellites of the American government’s Global Positioning System probably represent the world’s single most important space-based asset, vital to the American armed forces and tremendously useful to a couple of billion smartphone users. Building up the constellation to its current size took two decades. Now smallsat companies talk about launching constellations several times that size in just a year or two. Those satellites will be in low orbits, but not all small spacecraft will stay close to home. By the end of 2017 Moon Express, based in Florida, hopes to deliver a 10kg payload including a rover to the Moon, making it the first commercial company to land anywhere beyond Earth. Other companies are looking at smallsats as a way of prospecting asteroids for mining.

No single technology ties together this splendid gaggle of ambitions. But there is a common technological approach that goes a long way to explaining it; that of Silicon Valley. Even if for now most of the money being spent in space remains with old government programmes and incumbent telecom providers, space travel is moving from the world of government procurement and aerospace engineering giants to the world of venture-capital-funded startups and business plans that rely on ever cheaper services provided to ever more customers.

As they prove that they can make money, they will grow further, and fast. But in many cases money is not the only aim. Their founders are people who think that going into space can benefit the human race more broadly. Mr Musk wants to set up a permanent colony on Mars in a couple of decades. Mr Bezos hopes that millions of people will one day work in orbit. Neither of these aspirations seems likely to be realised. But the effort to get there may well re-establish space as a realm of possibility and inspiration.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21705587/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Satellites

The small and the many

Flocks of cheap little satellites could transform the space business

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

An SSL satellite unfurls its wings

ROCKETS are the thrilling, spectacular bit of space flight. But without something useful to carry they are basically just fireworks. To get a sense of the new entrepreneurial approach to unearthly enterprise, start instead with the radical changes in what it takes to make a spacecraft.

In Palo Alto, California, there is a factory that has been making spacecraft since the year Sputnik was launched, and before anyone in Palo Alto had heard of Silicon Valley. SSL, previously known as Space Systems/Loral, has built more than 100 communications satellites, of which 81 are still in operation today. The dozen or so currently spread through this warren of clean rooms the height of cathedral naves represent more than a year of the company’s order book.

They are all based on the same structure: a cylinder 1.2 metres across enclosed in a square box. The more the satellite has to do, the taller the box it is built on, the longer its solar panels and the larger and more complex the array of antennae and reflectors through which it sends data to its earthbound clients. Sky Muster II, nearing completion, is among the biggest. Designed to provide broadband communications across the less densely populated parts of Australia, it stands nine metres tall, with a complex array of reflectors tailored to serve the outback.



The communications-satellite business is dominated by four operators, Eutelsat, Inmarsat, Intelsat and SES. They make most of their money from companies that want to send television signals to people’s homes, but also serve markets for data transfer and mobile communications. They demand ever more of the handful of aerospace companies like SSL that have the expertise to compete for their custom, says Paul Estey, head of engineering and operations at the factory.

The industry is innovative but also very loss-averse. The smallest of the SSL communications satellites may sell for $100m or so, the biggest for perhaps three times that. Add on $100m for the launcher, and the satellite may not start showing a profit for a decade. Because of the need for a long lifetime in a hostile environment with no chance of any repair, a new technology that carries any significant risk will simply not be flown.

An hour’s drive up Route 101 you will find a very different spacecraft factory. Planet, until recently known as Planet Labs, occupies a shabby-chic building in the South of Market area of San Francisco. A room the size of a largish Starbucks on the ground floor houses the desks and tools needed to build 30cm-long satellites each weighing about five kilos. If you know what to look for, you will recognise many of the components as coming from other sorts of device, most notably smartphones. Making one of these “Doves” (pictured), as Planet calls them, takes about a week. At the back of the room there are dozens packed up ready to be shipped off. This is the new face of space: small objects, large numbers.

Doves are part of an extended family of very small satellites known as cubesats. In the late 1990s researchers at Stanford University and California Polytechnic State University in San Luis Obispo realised that a certain amount of standardisation would make very small satellites much easier to launch. They came up with a standard called the “1U” cubesat: a box 10cm by 10cm by 11.5cm with electronic and physical interfaces that would allow it to fit alongside others of its ilk in a dispenser that could fly as a “secondary payload” (launchers often have more capacity than they need for their main cargo). The standard caught on. By early 2013 some 100 cubesats had flown, and the tools required to design and build one were so well developed that a class of schoolchildren with an inspired teacher could take on the task.

Planet’s founders, Chris Boshuizen, Will Marshall and Robbie Schingler, thought cubesats might be the basis of a business. While working at NASA’s Ames Research Centre in the early 2010s, they looked at what could be done with the largest telescope that would fit into a “3U” cubesat, three 1Us stuck end to end. Pointed towards Earth from a low orbit like that of the ISS, such a telescope could take pictures with a resolution of five metres or a bit better. That was nothing like as good as the images being sold by companies using bigger telescopes in much larger satellites. But 3U cubesats could be deployed by the dozen or the hundred. For some markets, such as agricultural monitoring, the sheer quantity of the information gathered by such flocks might make up for the low resolution.

The first 28 Doves were sent up from where they were deployed to the ISS in 2014. The launch was celebrated at Planet’s headquarters with a pancake breakfast, as has been each of the 13 launches since. Planet currently operates 63 spacecraft. Their capabilities may be limited by their size, but the company claims that the sophistication of their technology is a match for any satellite anywhere. And they support a promising business model. Mr Marshall says Planet now has over 100 customers for the data that the Doves send back. It looks poised for significant growth.

Planet’s success stems partly from the continuously falling cost and rising capability of consumer electronics—especially components for smartphones, which sell by the billion and where size and low power usage are crucial. But that would be of no use without a willingness to improve the satellites frequently—indeed, incessantly. By June this year the Doves had been through 14 upgrades. Today’s spacecraft have a different camera from their predecessors, new antennae, rebuilt electronics and a power system based on the lithium-ion battery packs used in Tesla cars, rather than the original AA battery format. The satellites now “see” in four colour bands rather than the original three. They have become much better at telling where they are and which way they are pointing. According to Mr Marshall, in terms of performance per kilo the Doves are now 100 times better than the state of the art five years ago. Such agile innovation is normal in Silicon Valley, but it is not something the satellite world has seen before.

Fly, my pretties

To do things this way requires an attitude to risk alien to the world of big, expensive satellites: Planet expects some of its innovations to fail. It knows that Doves launched from the ISS have only a short life anyway, re-entering the atmosphere after nine to 18 months aloft. This attitude speeds up progress and provides resilience for the company as a whole. A big communications satellite can carry the fate of a whole company with it. When Astra1A, the first dedicated direct-broadcast television satellite, was sitting on top of Europe’s first Ariane 4 rocket in 1988, Rupert Murdoch knew that if it blew up, his nascent Sky broadcasting business would blow up with it—quite possibly taking the rest of his media empire down in flames too. Planet has twice had the bad luck to see a flock of Doves fall to Earth from the fiery wreck of a failed launch, and lived to tell the tale.

A company can welcome risk only if its investors take the same view. Planet’s do. This is another consequence of building a business on small, cheap satellites; the amount of capital needed is relatively modest. Planet has raised almost all its capital from Silicon Valley angel investors and venture funds. Just as technological improvement can be accelerated when your satellites weigh just a few kilograms and have parts lists in the 1,000s, so getting funding is a lot easier when their cost is a few hundred thousand dollars or less. The total invested in Planet to date, after three rounds, is $158m; at SSL that would buy a single satellite.



In 2001-05, venture investments in space businesses worldwide totalled just $186m. In 2011-15 they had risen to $2.3 billion, according to a study by the Tauri group. Half of those investors were based in California, and most of this money has gone either into small satellites or into new launchers tailored to those satellites’ requirements. Venture capitalists feel increasingly at ease about the technology involved.

The business aspirations of companies like Planet are familiar, too. As the Tauri report puts it, the new wave of space companies has been able to sell itself to VCs as a way to “follow the path terrestrial tech has profitably travelled: dropping system costs and massively increasing user bases for new products, especially new data products”. Fashion is another factor. Like Doves, Silicon Valley investors flock; the past few years of success for SpaceX, founded by one of their own, has made space a particularly appealing place for the flock to settle. This new source of capital looks like producing a great many satellites. In July Euroconsult, a consultancy, estimated that in the period from 2016 to 2025 some 3,600 commercial small satellites might be launched, including over 2,000 flown by VC-funded Earth-observing companies.

Others, including some with deeper pockets, want to take the smallsat revolution further. Today’s big communications satellites are almost all to be found in an orbit 36,000km above the Earth. This is because, at that height, it takes them 24 hours to go round once—which means that, seen from the ground, they seem to sit stationary in the sky. In businesses that depend on a single antenna pointed in a single direction, that is a huge advantage. But it has costs. The amount of data you can handle with a given antenna and amplifier drops off according to the square of its distance from the surface. This means that closer to Earth you can do more with less. You can do it faster, too: going 36,000km up to “geostationary” orbit and back again delays a radio signal by a quarter of a second, a problem for some applications.

All the same, communications satellites have mostly forgone the advantages of lower orbits, for two reasons. The lower the orbit, the more satellites you need to make sure one can always be seen from the ground. And satellites that move across the sky require receivers that can track them. This does not mean moving dishes; today’s receivers can track electronically. But such technology is demanding.

The more the merrier

OneWeb, a project being put together by, among others, Intelsat, the Virgin Group and Airbus Industries, is based on the idea that modern antennae can surmount this communication problem, and that the smallsat approach can sort out the coverage problem. It plans to use some 648 satellites in orbits just 1,200km up to offer seamless communications to any spot on Earth. Its business plan turns the need to cover everywhere to cover anywhere into a feature by focusing on developing countries; nowhere will be too remote for it to serve. The first satellites are to be launched next year.

This is not something you can do with cubesats, or on a startup budget. OneWeb is a multi-billion-dollar proposal. Its prototypes are being made at an Airbus plant in Toulouse. In Florida OneWeb and Airbus Space and Defence are building a factory where they hope to produce up to four 150kg spacecraft every day, using highly automated systems; that is more by an order of magnitude than anything the satellite world has seen before.

Not only is the project technologically very ambitious; it also faces a lot of competition. Google, where OneWeb’s innovators were working at one point, is looking at stratospheric balloons as an alternative way of providing connectivity in the developing world. Facebook is eyeing high-flying solar-powered drones.

The incumbent communications-satellite industry is paying attention, too. At Google the OneWeb founders worked on a system called O3B, named for the “other three billion” people not yet getting data services. After they left, the system went forward without them. When it is finished, it will consist of 20 satellites orbiting at about 8,000km. This summer SES, one of the big four comsat operators, took complete control of the project, buying out Google and its other original partners. Meanwhile SpaceX, which until now has operated purely as a launch provider, is talking about a low-orbit communications system of its own, with perhaps 4,000 small satellites. That one project would use three times as many spacecraft as there are in the skies today.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21705588/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Earth observation

Anywhere and everywhere

Earth-observation satellites are changing the world—yet again

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



IN TERMS of engineering ambition, operational complexity and capital requirements, big communications-satellite constellations outstrip the small-satellite revolution in Earth observation. In terms of world-changing potential, though, things may well be the other way round.

Satellites are only a marginal part of the communications business; they matter in some niches, such as multichannel television, but they represent only a small fraction of the $2 trillion telecoms business. The marginal can still matter. The as-yet-unconnected “other three billion” that projects like O3B and OneWeb aim to serve are on the margins of the world economy, and systems that connect them up affordably would be a great boon. But it would be an expansion of the remarkable transformation in computing and communications already being wrought by smartphones connected in all sorts of other ways. What is now happening in Earth observation, on the other hand, is a whole new story. For the fourth time in 60 years, space is revolutionising the way people think about the planet.

The first revolution might be called an anywhere revolution. From the early 1960s on, spy satellites were able to look wherever their handlers wanted them to, even deep into enemy territory. They allowed cold-war adversaries to assess each other’s nuclear and other capabilities and provided a way of monitoring arms-control agreements. That helped to keep the cold war cold.

The second revolution was an everywhere revolution. The pictures of the Earth taken by the Apollo astronauts gave the planet’s inhabitants their first sight of their common home seen from afar. Contrasted with the dead husk of the moon and the infinite emptiness of space it seemed small, beautiful, intensely precious. Those pictures accelerated the advent of modern green politics.

The third revolution was another anywhere revolution. This time, though, the novelty was to know your position anywhere that you happened to be. The GPS satellites launched by America’s Department of Defence allow billions of devices to pinpoint their precise positions. That smartphones, cars, goods containers and girl guides know exactly where they are is now central to everything from orienteering to Uber.

The current, fourth revolution is both an anywhere and an everywhere revolution. It is the transformation of the Earth into a gigantic set of data that can be both interrogated and extrapolated.



The number of Doves Planet is able to fly allows it to provide images of every point on the planet fairly frequently; its ambition, likely to be realised fairly soon, is to use “sun- synchronous” orbits (see graph) to image everywhere on Earth at the same time every day. Spire, another cubesat startup based in San Francisco, does not look at the Earth’s surface but listens to its radio signals. Every ship on the planet is required to have a transmitter that continuously broadcasts its location, and before long Spire expects to have data on every ship on the planet every hour.

All-seeing

BlackSky, a startup based in Seattle, is at the anywhere end of the market. Its satellites are larger than Doves, and their bigger optics give them better resolution (one metre or so, meaning that they can pick up cars, which matters for a lot of applications). They can also be made to take pictures of targets off their orbital track, rather than seeing only straight below them. With 60 of these satellites in a range of orbits, the company aims to be able to produce a picture of any point on the Earth’s surface between 55ºN and 55ºS within 90 minutes of being asked. Other new outfits offer different combinations of resolution and repeat visits.

Cloud storage and processing play a big part in this new revolution. Planet has invested heavily in the pipeline that takes raw data from its 12 ground stations around the world and turns them into a usable product, but it buys storage and processing power as needed from cloud-computing companies. Without such services, startups could never cope with the terabytes of data that their satellites produce every day.

New markets matter too. The Earth-observation companies that started up in America in the 1990s all had a single dominant and expert customer for their high-resolution images: the little-known National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency in Virginia. Serving its requirements made money for the companies involved but hardly encouraged diversity. The industry eventually coalesced into a single company, DigitalGlobe. It is thriving; this September it will launch another of the big, capable high-resolution satellites it puts into orbit every few years. But the government still accounts for well over half its sales.

The new companies will also sell to the government, but few if any of them are relying on it. Instead, their hopes of rapid growth rest on customers who have not previously used satellite data but have questions they want answered. Both the satellite companies and the third parties that use their data have invested heavily in machine-learning technologies that can extract those answers from the huge amounts of data stored in the cloud by understanding what they see and recognising when things change.

They can tell a shipping line—or, soon, an airline—exactly where all its vessels are. They can chart economic growth by recognising the spread of cities and the traffic within them, or the amount of light that they give off at night. They can provide a reinsurance company with daily updates on any changes relevant to its risk portfolio. They can inform futures traders about the state of crops across an entire continent, or individual farmers about the state of crops in a particular field. They can combine their data with other georeferenced data, such as Twitter feeds, to produce images of disasters, demonstrations, conflagrations and celebrations as they happen.

If you think the best way to look for some truth about America is to count the cars on the New Jersey Turnpike, it is easily done. The same applies to any equally obscure metric in any other country. The potential of immense sets of data that cover the world in growing detail, are refreshed more or less in real time and can learn to pick up all sorts of objects and phenomena autonomously seems inexhaustible.

In among all the novelty, old sorts of forecasts will be overhauled, too. As well as hearing radio signals from the Earth below, Spire’s satellites can listen to the transmissions from America’s 24 GPS satellites, and from similar systems being fielded by Europe, Russia and China. Given their different orbits, the Earth will sometimes come between the two satellites, and its radio signal will have to pass through some of the Earth’s atmosphere before the planet blocks it out completely. The way that the signal fades in the atmosphere can be used to calculate the temperature and pressure along the line connecting the two spacecraft, providing a valuable new source of raw data for weather forecasting. Spire has 12 satellites today and hopes to have 44 before the year is out. By the time it has 1,000, it could be producing 100,000 atmospheric cross-sections every day: terabytes of valuable data from thin air.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21705589/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Launchers

Getting a lift

Being cheap is not the be-all and end-all of a launcher

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR decades, lower launch costs seemed to be the sine qua non of progress in space travel. Enthusiasts saw reducing them by orders of magnitude as the key to being able to do much more in space. That is one reason why there is so much excitement around SpaceX, which has undercut the competition enough to take a significant share of the launch market. Its potentially reusable spacecraft seem to promise continuing reductions in launch costs in the future.

The smallsat revolution shows that this stress on dollars per kilogram was too simplistic. If you can get much more capability out of each kilo, then the cost of doing things in space will drop even if the cost of launches does not. In the smallsat world innovation comes first and new launch services follow. The key factor is not necessarily a very low cost per kilo, but new standards and speed of service.

This is the market that Peter Beck, CEO of an American-owned, New Zealand-based company called Rocket Lab, wants to serve. His company’s Electron rocket is due to make its first flight from New Zealand’s North Island later this year. Backed by Silicon Valley money, the Electron is designed to deliver a 150kg payload to a sun-synchronous orbit for just under $5m—the same price as that currently charged by Spaceflight, a Canadian company that brokers “ride-share” opportunities for smallsats to fly as secondary payloads on big launchers.

Rocket Lab’s $33,000 per kilo sounds dear when a Falcon 9 can deliver a kilo to low orbit for a tenth of that price or less. But you have to buy in bulk, paying $62m or more for launching 20 tonnes on a whole Falcon 9. And you may have to wait for a couple of years because there is a queue. For little agile companies currently shopping around for shared rides to often suboptimal orbits, like that of the ISS, 30 3U cubesats in just the right orbit within months of signing a $5m contract sounds a lot more appealing.

Building rockets with the low unit costs that smallsats require is challenging, even if the payloads are modest. Mr Beck’s response combines mass production, new manufacturing techniques and materials and new ideas. Rather than have different engine designs for both the first and the second stage, he has gone for just one type, nine of which are used for the first stage and one for the second. Not coincidentally, this is the same cost-saving approach as that taken by the Falcon 9: SpaceX has shown it is cheaper to build lots of engines to the same design than smaller numbers to a range of them. Rocket Lab also uses 3D printing to produce the engines, and makes its fuel tanks out of carbon composites, which being lighter give the engines less to lift. And it has some tricks all of its own, notably the use of battery-powered pumps to push fuel and oxidiser into the engines.

Alpha, a smallsat launcher being developed by Firefly, a company set up by SpaceX veterans, uses similar materials, but has a different new idea for getting the fuel into the engines, and is also using a novel clustered-engine design called an aerospike on its first stage. Richard Branson’s Virgin Galactic is in the market too. The company’s original purpose was to give tourists joyrides in sub-orbital spacecraft, and that is still on the cards, but the company is also planning to launch smallsats using LauncherOne, a rocket that will be carried under the wing of a converted Boeing 747. Again, the engines are largely 3D printed and the tanks made of carbon composite. The first flight is expected next year.

A crowded space

In its early days SpaceX, too, was aiming for the small-launcher market; the Falcon 1, which first flew in 2007, was much the same size as the Electron. But it was ahead of its time. There was a need for it but not a viable market, the company’s COO, Gwynne Shotwell, has since said. Luckily for Mr Musk, a NASA contract for resupplying the ISS made possible the development of the Falcon 9. Once it was making big launchers and space capsules, SpaceX did not return to the smallsat market; instead it branched out into the market for launching multi-tonne communications satellites to geostationary orbit, which had been dominated by Arianespace, a European consortium.

Mass-produced engines and other innovative approaches have made SpaceX very competitive on cost, but there are limits to how useful that is in this market. Russia, China, Japan and India, as well as Europe, all have their own launch industries, and will keep them for national-security reasons. That might not matter if SpaceX were able to increase the overall size of the market, but rockets typically cost less than the satellites they launch, and it is the total cost that sets demand. Making rockets $10m or $20m cheaper is neither here nor there.

So SpaceX (which declined to comment on the record for this article) has little commercial incentive to slash its prices, and at present is has no obvious new markets. Modest smallsat constellations do not make sense for it; the manifest that Rocket Lab hopes to spread over 50 launches in a year would fit on a single Falcon 9. And the only really big smallsat constellation, the OneWeb communications system, has signed launch contracts with Arianespace and Virgin Galactic (both companies in which OneWeb’s owners have stakes). This may be why SpaceX is talking about building its own constellation of 4,000 communications satellites. A venture on that scale might get real benefits from very low-cost Falcon 9 launches.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21705591/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The role of robots

Construction and destruction

It’s not what you launch, it’s what you do with it

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Spiderfab spins a platform

ON EARTH, valuable assets are serviced, upgraded and recycled; they are also protected and, now and then, attacked. None of this is yet happening in space. But all of it could.

Some satellites break down; all of them, eventually, run out of fuel. Robotic service spacecraft that can identify a satellite, grab it and manipulate it could get around those problems. Orbital ATK, an aerospace company based in Virginia, has developed a spacecraft along these lines that works a bit like a mobility scooter; it provides somewhere with an engine for an elderly spacecraft to settle down in when it can no longer get around on its own. Orbital hopes to use such spacecraft to extend the lives of communications satellites that are out of fuel but still making money, and has signed a contract with Intelsat to this end.

An alternative to assisted mobility is refuelling. The Naval Research Laboratory, NASA and DARPA—the Pentagon’s advanced-technology arm—are all working on various projects for spacecraft that could refuel satellites and even repair them in orbit, using a range of tools and complex robotic arms.

A more radical approach is to use orbiting robots to make new spacecraft rather than service old ones. Tethers Unlimited, based in Washington state, is working on a “SpiderFab” that would combine robotic arms with a form of 3D printing to create structures much larger and more delicate than anything that can fit into the fairing of a launcher. Satellite-makers have become adept at folding up solar panels and antennae so as to fit a lot of spacecraft into those small spaces. But the complicated unfurlings, articulations and poppings-into-place required tend to increase both expense and risk, and make some approaches impossible.

Structures built with technologies such as the SpiderFab could change the way the communications-satellite industry works. Platforms with big solar panels and engines would take care of the housekeeping for a whole range of communications packages that could be smaller and launched more frequently, thus keeping the technology much more up-to-date and reducing risk.

All this might have an even bigger effect on science. Space is a great place for telescopes, but it is very difficult to get a big one up there. One reason why the James Webb Space Telescope that NASA and the European Space Agency are due to launch in 2018 has a budget of $8 billion is the need to fold a sunshield the size of a tennis court and a polished mirror 6.5 metres across into the 5.4-metre fairing of an Ariane 5. A combination of big structures and techniques that let a number of small mirrors spread over a large area do the work of a single much bigger mirror would allow remarkable new instruments to be built. Such instruments might be much better than those on the ground at observing, for example, the fascinating planets being discovered around other stars.

Another use for robots in space is asteroid mining. Some asteroids have orbits similar enough to the Earth’s to allow a spacecraft in orbit to get to them with a relatively small amount of fuel—much less than what is needed to get it into orbit in the first place. Like many other staples of science fiction, mining these flying boulders and mountains is now on the Silicon Valley startup agenda. The commodity of greatest interest is not a precious metal (though some of those are to be found on asteroids) but something that in space is much more valuable: water.



Human space travellers need water, as well as oxygen, which can be made from water. They, and their spacecraft, also need fuel: hydrogen made from water fits that bill. Once a certain amount of activity is taking place in orbit, especially if it involves a human presence, getting water from asteroids, in some of which it can be found either as ice or as hydrated minerals, could start to make more sense than hauling it up from Earth.

This will take time, but Deep Space Industries and another asteroid-mining startup, Planetary Resources, recently found a patient investor. Luxembourg knows a bit about space; two of the big four satellite operators, Intelsat and SES, in which its government is a shareholder, are based there. It is also well able to afford a flutter, and tightly knit enough to give a far-out idea with a few enthusiastic supporters a hearing. This summer Luxembourg announced that both companies would benefit from the €200m it will be spending on asteroid-mining initiatives.

What goes up must come down

Fuel from beyond could keep some satellites in orbit indefinitely. Others, though, need to be got rid of. In the lowest orbits—those of the ISS and below—the problem has a natural solution: drag in the outer reaches of the atmosphere will bring anything down in a matter of decades (the ISS has to be regularly boosted). But in other orbits space debris—consisting of dead satellites and their fragments, as well as the leftovers of discarded launchers—builds up. Even in the most debris-ridden orbits, between 700km and 900km, the risk of hitting something is pretty low; the chance of a close call is perhaps 1% per satellite-year, according to Brian Weeden of the Secure World Foundation, an American NGO. But satellites have been lost to such collisions; more satellites mean more such collisions; and collisions create yet more junk. Left to itself, the problem can only get worse. “It’s like climate change,” says Mr Weeden. “By the time it becomes a really big problem it may be too late to do anything about it.”

One answer is to make satellites more responsive and ensure that their operators are better informed. America’s armed forces use radar and telescopes to keep track of everything bigger than about 10cm across, and provide warnings when a bit of junk is going to come close to a functioning satellite. Analytic Graphics, a company that sells orbit-planning software, is moving towards offering a similar service that is better tailored to the needs of commercial-satellite operators. Like Earth-observation startups, but in reverse, it is using ever cheaper commercial technology to do what only governments did before. It is currently tracking about half as many objects as the US Air Force provides data on, but its capacities are fast increasing. It may soon offer its customers a better service.

The other answer is to clean things up—yet another job for robots. In 2017 an ESA spacecraft built by Surrey Satellite Technology, a pioneering smallsat company now owned by Airbus, will test its ability to ensnare a nearby cubesat in a net, reel it in and attach a “dragsail” to consign it to death by re-entry. It will also look at a technology for harpooning bits of junk. In the same year Astroscale, a Singapore-based startup, plans to launch a satellite to get a better measure of space junk. (Ground-based radar can see little that is less than 10cm across; the size of a cubesat was chosen in part because anything smaller would risk being invisible from Earth.) In 2018 Astroscale plans to try out a satellite with an adhesive patch to which any piece of junk can stick.

As it happens, very similar technologies might also be used for removing satellites that some people want in position and others do not. Anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons that target satellites have been developed by America, China and Russia, but if they were used it would be fairly obvious who the attacker was. A stealthy little satellite that could take them out from close by might work better; the victim might never know for sure if its satellite had been attacked or just broken down.

Here, too, better local information would help. America recently sent a pair of small satellites up to geostationary orbit to keep a much closer eye on both its own satellites and those of other countries. A second pair was launched on August 19th. But there are limits to this approach. As Doug Loverro, America’s Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defence for Space Policy, puts it, space is an environment which, at the moment, favours attack over defence.

Star wars writ small

That said, Mr Loverro identifies three ways of ensuring a continued satellite capability, all of which America is pursuing. One is active defence: measures that would make an ASAT attack more difficult. The second is resilience. Commercial service providers and America’s allies have more assets in space than ever before. The use of those capabilities, both on a routine basis—relying on commercial satellite links rather than bespoke military ones for many operations, for example—and as required in an emergency would make it harder for an adversary to deal a crippling blow with an ASAT strike. There would be just too many targets.

The third response is replenishment, which means having some back-up satellites safely on the ground, ready to be sent into space at very short notice. Another of DARPA’s space projects, XS-1, is challenging commercial teams to develop partially reusable launch systems that could get a couple of tonnes into orbit every day for ten days in a row. That could improve the economics of small satellites yet further, and allow the armed forces to feel much more certain of their ability to keep using space.

But there is another side to that use. Some systems designed to hit satellites might also be able to take out an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) during the part of its trajectory when it is above the atmosphere. In the 1980s America’s “Star Wars” programme came up with the idea of so-called brilliant pebbles—thousands of small satellites that could spot and intercept rising ICBMs. The viability of such a system was hotly debated until the first Clinton administration pulled back from all space-based missile defences, on the argument that they would prove destabilising. That rendered the question moot.

The geopolitics of missile defence remain tricky. However, it is a sure bet that in a world where a smartphone has as much processing power as a Cray supercomputer had in the 1980s, and startups are launching satellites by the hundreds, a brilliant-pebble constellation is technologically a lot more plausible than it used to be, even though it might still prove politically unacceptable. Moreover, these capabilities, though at their most developed in America, are not unique to it. Warfare, both defensive and offensive, may yet prove to be an application where, as with communications, navigation and observation, space-based assets offer a regional or worldwide service that provides a distinct edge over surface-based alternatives.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21705586/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Human space flight

The orphans of Apollo

There is no compelling need for people in space, but they will keep going anyway

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Orphans comforted

SPACE need not necessarily become a battlefield, but the possibility is not without precedent. Military strategists have long known the value of taking the high ground, and the remarkable kinetic energy that comes with orbital velocities is a gift to weapon designers. The space race was a way to pursue the cold war by other means; its rockets were the children of V2s and the cousins of ICBMs. And its heroes were warriors, representing their nations in a strange new form of single combat.

The early astronauts had no real technical or operational purpose; their presence, like their combat, was symbolic. But the symbolism was central to the whole enterprise. Well before Sputnik, science fiction had established space travel as one of the fundamental metaphors for future transcendence, a rising above and beyond the limits of the human which would be meaningless if humans were not involved. Superpower competition made the same demand. If space was a race it had to have winners, and those winners had to be people, singular people whose achievements, made possible by the work of hundreds of thousands, would inspire not just their fellow citizens but the whole world looking up at them.

And inspire they did. A generation of children watched the Apollo landings and wondered what was coming next. That wondering went on for the next 40 years—wistful, fitful, sometimes angry, hungry for more. The “orphans of Apollo”, to borrow the title of a documentary film, watched the flying and failing of shuttles; the growth of the comsat industry; the Star Wars programme; the ISS; the roverisation of Mars: and none of it satisfied them. It was not simply that they wanted more astronauts. Astronauts kept flying almost all the time, because the powers that put them in space felt that giving up would entail a loss of prestige. The orphans wanted those astronauts to take things further. Human space programmes stuck in low orbit with no higher purpose than self- perpetuation could not make good their loss.

Now some of those who wondered “what next?” are answering their own question. Many involved in the new generation of space ventures are motivated by more than profit. They want to extend humankind’s grasp and its sense of what it is. Some of this can be satisfied through the technologies of the small, the many and the robotic. These can do more than make money and serve humanity; they can inspire a wonder of their own (see Brain scan below). But for some the promise of space cannot be fulfilled just by hardware and imagery. And the radical improvements in earthly technology that have made ever more capable spacecraft possible have also made some of the technologically attuned entrepreneurs interested in space travel rich enough to direct their efforts beyond the near-term dictates of commerce.

Elon Musk is the foremost of these superpowered orphans. He has shown that he can drive the costs of space travel lower, possibly far lower, than a government bureaucracy can. For more than a decade he has talked about the need for a self-sufficient colony of people on Mars to ensure that the human race could survive an Earth-wrecking cataclysm. He has made it clear that his company, SpaceX, which recent investments have valued at $12 billion, will not become a publicly traded company before it is well on the way to getting that colony started. His purpose is not to maximise shareholder value but to make history.

At the end of September Mr Musk will reveal his road map for Mars colonisation at the International Astronautical Congress in Guadalajara, Mexico. A key part of the scheme is likely to be a new engine, the Raptor, far more powerful than the Falcon 9’s Merlin. Reusable rockets powered by clusters of Raptors will lift both Mars-bound spacecraft and their fuel to orbit. That fuel, unusually, will be liquid methane, which yields more energy per kilogram than the kerosene that Merlins use—and can quite easily be made from ice and carbon dioxide, both of which are available on Mars. Thus methane-powered spacecraft could not only get to the planet; they could also get back.

Billionaire boys’ club

Mr Musk is only one of a number of billionaires with a yen for space. In the 1996 Peter Diamandis, who is now co-chairman of an asteroid-mining startup, Planetary Resources, set up the Ansari X prize, a $10m reward for anyone who could build a vehicle able to lift three people higher than 100km—and thus, technically, into space—twice in two weeks. It was won in 2004 by SpaceShipOne, an experimental aircraft built by Scaled Composites, an outfit that excels at such things, and financed by Paul Allen, who founded Microsoft with Bill Gates. Mr Allen is now funding Stratolaunch, again in partnership with Scaled Composites. It aims to build the world’s biggest aircraft as a platform from which to launch satellites and, conceivably, people into space.

Richard Branson, a British businessman, founded Virgin Galactic to build a space-tourism business out of Scaled Composite’s X-prize-winning know-how. His SpaceShipTwo should let six paying customers fly into the blackness of space and experience zero gravity; about 700 people have paid deposits for tickets. Its development has been far slower than expected, and in 2014 an accident claimed one of its aircraft as well as the life of one of its pilots. But SpaceShipTwo should be back in the air soon. And Mr Branson can call on more than just his own wealth to cushion the blows of fate: Arbor Investments, an Abu Dhabi sovereign-wealth fund, has invested $380m in the venture.

Mr Branson’s main rival in the space-tourism business is Jeff Bezos of Amazon. New Shepard, the small reusable rocket built by Mr Bezos’s private company, Blue Origin, is capable of taking a reasonably roomy space capsule to the same sort of height as SpaceShipTwo. But Mr Bezos’s ambitions go far further. Blue Origin is building a new engine much larger than that used by New Shepard, similar in size to SpaceX’s Raptor. He is talking of selling this rocket to others, but doubtless also has plans for using it himself.

When Mr Bezos outlines his long-term vision for space, he conjures up dreams strongly influenced by ideas championed in the 1970s by Gerard K. O’Neill, a professor at Princeton. O’Neill imagined a future in which all the heavy industry on Earth would be transferred to orbit, there to be powered by unlimited and uninterrupted sunshine, some of which would be beamed down to Earth by huge solar-power satellites. Industry’s workers would live in vast space settlements; its raw materials would come from the Moon and the asteroids; its effluent would be swept away by the solar wind. Mr Bezos talks of a similar “great inversion” in which orbital space becomes a swarm of industrial satellites employing millions of people while the billions below restore Earth to a pristine patchwork of cities, parks and wilderness, receiving much of the hardware they need as industrial manna from heaven.

Blue Origin could be the tortoise to SpaceX’s hare. Rather than racing off to Mars, Mr Bezos is building up a sub-orbital space-tourism business first, then, presumably, a high-capacity, low-cost reusable launcher. From there, maybe, the assembly of an orbiting destination (another of Apollo’s wealthy orphans, Robert Bigelow, made his money in Las Vegas hotels, and longs to expand into orbit). Later perhaps some installations on the Moon, or on asteroids, to provision the guests? If Mr Bezos is willing to devote a significant fraction of what he has earned from Amazon to such things over the coming decades, his slow and steady approach might achieve a lot. Among other things, satisfied space tourists—well off, by definition—may swell the ranks of future space investors.

Such undertakings could outstrip, or absorb, national human space-flight programmes. China and Russia both aspire to putting people on the Moon. Europe’s space agency has similar plans, though it lacks a crewed spacecraft. America talks of Mars as its next destination, but seems in no hurry; and if Mr Musk’s big rockets head there, NASA may pivot back to the Moon. It is good for doing interesting science, and there are resources, too: bits of the Moon, like some asteroids, have ice. A largely scientific moonbase may become America’s default destination.

Such a moonbase might turn out significantly cheaper than the ISS—which is, at a cost of some $100 billion, the most expensive object humans have ever built. Just as post-shuttle NASA now uses contracts with private launchers like SpaceX to resupply the ISS, and will soon rely on them to get crew members there and back too, it will surely take a similar attitude to a future moonbase, contracting with Blue Origin, SpaceX, Boeing or some other company for the delivery of supplies and other services. That should keep costs down. So should the provision of robot assistance and the adaptation of other new space technologies to human needs. Companies such as Moon Express that are planning private missions to the Moon are not driven solely by the Google Lunar X prize, which promises $20m to a mission that meets certain objectives. They see themselves making money providing infrastructure for lunar science and, eventually, settlement.

Stretching the magic

None of this is yet certain. Mr Musk’s record is impressive, but he is trying to change the world not once but twice, both re-energising Earth with the solar-panel, battery and car business built around Tesla and providing an alternative to it with SpaceX. The magic could be spread too thin. So, perhaps, could the cash; both Tesla and SpaceX have in the past come within hours of bankruptcy, just as both have repeatedly failed to meet ambitious timetables. Even if Mr Musk can make spacecraft that get to Mars much more cheaply than previously thought, it is hard to see how they can be paid for with just part of the $5.5 billion launch business.

The powerful Raptor could be a risky beast, at least early on. Taking hundreds of people to Mars is a task of a different order from taking a handful to the ISS. And some aspects of Mars itself could scupper the plans. The planet’s surface is laced with poisonous perchlorates; its gravity may be too low for women to carry babies to term, or children to grow up healthy. Mr Bezos’s Earth-centric ideas may look more reasonable. But they require manufacturing industries that greatly benefit from being in space. And those industries have to consider people who need air, food and places to live as more desirable workers than tireless solar-powered robots specifically designed for vacuum and microgravity—unless people to want to do the work so much that they will pay for the privilege, or contrive to receive subsidies.

As far as a human presence goes, perhaps the most that space can hope for is to become a new Antarctic, protected from military expansion by treaty, suited only to research and tourism. It would not be a new Earth, or a greatly inverted one. But it would be an addition to the human realm well worth having; Antarctica, after all, is a wonderful thing. And the efforts of the orphans to create a yet greater future will, as long as there is no terrible loss of life, provide insights into what visionary drive, technological acumen and capital can achieve.

Humankind’s expansion into space may never meet with crowning glory on other planets or pass far beyond Earth’s orbit. But the years and decades to come will see something bolder and more inspirational than the staid circlings of those just past. And whatever the fate of the most ambitious ventures, the navigable, networked and knowable world that today’s satellites are creating, reinforcing and enriching will endure.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21705590/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brain scan

Space chips

Zac Manchester is making smallsats smaller still

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



LIKE Elon Musk, Zac Manchester wants to get people into space. Unlike Mr Musk, he does not have a billion-dollar spaceship business to do it with. But he has imagination, the skills of a smart young engineer, the cubesat standard and crowdsourced funding. That is enough.

Had it not been for a regulatory SNAFU, the Falcon 9 that took off from Cape Canaveral this July would have carried a 3U cubesat called Kicksat. On board would have been 100 circuit boards measuring 3.5cm on a side and weighing four grams, each holding sensors, a processor, solar cells, a radio and a pair of coiled 10cm whiskers. Once in orbit each of those circuit boards—he calls them “sprites”—would have headed off on its own, kicked out of the tiny mother ship by the uncoiling of its antennae, and the project’s backers on Kickstarter would have had their own personal Sputniks, transmitting at a frequency they could monitor.

A 3mm smartphone camera would be an easy addition, says Dr Manchester, as would other sensors commonplace in phones and elsewhere. A modest investment would allow the whole package to be produced on a single silicon chip. At the margin they could be priced in pennies.

A swarm of such mites could be used to study the Earth’s upper atmosphere or its magnetic field. With a bit more development they could be a remarkable supplement to asteroid-prospecting missions, thousands of them imaging their target from every angle and putting a network of simple sensors all over its surface. If they were attached to lightweight mirrors, lasers could fling them to targets across the solar system—perhaps, one day, beyond it.

Mr Manchester would like eventually to travel to space himself the old-fashioned way. If out-of-the-box engineers are needed in orbit, he may well get his chance. But Kicksat will get up there a lot sooner. And its nanoscale possibilities may take some imaginations—and sponsors—a great deal further.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21705592/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Linux and AWS: Cloud chronicles

Viacom: In the name of the father

Cement manufacturers: Cracks in the surface

Football: Winging it

Direct selling in China: Rebirth of a sales firm

Schumpeter: Mafia management





Articles Sections Next

Linux and AWS

Cloud chronicles

How open-source software and cloud computing have set up the IT industry for a once-in-a-generation battle

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



AS BOSSES go, Linus Torvalds and Andy Jassy couldn’t be more different. Mr Torvalds works, often in his bathrobe, out of his home in Portland, Oregon. He leads an army of volunteer developers whose software can be had for nothing. The office of Mr Jassy, who usually sports business casual, is in a tower in Seattle. His employees operate dozens of huge data centres around the world and work to create new online services that his firm can charge for.

Yet their organisations share an anniversary and an intertwined history. On August 25th 1991 Mr Torvalds asked other developers to comment on a computer operating system he had written, which became known as Linux. It has since become the world’s most-used piece of software of this type. On the same day in 2006 Mr Jassy’s team made available a beta version of “Elastic Compute Cloud” (EC2), the central offering of Amazon Web Services (AWS), the cloud-computing arm of Amazon, an e-commerce giant. Over the past 12 months the division racked up sales of $11 billion.

These two organisations have been central to the rise of cloud computing, the provision of all kinds of number-crunching services over the internet. Global networks of huge data centres, of the sort run by AWS, have become one of the world’s most important infrastructures. Without open-source programs like Linux, however, cloud computing would have been stillborn. Old-style “proprietary” software was too expensive and hard to adapt. In writing his program, Mr Torvalds was just scratching his own itch: he simply needed what later became Linux for his own PC. Now about 1,500 developers contribute to each new version of Linux. As for AWS, rapid growth had left its parent company with “jumbled IT systems”, says Mr Jassy, and it needed to integrate them into a single platform, or set of reusable services, which later emerged as AWS.

Being first to succeed on a large scale allowed both Linux and AWS to take advantage of network effects, which make popular products even more entrenched. Linux also took off because Microsoft’s rivals, in particular IBM and Oracle, wanted to rein in Windows and threw their weight behind the open-source alternative. AWS’s timing, just before smartphones emerged in 2007 and ushered in the app economy, was especially good. It became the go-to service for startups because it charged only for the capacity they used rather than a fixed fee. AWS is still a haven for young firms: nearly two-thirds of its more than 1m customers are startups, although it increasingly also serves big companies such as General Electric and Netflix.

Both open-source software and cloud computing have been disastrous for the old giants of IT. New firms almost always opt for an open-source database in the cloud rather than a pricey proprietary version from Oracle, the biggest vendor of such software. The more firms use the cloud, the less they buy equipment from Dell, Hewlett-Packard and other hardware makers. Cloud-computing providers, for their part, have little time for traditional vendors of computing gear and instead buy from contract manufacturers in China. The incumbents have seen sales in their core business stagnate or drop in recent years. IBM’s revenues, for instance, have fallen for 17 consecutive quarters.

But if their pasts share resemblances, the futures of Linux and AWS will diverge. Linux will probably just “happily plod along”, in the words of Mr Torvalds, as will open-source software in general. Meanwhile, AWS shows no sign of slowing its progress towards full dominance of cloud computing’s wide skies (see chart). It has ten times as much computing capacity as the next 14 cloud providers combined, according to Gartner, a consulting firm. AWS’s sales in the past quarter were about three times the size of its closest competitor, Microsoft’s Azure. This business is the reason why its parent company was able to report its third consecutive record quarterly profit in July, after years of patchy results.



It is much more profitable than anyone expected, too, even after many rounds of price reductions designed to seize market share. One reason is that as well as offering basic storage and number-crunching, it sells hundreds of other computing services and features, from analytics and e-mail to search and workflow; the marginal cost for providing these add-on services is close to zero because the necessary software is already written.

Others are struggling to keep up. Hewlett-Packard has thrown in the towel. IBM had to buy SoftLayer, a startup, in 2013; it has since become the core of Big Blue’s cloud but IBM is still lagging behind. Google is also struggling. Last year it hired Diane Greene, a renowned IT executive, to give its computing utility a boost. Only Microsoft’s Azure is currently able even to “touch” AWS, says Paul Miller of Forrester, a consultancy.

Get off of my cloud

The “cloud-computing wars”, as some call them, are not yet over. The prize is too great. Gartner estimates that about $205 billion, or 6% of the world’s IT budget of $3.4 trillion, will be spent on cloud computing in 2016—a number it expects to grow to $240 billion next year. The latest battleground is data. Cloud providers are hoovering up digital information left and right so they can mine it and use the insights to offer new services or improve existing ones. Earlier this year, for example, IBM bought Truven Health Analytics, which has data on 215m patients.

Yet again, however, AWS has stolen a march on its rivals. Its latest database offerings, Aurora and Redshift, have been in especially high demand. Last year it began to offer a service called Snowball, a suitcase-sized box packed with 50 terabytes of digital memory, which firms can use to transfer mountains of data into AWS’s cloud.

AWS may eventually discover some limits to its growth, as users seek to keep alternative providers in business. Many customers fret about getting “locked in” to it. Startups often use the service in ways that deliberately allow them to switch providers. In Europe some two-fifths of firms use more than one cloud, according to Forrester. This will help other players to catch up.

But AWS’s momentum is immense. Even Salesforce.com, a big provider of online business applications that operates data centres of its own, recently announced that it will start using AWS, notes George Gilbert of Wikibon, a group of IT consultants. At some point, Mr Gilbert reckons, even IBM may have to take the same step.

AWS could end up dominating the IT industry just as IBM’s System/360, a family of mainframe computers, did until the 1980s. If that happens, the antitrust authorities may eventually have to step in, as they did with IBM. Back in the early days, when Messrs Torvalds or Jassy tinkered with their creations, that outcome would have seemed inconceivable.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21705849-how-open-source-software-and-cloud-computing-have-set-up-it-industry/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Viacom

In the name of the father

After a protracted fight, Shari Redstone has taken charge of Viacom

Aug 27th 2016 | New York | From the print edition

Family reunions

A FEW days ago Viacom’s film studio, Paramount Pictures, released “Ben Hur”, a film that cost $100m to make and which tanked so badly at the American box office (it took just $12m in its first weekend) that a prominent investor in the firm, Mario Gabelli, calls it “Ben Hurts”. And in the latest in a string of disappointments for the media giant’s cable channels, which used to lead their industry, Comedy Central was obliged to cancel a low-rated programme, “The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore”.

Yet in another way Viacom has had a good couple of weeks. On August 20th it jettisoned Philippe Dauman, its chief executive, whom many people at the firm and outside blame for leading the business into disarray during his decade in charge. His ousting also marks the end of a soap-opera-like legal battle for control of the company. It has been fought in the name of Sumner Redstone, the ailing 93-year-old mogul who controls Viacom through his family’s private company, National Amusements. People around Mr Redstone, who is neither seen nor heard from these days, have variously claimed either to know his innermost thoughts, or argued that he was not competent enough to have them and should surrender control.

A settlement between Mr Dauman and the board of Viacom leaves Mr Redstone still nominally in charge. But most people believe that Shari Redstone, the mogul’s daughter, who for years was estranged from her father, is now calling the shots.

The question now is how she intends to lift Viacom’s fortunes. Paramount used to have blockbuster years at the box office; and Viacom some of the most acclaimed shows on cable, including Jon Stewart’s “The Daily Show”. Much of the company’s best creative talent left while Mr Dauman was in charge, and few will want to come back unless there are drastic changes. That cannot happen immediately. Tom Dooley, the former chief operating officer and Mr Dauman’s right-hand man, is serving as interim CEO until at least the end of September. Investors tend to like him, but creative types hope that he is a caretaker.

The most intriguing option would be to recombine Viacom with the Redstone family’s more vibrant media property, CBS Corporation, under the leadership of the CBS chief, Leslie Moonves, one of the TV industry’s best-known showmen. According to one former Viacom executive who knows Ms Redstone well, a recombination is her priority. CBS, with a strong broadcast network and a well-run premium cable channel in Showtime, would fit with Viacom’s basic cable offering, giving a combined firm more leverage with cable companies to keep Viacom’s networks in their packages of channels.

A reunited firm, with the film studio, would have enough size and global clout to be credible in an industry where its competitors operate at massive scale. Viacom has a market value of $17 billion, while CBS, once its junior, has risen to $23 billion (see chart). Disney, by comparison, has a market capitalisation of $154 billion. It is clear that Mr Redstone’s decision in 2005 to split up the two firms, partly to allow two favourites (Mr Moonves and Tom Freston, then co-presidents of Viacom) to take jobs as chief executives, was a mistake. Re-merging the firms “makes a lot of sense”, says Mr Gabelli, whose firm, Gamco Investors, controls the biggest block of voting shares not held by a Redstone. “Les is the logical guy and she likes him.”



Whoever takes the job has a difficult task. Under Mr Dauman, a corporate lawyer by training, the firm was sapped of its creative energy, former executives say. He discouraged risk-taking, especially in the digital space, preferring to protect his existing portfolio of assets. He sued YouTube in 2007, after clips of Viacom shows started appearing on the video site. When ratings at the firm’s channels plummeted, he increased the number of commercials to keep up revenues. Recently Mr Dauman also tried to sell half of Paramount to Dalian Wanda, a Chinese conglomerate, in order to pay down debt. The studio that made “The Godfather” films has languished at the bottom of the box office rankings for four years. A sale of Viacom itself is an option, whether to a much bigger media conglomerate or to a trophy hunter. But not while Mr Redstone is still alive, says Mr Gabelli.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21705863-after-protracted-fight-shari-redstone-has-taken-charge-viacom-name-father/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Cement manufacturers

Cracks in the surface

Why grey firms will have to go green

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



THE cement industry is one of the world’s most polluting: it accounts for 5% of man-made carbon-dioxide emissions each year. Making this most useful of glues requires vast quantities of energy and water. Calcium carbonate (generally in the form of limestone), silica, iron oxide and alumina are partially melted by heating them to 1450°C in a special kiln. The result, clinker, is mixed with gypsum and ground to make cement, a basic ingredient of concrete. Breaking down the limestone produces about half of the emissions; almost all the rest come from the burning of fossil fuels to heat the kiln.

About 4.3 billion tonnes of cement were consumed in 2014—China alone needed more than half of that. It also produces 60% of the stuff, followed at a distance by India and America. The industry brings in about $250 billion a year. Cement firms have not attracted the ire of environmental campaigners in the way that oil firms have. But that could change if they shirk efforts to cut emissions in a manner consistent with keeping the world less than 2°C warmer than it was in pre-industrial times (as agreed at UN climate talks last year). For now, few cement companies are setting environmental targets that are tough enough.

The main reason is a lack so far of strong enough financial imperatives, but that is changing. And as is the case for many industries, going green could save firms money. Around a third of cement’s production costs come from energy bills. Retrofitting old kilns to improve thermal efficiency can lower the industry’s energy needs by two-fifths, according to the Carbon Disclosure Project, a research body. Another way to go green is to reduce the amount of clinker in cement by using waste substitutes such as fly ash from coal plants or slag from steel blast furnaces, but these are becoming scarcer and more expensive.

Capturing carbon and then sequestering it, often underground, is another method for cutting emissions. But the bother and expense of such schemes makes them a rarity. There are variations that can cut costs in rich countries. Rather than stuffing the CO² spewed out of cement and other plants underground, Blue Planet, a carbon-capture company based in California, creates building materials from it in the form of aggregates. These can be recycled into making new concrete, avoiding the need for more limestone.

As almost all big cement firms also produce building materials such as concrete and asphalt, capturing emissions to create such products is worthwhile. It could also reduce open-pit mining for limestone, which is especially destructive. Blue Planet is providing materials for San Francisco’s new airport and has other projects across North America. Concrete is the “900-pound gorilla in the carbon footprint of any building” says its CEO, Brent Constanz.

The group of cement bosses that environmentalists need to win round is small. Just six firms—LafargeHolcim, Anhui Conch, CNBM, Cemex, Heidelberg and Italcementi—dominate the global market. The last two are set to merge this year, leaving just five behemoths. The nature of the industry helps explain its propensity for consolidation. The great weight of cement and its ingredients makes the materials tough to transport, creating localised markets. Companies prefer to serve distant markets by buying firms that are already there. Deals have multiplied as firms from the rich world have splurged on those in developing countries, and, occasionally, vice versa. Slowing growth in China has created a huge, grey supply glut of cement in the country, which is likely to mean more dealmaking.

Further consolidation, bringing economies of scale, ought to help the industry to clean up. China is to introduce a national carbon-trading scheme in 2017, and the EU’s own scheme will reduce its emissions cap by 2.2% every year after 2020. The industry is becoming more vulnerable to emissions-curbing legislation, says Phil Roseberg of Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm. Some cement giants are at last taking action. LafargeHolcim already uses an internal carbon price of $32 per tonne; Heidelberg works with one of $23. In a changing regulatory and political environment, investors may start to see nasty cracks in the business model of any firm still stuck in the industry’s old, polluting ways.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21705861-why-grey-firms-will-have-go-green-cracks-surface/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Football

Winging it

China and the beautiful game

Aug 27th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition

The Chinese are on side

WILL the Reds go red? Everbright, a Chinese state-backed financial conglomerate, is reportedly keen to buy Liverpool Football Club, one of the sport’s most celebrated names. If it were to happen, it would be the biggest in a series of recent investments made by mainland firms in European football (see chart). Some think such moves will redraw the sporting map. Arsène Wenger, manager of Arsenal, a London club, has said that China has the financial wherewithal to “move a whole league of Europe to China”.



The tally of Chinese investment in foreign football clubs since January of last year now stands at $2 billion, according to Rhodium Group, a consulting firm. The sums keep growing. The biggest deal yet was the takeover of AC Milan for $820m by a mainland consortium, announced on July 5th. Chinese money has also cascaded towards individual footballers, who often join the world’s best paid. The latest jaw-dropping deal was Shanghai SIPG’s signing of Givanildo Vieira de Sousa, a Brazilian star known as Hulk, in June for $61m.

China’s president, Xi Jinping, a lifelong football fan, approves. He wants to build a domestic sports industry worth $850 billion by 2025. His other goals are for China to host the World Cup by 2030 and win it soon after. The bureaucracy has swung into action, issuing 50-point policy plans and offering tax breaks and other inducements to firms investing in the game.

Many have responded, with Chinese investors in football ranging from the business elite to the relatively unknown. Some businessmen may be mindful of the benefits of being seen to invest in the state’s declared priorities during Mr Xi’s feared anti-corruption campaign. The new owner of Wolverhampton Wanderers, Guo Guangchang, the boss of Fosun Group, for instance, was briefly detained by police last December before being released with no charges a few days later. Foreign football clubs also offer investors a state-sanctioned way to move money out of China, and a hedge against the falling yuan.

Many of those buying clubs abroad are also spending big on football back home. The knowledge gleaned from inspecting the way in which European clubs develop talent should eventually boost skills on pitches in China, where playing standards have long been poor. The investment is not a case of blind adoration for European football, argues Simon Chadwick of Coventry University Business School, but is rather quite strategic.

Insiders who know Liverpool FC are playing down the likelihood of an imminent deal, but the club’s owners may be swayed by events 50km away from Anfield, its home. Manchester City, of which 13% is owned by a consortium led by China Media Capital (CMC), a venture-capital firm with a strong presence in Chinese media, is well placed to lift its profile in a vast, untapped football market. Manchester City has recently agreed a deal to set up a satellite club in China.

Analysts based in China tend to think that the string of purchases represents a bubble. The nation is likely to have less success in spending its way to the top in football than it has had in the Olympics, says Mark Dreyer of China Sports Insider, an industry blog. Corruption now is not as bad as in the old days of “black ball” scandals, when many matches were fixed. Still, the Hong Kong Jockey Club, which hosts betting on a range of sports, remains suspicious and does not allow bets on Chinese football matches.

And the problem with state backing is that it could easily lead to the sort of industrial policies that have led to overinvestment and underperformance in several other Chinese industries. The chances of China becoming a global chip-making superpower, for example, are slim, even though it plans to spend over $100 billion buying semiconductor firms and technologies, said Bain & Company, a consultancy, in a recent study. A report drawing similar conclusions about China’s ambitions in football could soon be on its way.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21705862-china-and-beautiful-game-winging-it/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Direct selling in China

Rebirth of a sales firm

Lessons from Amway’s turnaround

Aug 27th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition



“I AMWAY you this song!” So declared Tan Weiwei, a Chinese pop artist, during a performance in Shanghai on August 14th. Hers was the closing act in a gala celebration thrown by America’s Amway, the world’s largest direct-sales company, for its top sales representatives in China. When she used that odd expression, which in China is a way to say “strongly recommend”, the crowd of 11,000 diehards gathered in the stadium and another 1.5m Amway staff, distributors and customers watching via webcast went wild.

That Amway’s Mandarin name (“An Li”) has become a meme shows the strength of its comeback in China. It entered two decades ago, using its model of multi-level marketing (MLM), which rewards salesmen not only for selling products but also for sales made by people they recruit. After a run of pyramid scams—unrelated to Amway—led to a public backlash, in 1998 the Chinese government banned all direct sellers and its sales dwindled to nearly nothing. Now, however, the mainland is Amway’s biggest market. Its annual sales there, of products such as toothpaste and make-up, have exceeded $4 billion in recent years. How did it do it?

The firm’s leadership emphasises the virtues of patience and investment. Amway had floated bits of its Asian operations outside China, but disliked investors’ short-term focus. It took the divisions private again, which it says shows its long-term approach. Its philosophy helped it through the bleak years on the mainland.

Just as important was Amway’s ability to sell itself to officialdom. The firm’s senior managers got to know regulators and informed them about the differences between pyramid schemes and established direct sellers. It managed its after-sales process well: even after the government lifted the ban on direct selling ten years ago after China’s accession to the WTO, Amway sponsored a fellowship that sent rising stars of the Communist Party to Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, with a handy stopover at Amway’s headquarters in Ada, Michigan.

Amway also had to be willing to change its MLM methods. China’s law permitted direct selling but forbade most forms of multi-level marketing. Firms had to have a physical presence, the government decreed. Amway’s China division devised clever, legal means to reward networkers who recruit other salespeople. It had to revise its sales model five times. It also opened branded outlets, Amway’s first.

So far it has been worth it. Amway is facing greater competition from local firms, but it is still raking in cash as the biggest direct seller in a market worth 112 billion yuan ($16.8 billion). Yet the firm’s choice of keynote speaker at its recent gala in Shanghai, Sir Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the web, is a reminder of a different threat. China’s rapid embrace of e-commerce has already caught some Western giants, including Unilever and Nestlé, off-guard. Amway is menaced, too.

“E-commerce is hurting us very much, as it is changing the mentality of how people shop,” says Audie Wong, president of Amway China. Its digital efforts are getting results; from nothing a few years ago, e-commerce now makes up 45% of sales in China. But strangely, the company is refusing to let consumers buy online directly and insists that web orders must be routed through specific representatives, which adds to its products’ cost. It seems tied to its army of glad-handers. If it cannot go truly digital, its China business might eventually become an example of how not to do things.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21705864-lessons-amways-turnaround-rebirth-sales-firm/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

Mafia management

The crime families of Naples are remarkably good at business

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



AN EASY way to revive a flagging dinner party is to ask people to name their choice of the greatest crime show. Is it “The Wire”, with its intricate portrait of Baltimore’s underworld? Or “The Sopranos”? Or perhaps “Breaking Bad”? Now there is a new contender for the prize—“Gomorrah”, a drama about a collection of Italian gangs known as the Camorra that run a criminal empire from their base in Naples.

“Gomorrah” has been Italy’s most talked-about television series since its release two years ago. It has been sold in 50 countries and the first episode premiered on America’s Sundance TV this week. The series is far darker than the other three. The gangsters aren’t lovable monsters like Tony Soprano, just monsters. It is more realistic. The author of the book behind the series, Roberto Saviano, has been in hiding since the Camorra issued a death warrant against him in 2006. Filming of the series in gritty Neapolitan neighbourhoods was interrupted by local violence.

One of the most striking things about the Camorra is how good they are at business. They have taken over from the Sicilian Mafia as Italy’s foremost crime syndicate, partly owing to the Italian state’s move to clamp down on the Cosa Nostra from the mid-1990s. The Camorra’s strategy of focusing on drugs, particularly cocaine, has also paid off. The group runs much of Europe’s drug trade, including the continent’s largest open-air narcotics market in Secondigliano, in the north-east of Naples.

The syndicate appears to be organised like a typical corporation, with descending levels of power. There is a top tier of senior managers who determine strategy and allocate resources; a second tier of middle managers who purchase and process the product; a third level of sales chiefs who co-ordinate distribution; and a fourth grade of street salesmen who deliver the product directly to customers. The group employs all the usual supply-chain-management methods. Its leaders source drugs from around the world (cocaine from Latin America, heroin from Afghanistan and hashish from north Africa) and make sure that alternatives are in place in case of disruption.

They do some things outstandingly well. Operating outside Italy’s growth-killing labour rules, the Camorra can be fleet-footed. A loose alliance of about 115 gangs, with around 500 members each and numerous associates, they can swiftly assemble a workforce of whatever size is needed, or shift from one line of business to another in a flash. They are best-in-class when it comes to renewing talent and ideas. Whenever entrenched managers balk at moving into new markets, as the older Camorra bosses did when drugs came along in the 1980s, they are replaced by a younger generation.

Paolo Di Lauro, the former head of one of the most powerful clans, and the model for Don Pietro in “Gomorrah”, is arguably one of the most innovative businesspeople Italy has produced in recent years (since 2005 he has been held in solitary confinement in a maximum-security prison). As well as co-ordinating the drug trade with Colombia, he designed the group’s successful franchise system, in which it treats distributors like franchisees who are responsible for their own turf rather than as mere employees. That gives them an incentive to recruit more people as well as to shift more product.

The Camorra put their own unique spin on standard management techniques. They are experts in team-building. New recruits are initiated with quasi-religious ceremonies. Rising stars are given endearing nicknames such as Carlucciello ‘o mangiavatt (“little Charles the cat-eater”) or Urpacchiello (a riding crop made from dried donkey’s penis). They take care of the relatives of workers who die on the job. Gang members known in their role as the “submarine” deliver money and groceries to the bereaved families on Fridays. The group’s efforts at corporate social responsibility (CSR) pay off. Local people invariably take the gangsters’ side during police raids, forming human barricades, pelting law enforcers with rubbish and setting fire to their cars.

True, this is CSR that comes soaked in blood rather than the usual syrup. Mr Saviano calculates that the gangs were responsible for 3,600 deaths between 1979 (when he was born) and 2006 (when he published his book). They are also responsible for a widening circle of economic devastation. The trade in drugs that swells their coffers also ruins lives. Naples, one of Italy’s most enjoyable cities, would be a bigger tourist attraction if it weren’t for its reputation for violent crime.

They’re bigger than US Steel

The Camorra themselves pay a high price, too. The street soldiers live miserable lives, typically ending up dead, injured or in prison before they reach middle age. Those at the top are constantly on their guard against being rubbed out by rivals or arrested by the police. Many of them live in permanent hiding, either in attics or underground complexes. Mr Di Lauro’s business produced turnover of €200m ($250m) a year, but he didn’t exactly live large: he was a recluse, protected by steel shutters and bolted gates, and also had to spend years on the run.

Nonetheless, the syndicate thrives, in part because the rewards are so huge and in part because the alternatives are so sparse. Italy’s economy has been stagnant for well over a decade. The country ranks number 45 in the World Bank’s ease-of-doing-business table, with southern Italy being a particularly hostile place for legitimate enterprise. On August 22nd the heads of the euro zone’s three biggest economies—Angela Merkel of Germany, François Hollande of France and Matteo Renzi of Italy—met on an island off the coast of Naples to talk about relaunching the European project. To be successful, any such plan must make it easier to create legal businesses—and thus likelier that the management genius displayed by the likes of the Camorra is directed towards the creative side of creative destruction.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21705858-crime-families-naples-are-remarkably-good-business-mafia-management/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Central banking: The Jackson four

India’s central bank: Reserve player

American business investment: Econundrum

Drought insurance in Africa: ARC’s covenant

Rising LIBOR: SECular shift

Hedge funds: Law of averages

Free exchange: Believing is seeing





Articles Sections Next

Central banking

The Jackson four

Should the Fed adopt India’s inflation target?

Aug 27th 2016 | HONG KONG | From the print edition



IN THE latter part of this week, monetary policymakers and theorists from around the world were due to attend the Jackson Hole symposium, 6,800 feet up in the mountains of Wyoming. Many people—aggrieved savers and yield-hungry investors—probably wish they would never come back down. To their critics, central bankers seem strangely committed to two unpardonable follies: eroding the interest people earn on their savings and inflating the prices they pay at the shops.

It was, therefore, brave of one central banker—John Williams of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco—to argue on August 15th that the Fed might need to raise its 2% inflation target or replace it with an alternative if it is successfully to fight the next downturn. Some economists favour an inflation target of 4%. This is not as outlandish as it sounds. Indeed, the notion that new circumstances require a new target may appear quite run-of-the-mill to central bankers from the developing world who are taking part in the symposium.

Much criticism of the West’s central bankers rests on the myth that they are wholly responsible for rock-bottom rates. In fact, they seek the highest rates the economy can bear, but no higher. When the economy is at full strength, they want a “neutral” (or natural) rate that keeps inflation steady, neither stimulating the economy nor slowing it. When the economy is overheating, they want a rate above neutral. And when the economy is weak, they want one below it. The neutral rate (r* in economists’ algebra) thus provides a vital reference point for their policy. As such, it exercises considerable influence over central bankers. But they, importantly, exercise precious little influence over it.

According to economic theory, the neutral rate reconciles the eagerness to invest and the willingness to save when the economy is in full bloom. As such, it reflects the productivity of capital, the promise of technology and the prudence of households, none of which are variables chosen by monetary officials. The neutral rate cannot be observed directly. But Mr Williams and a Fed colleague reckon it has fallen persistently: r-star (as he calls it) is close to zero, or about two percentage points lower than it was in 2004.

If r-star is lower than it was back then, the Fed’s policy rate must also be lower to be equally stimulative. That means today’s rate (of between 0.25% and 0.5%) is not as lax as it looks. Leo Krippner of the Federal Reserve Bank of New Zealand estimates that American monetary policy today is already as tight as it was in July 2005, when the federal funds rate stood at 3.25%, having been raised nine times.

The question preoccupying most Fed-watchers is how much tighter policy will get in the next year or two. Mr Williams raises a different concern: how much looser can policy get during the next downturn. If the Fed sticks to its current inflation target of 2%, a policy rate of 0% would translate into a real cost of borrowing of minus 2% (because the money debtors repay will be worth less than the money they borrowed). That may not be low enough.

Such a rate would be only about two percentage points lower than Mr Williams’s estimate of the neutral rate. Raising the inflation target to 4%, say, would allow real interest rates to drop about four percentage points below neutral if necessary. (This is not the only reform idea. Another is targeting the trajectory of nominal GDP, which reflects both economic growth and price inflation; that might result in higher inflation when growth was weak and low inflation when growth was strong.)

But even if a 4% target is desirable, would it be feasible? The Fed has struggled to reach its current target quickly or consistently. What makes anyone think it could hit a higher one? One answer is that a higher target would free the central bank from a “timidity trap”, as Paul Krugman of the New York Times calls it. In such a trap the central bank sets its goals too low, and paradoxically falls short of them. A credible central bank might cut rates to zero and promise 2% inflation. If it is believed, inflation expectations will rise and the anticipated real cost of borrowing will fall to minus 2%. But if the economy actually needs a real rate of minus 4% to revive, spending will remain too weak, economic slack will persist and inflation will ebb, falling under target. Conversely, if the central bank promises 4% inflation, its pledges will be both believed and fulfilled.

Shooting r-star

Western policymakers dislike tinkering with their inflation targets. But in the wider universe of central banks, periodic revisions are no big deal. Indonesia sets its targets for a three-year period, as does the Philippines, Turkey and South Korea. This flexibility need not destroy a central bank’s sound-money credentials: South Korea’s inflation is even lower than America’s.

Although a target centred on 4% sounds scandalous to rich-world central bankers, it is not unusual elsewhere. Indonesia pursues one. Brazil’s inflation target is 4.5%. India is lowering its target from 6% last year to about 4% for the future. The committee recommending that figure was chaired by Urjit Patel, who will be the Reserve Bank of India’s next governor (see article).

One advantage many emerging economies enjoy over richer ones is a higher r-star, thanks to faster rates of underlying growth and inflation, as low local prices converge towards higher international prices. That gives their central banks more room to cut interest rates in the face of a downturn. Indeed, it is hard to think of any catch-up economy that has remained stuck at zero rates.

If Mr Patel succeeds in his new job and the Fed embraces reform, America’s inflation target may one day resemble India’s. But India will still worry more about overshooting its target than undershooting it, and America will still probably harbour the opposite set of concerns. Their inflation targets may match, but their r-stars will not be aligned.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21705832-should-fed-adopt-indias-inflation-target-jackson-four/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

India’s central bank

Reserve player

Will the new governor be a clone of the old one?

Aug 27th 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition

Patel-tale signs of orthodoxy

CENTRAL banks need the confidence of investors to function well, so questions about their leadership and independence are seldom welcome. On August 20th Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, belatedly appointed a new head of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), nine weeks after Raghuram Rajan, the incumbent, surprised everyone by announcing he was stepping down. The new man, Urjit Patel, was an understudy to Mr Rajan—prompting plenty to wonder why the original cast member was, in effect, forced out.

Beyond the usual way stations for central bankers—Yale, Oxford, a period at the IMF—Mr Patel was once a management consultant and an executive at Reliance Industries, a group headed by Mukesh Ambani, India’s richest man. He has been a deputy governor of the RBI since 2013.

India’s newish inflation-targeting framework, which has been successful in stemming rising prices (helped by outside factors such as falling oil prices), is as much his as Mr Rajan’s. So is the upcoming arrangement whereby interest rates will be set by a panel comprising government and RBI appointees, rather than the governor alone. Though he lacks the stature of Mr Rajan, a former IMF chief economist, his hawkish credentials will help fend off calls for lower rates from ministers and industrialists.

His appointment should alleviate fears that Mr Rajan’s untimely exit—all recent RBI governors have served more than a single three-year term—was a ploy by Mr Modi to hobble the central bank’s independence. Insiders suspect that it was Mr Rajan’s sideline as a public intellectual, pontificating on matters far removed from economics, that undermined him in Mr Modi’s eyes. Mr Patel is unlikely to stray so far from his bailiwick.

If monetary policy is expected to remain unchanged, the regulation of banks, the RBI’s other main remit, is a more open question. The state-owned lenders, some 70% of the industry, are struggling with dud loans they extended to industry and infrastructure firms five years ago. Mr Rajan had forced the banks to recognise the holes in their balance-sheets, indirectly taking on the tycoons who had benefited from the forbearance of bank bosses.

Mr Patel’s views on bank regulation are not known. Some of the sensible stuff enacted in recent years, such as making it easier for newcomers to obtain banking licences, will surely stay in place. But whether Mr Patel keeps up the same pressure on the banks will be a big test in the early stages of his three-year mandate. Many hope the new governor will be a clone of the man he replaces—while wondering why Mr Modi didn’t just stick with the original.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21705836-will-new-governor-be-clone-old-one-reserve-player/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

American business investment

Econundrum

Americans are spending and hiring. So why aren’t firms investing?

Aug 27th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition



THE American economy is in a befuddling state. Firms are on a six-year hiring spree that shows little sign of abating; payrolls swelled by an average of 190,000 a month between May and July. Competition for workers is pushing up wages. The median pay rise in the year to July was 3.4%, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Americans are spending that cash; in the second quarter, consumption per person grew at an annual pace of 5.5%, equalling its fastest growth in a decade. Yet real GDP is expanding by only 1.2% a year. The culprit seems to be business investment, which has fallen for three consecutive quarters. It is now 1.3% lower than a year ago—the biggest annual decline since early 2010 when the country was staggering out of the financial crisis. If firms are hiring and consumers are spending, why is investment weak?

Initially, the decoupling was caused by the prolonged fall in oil prices. Cheaper petrol benefited Americans by about $1,300 per household, boosting consumption. Simultaneously, it caused investment in the oil industry to fall by more than half in 2015, as shale oil and gas firms stopped drilling. Investment elsewhere carried on merrily, rising by 4.3%. But the malaise is no longer so contained. Even excluding oil, investment shrank slightly in the first half of 2016 (see chart).

Some of this reflects contagion. When energy firms tighten their belts, their suppliers feel the squeeze. Yet other sectors with little exposure to oil have also pulled back. Financial firms, for instance, invested about 21% less in the first quarter of 2016 than a year earlier. Investment is even down in the consumer-staples industry.

There are three potential explanations for this widespread reluctance to invest. The first is weak demand for the firms’ goods. This explains exporters’ restraint, given lacklustre global demand and a pricey dollar. But it makes less sense at home, with consumer spending strong, and firms happy to hire and to raise wages.

The second is tighter credit. Since the Federal Reserve raised interest rates in December, the average rate banks charge firms to borrow is up by about half a percentage point. After five years of loosening standards, more banks have tightened than eased credit standards for business lending in 2016, according to a Fed survey. In February, financial-market turmoil caused credit spreads in bond markets, the best measure of credit conditions, to surge.

Yet it is unlikely that slightly tighter credit has substantially crimped investment, because American firms are flush with cash. At the end of last year they had $1.7 trillion on hand, enough to pay for Hillary Clinton’s infrastructure plan six times over (though much of this cash is held overseas for tax reasons). Indeed, firms are accumulating cash at the fastest rate since July 2011, according to the Association for Finance Professionals, an industry group.

That leaves the third explanation: that in spite of strong spending, slow trend growth is reducing opportunities for profitable long-term investments. On this view, the recent downturn in business investment was less of a cyclical blip than a sign of things to come.

Economies get bigger when they add people or get more from their existing workforce. America is doing less of both. The Bureau of Labour Statistics projects that the labour force will grow by an average of 0.5% a year from 2014 to 2024, down from 1.2% annually from 1994 to 2004, because of ageing baby-boomers and low fertility. And productivity growth has stalled. From 2005 to 2015, output per hour worked grew by only 1.3% a year, down from growth of 3% a year between 1995 and 2005. In the year to the second quarter of 2016, productivity actually fell, by 0.4%.

Optimists argue that this is part of a lengthy hangover from the recession, which should soon end. One contributor to productivity is the amount of capital—for example, machinery or computers—that each worker has at their disposal. The recession sent this ratio soaring as firms laid off workers and left machines sitting idle. Why would firms invest again before they had replenished their payrolls? But this explanation is becoming less convincing. The capital-to-worker ratio returned to its long-run trend in 2014 (the last year for which data are available). It is past time for productivity growth to have recovered; instead, it is sinking further.

Pessimists think the productivity problem is chronic. Technological advances, they say, are ever-less revolutionary: Uber is less of an advance than the car itself, the smartphone has not changed office work the way the PC did. Nonsense, reply “techno-optimists”, who foresee huge advances in machine learning and robotics.

For now, the data support the pessimists. The best measure of technological advance is total factor productivity, which measures output after controlling for both the number of workers and the amount of capital. In 2015 it grew by just 0.2%, compared with an average of 1.1% in the two decades prior to the financial crisis.

The economy has gradually become more stale. The number of startups per 100,000 people halved from 160 in 1977 to 80 in 2013, according to data from the Kauffman Foundation, a think-tank. Disruption thrives in hubs like the Bay Area and New York, but workers have become less geographically mobile (perhaps due to high housing costs in many such areas). Notwithstanding pockets of disruption, the market share of the biggest firms is rising in most industries, suggesting a dearth of competition. A recent analysis by Goldman Sachs, a bank, found that the fraction of workers in innovative occupations, defined as those growing more than three percentage points faster than overall employment, is falling.

Businesses anticipating slower long-term growth cannot be expected to invest much. And politicians cannot easily conjure up technological progress. But they can boost competition, simplify taxes and regulation, and invest in infrastructure and education, all of which would help to raise American productivity.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21705847-americans-are-spending-and-hiring-so-why-arent-firms-investing-econundrum/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Drought insurance in Africa

ARC’s covenant

A worthy insurance scheme goes awry

Aug 27th 2016 | LILONGWE | From the print edition

Where’s the liquidity?

This year has brought prolonged dry spells to many parts of Malawi. In April President Peter Mutharika declared a state of emergency because of food shortages; yields of maize, the staple crop, are a third below their five-year average. Prudently, Malawi had bought drought insurance from the financial affiliate of African Risk Capacity (ARC), an African Union initiative to fund disaster relief. There is one problem: ARC has not paid out.

Malawian officials had spent three years preparing to join the scheme. They found lots to like. Risks were pooled across the continent. Sophisticated software would model rainfall and its impact on households. If the rains failed, a payout would come quickly, before more typical emergency assistance kicked in. “It was beautifully crafted,” says one civil servant. Malawi signed up last year.

Under the terms of the policy, a payment would be triggered if more than 1.39m people were affected by drought. A joint assessment by the government and international agencies reckons that 6.5m people will need aid by January. Yet ARC’s software, bizarrely, concluded that only 21,000 people were at risk. According to the model, there was hardly a drought at all. ARC is investigating the discrepancy.

No model is perfect. ARC’s approach does not account for extreme heat, which increased evaporation and thus water needs. It estimates precipitation based mostly on satellite monitoring of clouds—only a rough guide to how much rain is actually falling from the sky. Adjusting for the timing of the rains, which came after the crucial flowering period, is also tricky. But similar models are a standard part of famine early-warning systems, and these flaws were probably not the real culprit.

Part of the problem may be that the model is benchmarked using data only from the previous five years, which were themselves unusually barren: that raises the bar to a payout. And many farmers are still reeling from last year’s poor harvest. With little to fall back on, they are vulnerable to even a small drop in rainfall—a rollover effect that ARC’s model ignores.

ARC will conclude its investigations in September: some kind of payment may ease embarrassment. In the meantime Malawi is counting the cost of the wonks’ bewilderment. The maximum payout was $30m: not much to financial markets, but enough to provide supplemental food for 3.7m people for a month. The country is yet to get back its $4.7m premium.

For all that, the principle of disaster insurance is a sound one. The African continent has nine discrete rainy seasons, which rarely all fail in the same year. By sharing risk, countries could halve the funds they need to hold back for emergencies. In 2015, its first year, ARC paid $26m to drought-affected countries in the Sahel before humanitarian appeals had even started. A similar scheme in the Caribbean has doled out $38m since 2007 to islands struck by earthquakes and cyclones.

ARC wants to expand its coverage from seven countries this year to 30 by 2020. It has plans to insure against epidemics and issue climate-catastrophe bonds. Malawi will need convincing. The finance minister has promised to seek answers before signing up again. In this parched part of the continent, enthusiasm is drying up.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21705856-worthy-insurance-scheme-goes-awry-arcs-covenant/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Rising LIBOR

SECular shift

New money-market regulations are pushing up a benchmark interest rate

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



DURING the financial crisis of 2008, LIBOR was a gauge of fear. The London inter-bank offered rate—at which banks are willing to lend to one another—leapt. (Even then it may have been too reassuring: banks have since been fined billions, and traders jailed, for rigging it.) Lately it has been climbing again: on August 22nd three-month dollar LIBOR rose above 0.82%. That is no cause for panic, but it is a seven-year high and 0.2 percentage points more than in June. What’s going on?

Increases in LIBOR, a benchmark used to set rates for trillions of dollars’ worth of loans, usually reflect either strains on banks or expected rises in central banks’ policy rates. Although the Federal Reserve has been toying with tightening, this time LIBOR’s ascent has another explanation, traceable to the turmoil of 2008. A change by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in the regulation of American money-market funds has made borrowing pricier, especially for foreign banks.

Before the crisis investors in money-market funds—which lend for short periods to banks, other companies and the government—had become accustomed to treating their accounts like bank deposits, putting money in and taking it out at will. That changed the day after Lehman Brothers went bust, when the Reserve Primary Fund “broke the buck”, declaring that investors could no longer redeem shares for the customary $1 apiece. A run on funds ensued; to halt the chaos, the Treasury was forced to guarantee them.

The SEC’s new rule, which takes effect on October 14th, obliges “prime” funds (buyers of banks’ and companies’ paper, as well as public debt) serving institutional investors to let their net asset values vary, rather than fix them at $1 a share. To prevent runs, they may also limit and charge for redemptions if less than 30% of their assets can be liquidated inside a week.

This has made prime funds much less attractive, causing a “change in the landscape of the wholesale funds market”, says Steve Kang, an interest-rate strategist at Citigroup. Between October 2015 and July 2016 all prime funds’ assets declined by more than $550 billion, to $1.2 trillion, according to the SEC; “government” funds that invest in Treasuries and the like have swollen by a similar amount, to $1.6 trillion (see chart). Prime funds have also pushed their liquidity ratios well above the 30% threshold as the October deadline approaches; they are loth to lend for as long as three months. Steven Zeng of Deutsche Bank notes that in the past couple of months the average maturity of large funds’ assets has declined from more than 20 days to less than 13.

For foreign banks, which account for more than $800 billion of prime funds’ $938 billion of bank securities, this is depleting an important source of dollars. (American banks rely more on deposits.) Borrowing has become pricier, which LIBOR echoes. They seem to be filling the gap: for example, cash-rich companies are thought to be lending via “separately managed accounts” rather than prime funds. Banks have other alternatives, but borrowing using exchange-rate swaps, explains Mr Kang, is more expensive; central-bank swap lines are dearer still, and because they are primarily regarded as emergency facilities, banks are reluctant to tap them.

The pain will vary from bank to bank. American lenders with lots of LIBOR-linked mortgages may even gain. Some foreign banks may also recoup higher borrowing costs: their floating interest-rate commercial loans outweigh those at fixed rates. But many borrowers will pay a price. The aftershocks of 2008 rumble on.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21705854-new-money-market-regulations-are-pushing-up-benchmark-interest-rate-secular-shift/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Hedge funds

Law of averages

Star funds rarely outperform for long

Aug 27th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



WHEN Citadel, a Chicago-based hedge fund, was bleeding money during the global financial crisis, its boss, Ken Griffin, says CNBC, a broadcaster, parked a van outside its doors to chronicle its demise. Last year CNBC crowned Mr Griffin “King Ken”; in recent years he has done spectacularly well.

Such abrupt twists of fortune appear dramatic. In fact, they are predictable. Novus, an analytics firm, has crunched numbers from Hedge Fund Research, a data provider, to suggest that hedge-fund performance shares a trait boringly familiar from other forms of investment: funds that do poorly then do better, and outperformers then underperform. In other words, past performance is not a guide to future returns (see chart).

The study filters data for two periods: from June 1st 2008 to February 28th 2009, when equity and credit markets were crashing, and from March 1st 2009 until the end of 2015. The funds are anonymised but show plenty of Citadel-like cases. One fund that lost 91% during the crash returned an annualised 42% afterwards. Conversely, among the 93 funds that finished in the top decile during the crash, only three remained star performers. Perhaps they were dazzlingly smart back then. Perhaps they were just lucky.

The study is not perfect. The database includes 928 firms that are still around; others may have closed their doors. But the dots also reveal that quite a few funds performed poorly during both periods, belying the claim that hedge funds optimise returns during good times and minimise damage when things turn nasty. That may explain why this year is expected to be the first since the crisis when investors pull more money out of hedge funds than they put into them.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21705855-star-funds-rarely-outperform-long-law-averages/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

Believing is seeing

New technologies will make society richer by cultivating trust

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS easy to forget that even the most trivial commercial transactions rely on small acts of trust. Laws encourage good behaviour, but states lack the resources to force everyone to be good all the time. Trust keeps society running. Just ordering a pizza requires faith that the dough will be well made, that the pizzeria will not abuse the customer’s credit-card information, and that the delivery man will not abscond with the cargo. More complex partnerships, of the sort that make long-run economic growth possible, require much higher degrees of trust. New technologies, from sharing-economy apps to the blockchain, offer routes around some of the trust deficits that stand in the way of growth. Yet whether such solutions to problems of mistrust build on or undermine social ties is no easy question to answer.

Trust in society is not just a nicety. It makes possible, as one paper on the subject has it, “the commitment of resources to an activity where the outcome depends upon the co-operative behaviour of others”. Low-trust societies waste piles of time and money working out who can be counted on, defending vulnerable stores of wealth, and guarding against con men. Such places are infertile ground for long-run investment, the gains from which could be grabbed by rivals or stolen by government. Meanwhile trust is highest, and defences against chicanery lowest, within some of world’s wealthiest countries. Studies of the relationship between measures of trust and economic growth find a close link between the two. That does not necessarily mean one causes the other. But research also suggests that trust boosts trade, participation in financial markets and investment, suggesting that greater trust spurs the activities that make a place richer.

Sadly, cultivating trust is hard. It is a sort of social capital which must be built through time and effort. Repeated positive interactions and demonstrations of trustworthiness create a foundation of mutual confidence. Within close communities, emotional cues like praise and shame effectively discourage antisocial activity. In environments rich in social capital, the return for co-operative behaviour is high; you can make more money playing by the rules and building a business, for instance, than by reneging on a contract at the first opportunity. In the same way, trustworthiness is rarely rewarded in low-trust societies; both high-trust and low-trust states of the world are sticky.

Inventive humans are good at finding ways around trust bottlenecks. Reliance on families or tribes—groups whose members’ interests are more closely aligned, presumably, than those of the population as a whole—is a common strategy. Yet by their nature, such workarounds are limited in scope, and leave many members of society isolated. New technologies offer a more promising approach. A company’s ability to use the internet to monitor production in a factory half a world away means that firms need not establish deep relationships with foreign suppliers before opening a distant plant. Network connections between retailers and banks can help verify a customer’s ability to pay; the blockchain, a shared, public and trusted digital ledger of transactions, eliminates the need for a central counterparty altogether.

These advances clear the way for new investments and purchases. Yet whether they are a long-run boon is harder to assess. In a world of big data, people might come to trust only what can be verified electronically. In a recent blog post, Branko Milanovic of The City University of New York lamented the “commodification” of labour made possible by market-making apps. Enabling strangers to quickly do business frees people of the need to be nice, he argues; their trust-building skills could atrophy. Similarly, Tyler Cowen of George Mason University recently mused that as people grow more accustomed to interacting with intelligent machines (like Apple’s Siri), which require no social niceties, they might find it harder to build relationships with humans. Technologies can perpetuate discrimination: algorithms used to make lending decisions or process human speech occasionally “learn” to become racist by analysing the data fed to them.

Computer says yes

Historically, however, technology has done more to open up society than to segregate it. New technologies make it easier to trust unfamiliar groups. Public ratings, for instance, can undercut discrimination. Taxi drivers who might normally speed past members of a different race may feel more comfortable picking up a diverse set of riders given good ratings on Uber. A survey conducted by BlaBlaCar, a popular ridesharing service, found that 88% of its members reported a high level of trust in fellow users—higher than that reported for colleagues or neighbours. In a study in America, Alberto Alesina, of Harvard University, and Eliana La Ferrara, of Bocconi University in Milan, found that places with higher levels of racial and income diversity have lower levels of trust. By arranging interactions across such boundaries, technology may widen the circle of trust.

Apps often encourage good behaviour as well. Public ratings, like the ones that Uber presents for its drivers or that Yelp collects for businesses, mean that good customer service is increasingly important in capturing new business. Firms and customers that behave badly risk a permanent stain on their reputation.

Reliance on a social panopticon to enforce good behaviour may not seem much like the sort of trust that underpins economic growth. It is one thing to use Airbnb to rent a spare room from someone of a different background, and quite another to build the deep social bonds needed to support long-run investments. For big commitments, people will not suddenly let down their guard, however impressive technology becomes. Yet trust is a habit. New technologies that encourage co-operation in some spheres of life contribute to social capital rather than weaken it.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21705831-new-technologies-will-make-society-richer-cultivating-trust-believing-seeing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Economics brief




The Mundell-Fleming trilemma: Two out of three ain’t bad





Articles Sections Next

The Mundell-Fleming trilemma

Two out of three ain’t bad

A fixed exchange rate, monetary autonomy and the free flow of capital are incompatible, according to the last in our series of big economic ideas

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



HILLEL THE ELDER, a first-century religious leader, was asked to summarise the Torah while standing on one leg. “That which is hateful to you, do not do to your fellow. That is the whole Torah; the rest is commentary,” he replied. Michael Klein, of Tufts University, has written that the insights of international macroeconomics (the study of trade, the balance-of-payments, exchange rates and so on) might be similarly distilled: “Governments face the policy trilemma; the rest is commentary.”

The policy trilemma, also known as the impossible or inconsistent trinity, says a country must choose between free capital mobility, exchange-rate management and monetary autonomy (the three corners of the triangle in the diagram). Only two of the three are possible. A country that wants to fix the value of its currency and have an interest-rate policy that is free from outside influence (side C of the triangle) cannot allow capital to flow freely across its borders. If the exchange rate is fixed but the country is open to cross-border capital flows, it cannot have an independent monetary policy (side A). And if a country chooses free capital mobility and wants monetary autonomy, it has to allow its currency to float (side B).



To understand the trilemma, imagine a country that fixes its exchange rate against the US dollar and is also open to foreign capital. If its central bank sets interest rates above those set by the Federal Reserve, foreign capital in search of higher returns would flood in. These inflows would raise demand for the local currency; eventually the peg with the dollar would break. If interest rates are kept below those in America, capital would leave the country and the currency would fall.

Where barriers to capital flow are undesirable or futile, the trilemma boils down to a choice: between a floating exchange rate and control of monetary policy; or a fixed exchange rate and monetary bondage. Rich countries have typically chosen the former, but the countries that have adopted the euro have embraced the latter. The sacrifice of monetary-policy autonomy that the single currency entailed was plain even before its launch in 1999.

In the run up, aspiring members pegged their currencies to the Deutschmark. Since capital moves freely within Europe, the trilemma obliged would-be members to follow the monetary policy of Germany, the regional power. The head of the Dutch central bank, Wim Duisenberg (who subsequently became the first president of the European Central Bank), earned the nickname “Mr Fifteen Minutes” because of how quickly he copied the interest-rate changes made by the Bundesbank.

This monetary serfdom is tolerable for the Netherlands because its commerce is closely tied to Germany and business conditions rise and fall in tandem in both countries. For economies less closely aligned to Germany’s business cycle, such as Spain and Greece, the cost of losing monetary independence has been much higher: interest rates that were too low during the boom, and no option to devalue their way out of trouble once crisis hit.

As with many big economic ideas, the trilemma has a complicated heritage. For a generation of economics students, it was an important outgrowth of the so-called Mundell-Fleming model, which incorporated the impact of capital flows into a more general treatment of interest rates, exchange-rate policy, trade and stability.

The model was named in recognition of research papers published in the early 1960s by Robert Mundell, a brilliant young Canadian trade theorist, and Marcus Fleming, a British economist at the IMF. Building on his earlier research, Mr Mundell showed in a paper in 1963 that monetary policy becomes ineffective where there is full capital mobility and a fixed exchange rate. Fleming’s paper had a similar result.

If the world of economics remained unshaken, it was because capital flows were small at the time. Rich-world currencies were pegged to the dollar under a system of fixed exchange rates agreed at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in 1944. It was only after this arrangement broke down in the 1970s that the trilemma gained great policy relevance.

Perhaps the first mention of the Mundell-Fleming model was in 1976 by Rudiger Dornbusch of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dornbusch’s “overshooting” model sought to explain why the newish regime of floating exchange rates had proved so volatile. It was Dornbusch who helped popularise the Mundell-Fleming model through his bestselling textbooks (written with Stanley Fischer, now vice-chairman of the Federal Reserve) and his influence on doctoral students, such as Paul Krugman and Maurice Obstfeld. The use of the term “policy trilemma”, as applied to international macroeconomics, was coined in a paper published in 1997 by Mr Obstfeld, who is now chief economist of the IMF, and Alan Taylor, now of the University of California, Davis.

But to fully understand the providence—and the significance—of the trilemma, you need to go back further. In “A Treatise on Money”, published in 1930, John Maynard Keynes pointed to an inevitable tension in a monetary order in which capital can move in search of the highest return:

This then is the dilemma of an international monetary system—to preserve the advantages of the stability of local currencies of the various members of the system in terms of the international standard, and to preserve at the same time an adequate local autonomy for each member over its domestic rate of interest and its volume of foreign lending.

This is the first distillation of the policy trilemma, even if the fact of capital mobility is taken as a given. Keynes was acutely aware of it when, in the early 1940s, he set down his thoughts on how global trade might be rebuilt after the war. Keynes believed a system of fixed exchange rates was beneficial for trade. The problem with the interwar gold standard, he argued, was that it was not self-regulating. If large trade imbalances built up, as they did in the late 1920s, deficit countries were forced to respond to the resulting outflow of gold. They did so by raising interest rates, to curb demand for imports, and by cutting wages to restore export competitiveness. This led only to unemployment, as wages did not fall obligingly when gold (and thus money) was in scarce supply. The system might adjust more readily if surplus countries stepped up their spending on imports. But they were not required to do so.

Instead he proposed an alternative scheme, which became the basis of Britain’s negotiating position at Bretton Woods. An international clearing bank (ICB) would settle the balance of transactions that gave rise to trade surpluses or deficits. Each country in the scheme would have an overdraft facility at the ICB, proportionate to its trade. This would afford deficit countries a buffer against the painful adjustments required under the gold standard. There would be penalties for overly lax countries: overdrafts would incur interest on a rising scale, for instance. Keynes’s scheme would also penalise countries for hoarding by taxing big surpluses. Keynes could not secure support for such “creditor adjustment”. America opposed the idea for the same reason Germany resists it today: it was a country with a big surplus on its balance of trade. But his proposal for an international clearing bank with overdraft facilities did lay the ground for the IMF.

Fleming and Mundell wrote their papers while working at the IMF in the context of the post-war monetary order that Keynes had helped shape. Fleming had been in contact with Keynes in the 1940s while he worked in the British civil service. For his part, Mr Mundell drew his inspiration from home.

In the decades after the second world war, an environment of rapid capital mobility was hard for economists to imagine. Cross-border capital flows were limited in part by regulation but also by the caution of investors. Canada was an exception. Capital moved freely across its border with America in part because damming such flows was impractical but also because US investors saw little danger in parking money next door. A consequence was that Canada could not peg its currency to the dollar without losing control of its monetary policy. So the Canadian dollar was allowed to float from 1950 until 1962.

A Canadian, such as Mr Mundell, was better placed to imagine the trade-offs other countries would face once capital began to move freely across borders and currencies were unfixed. When Mr Mundell won the Nobel prize in economics in 1999, Mr Krugman hailed it as a “Canadian Nobel”. There was more to this observation than mere drollery. It is striking how many academics working in this area have been Canadian. Apart from Mr Mundell, Ronald McKinnon, Harry Gordon Johnson and Jacob Viner have made big contributions.



But some of the most influential recent work on the trilemma has been done by a Frenchwoman. In a series of papers, Hélène Rey, of the London Business School, has argued that a country that is open to capital flows and that allows its currency to float does not necessarily enjoy full monetary autonomy.

Ms Rey’s analysis starts with the observation that the prices of risky assets, such as shares or high-yield bonds, tend to move in lockstep with the availability of bank credit and the weight of global capital flows. These co-movements, for Ms Rey, are a reflection of a “global financial cycle” driven by shifts in investors’ appetite for risk. That in turn is heavily influenced by changes in the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve, which owes its power to the scale of borrowing in dollars by businesses and householders worldwide. When the Fed lowers its interest rate, it makes it cheap to borrow in dollars. That drives up global asset prices and thus boosts the value of collateral against which loans can be secured. Global credit conditions are relaxed.

Conversely, in a recent study Ms Rey finds that an unexpected decision by the Fed to raise its main interest rate soon leads to a rise in mortgage spreads not only in America, but also in Canada, Britain and New Zealand. In other words, the Fed’s monetary policy shapes credit conditions in rich countries that have both flexible exchange rates and central banks that set their own monetary policy.

Rey of sunshine

A crude reading of this result is that the policy trilemma is really a dilemma: a choice between staying open to cross-border capital or having control of local financial conditions. In fact, Ms Rey’s conclusion is more subtle: floating currencies do not adjust to capital flows in a way that leaves domestic monetary conditions unsullied, as the trilemma implies. So if a country is to retain its monetary-policy autonomy, it must employ additional “macroprudential” tools, such as selective capital controls or additional bank-capital requirements to curb excessive credit growth.

What is clear from Ms Rey’s work is that the power of global capital flows means the autonomy of a country with a floating currency is far more limited than the trilemma implies. That said, a flexible exchange rate is not anything like as limiting as a fixed exchange rate. In a crisis, everything is suborned to maintaining a peg—until it breaks. A domestic interest-rate policy may be less powerful in the face of a global financial cycle that takes its cue from the Fed. But it is better than not having it at all, even if it is the economic-policy equivalent of standing on one leg.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economics-brief/21705672-fixed-exchange-rate-monetary-autonomy-and-free-flow-capital-are-incompatible/print





Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Hunting for aliens: Proximate goals

How to find exoplanets: Round and round the mulberry bush

Oceanography: Deep waters

Keeping ships clean: Foul play

Medical batteries: Dark arts





Articles Sections Next

Hunting for aliens

Proximate goals

An Earth-sized planet has been discovered in a propitious orbit around a nearby star. A new phase in the search for life elsewhere is about to begin

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



“WE’VE been wondering what planet we’re first going to look for life on. Now we know.” Rory Barnes, of the University of Washington, puts it nicely. Proxima Centauri, the star closest to the sun, has a planet. That planet weighs not much more than Earth and is therefore presumably rocky. And it orbits within its parent star’s habitable zone—meaning that, given an atmosphere, its surface temperature is likely to permit liquid water.

A prize discovery, then, for astrobiologists such as Dr Barnes. The discoverers themselves are a transnational team of astronomers who have been using telescopes at the European Southern Observatory (ESO) in the Atacama desert, in Chile, for planet-hunting. Though they have not seen the new planet directly (they have inferred its existence from its effect on its parent star’s light—see box on next page), their paper in Nature describes what they have been able to deduce about it.

Proxima Centauri b, as it is known, probably weighs between 1.3 and three times as much as Earth and orbits its parent star once every 11 days. This puts its distance from Proxima Centauri itself at 7m kilometres, which is less than a twentieth of the distance between Earth and the sun. It can remain temperate in such a close orbit only because Proxima is a red dwarf, and thus much cooler than the sun. It is not the only Earth-sized extrasolar planet known to orbit in a star’s habitable zone. There are about a dozen others. But it is the closest to Earth—so close, at four light-years, that it is merely outrageous, not utterly absurd, to believe a spaceship (admittedly a tiny one) might be sent to visit it. Before this happens, though, it will be subjected to intense scrutiny from Earth itself.

Eyeball to eyeball

That scrutiny will probably be led by ESO. The data which led to Proxima Centauri b’s discovery came from the observatory’s 3.6 metre telescope at La Silla, in Chile. But ESO is also building a much bigger device, the 39-metre European Extremely Large Telescope (E-ELT), at another site in Chile. Since the late 2000s Markus Kasper of ESO has led a team which is designing a specialised planet-spotting instrument, the Exoplanet Imaging Camera and Spectrograph (EPICS), to fit on this telescope. Dr Kasper’s camera has a price tag of €50m ($56m), and there have always been questions about whether it is worth the money. But EPICS stands a better chance of producing actual pictures of Proxima Centauri b, and being able to analyse its atmosphere, than any other instrument in the world (or off it). Its future can now scarcely be in doubt.

The problem for astronomers trying to catch a glimpse of Proxima Centauri b is that, though close to the Earth by interstellar standards, it is closer to its parent star by more or less every other standard short of that of walking down the road to the chemist. Seen from Earth, star and planet are 35 thousandths of an arc second apart (an arc second is a 3,600th of a degree). Producing a picture that separates the two objects thus requires a telescope with a resolution good enough to distinguish between the left and right headlights of an oncoming car in Denver from the distance of Berlin.

Things get worse. Dim as it is, Proxima Centauri (pictured above, as seen by the Hubble space telescope) is still more than 10m times brighter than its planet is expected to be. It is as though one of those headlights in Denver was actually the open door to a furnace, while the other was a tea light. This is what makes the E-ELT and EPICS crucial. EPICS contains a coronagraph—a tiny shield that blocks out a star’s light so that adjacent planets can be seen. Unfortunately, a coronagraph reduces a telescope’s resolution, meaning you need an even bigger one to see the target in the first place. To observe Proxima Centauri b using a coronagraph, and doing so in the infrared wavelengths that are likely to provide the best information about its atmosphere, you need a telescope at least 20 metres across; 30 metres would be better.

Two other large telescopes besides E-ELT are being developed. But the Giant Magellan Telescope, also in Chile, has an effective diameter of only 24.5 metres, and its design makes using a coronagraph tricky. The Thirty Metre Telescope, meanwhile, was conceived as an instrument for Hawaii, which is in the northern hemisphere. Proxima Centauri is in the southern skies, and therefore not so easy to study from north of the equator.

There may, just possibly, be another way to look at Proxima Centauri b—or, at least, at its atmosphere. The planet was discovered by the radial-velocity technique, but there is about a one-in-67 chance that it might also be detectable by the transit technique (again, see box). This would require it and its star to sit in the same plane as Earth so that, seen from Earth, it would cross the face of its parent and thus slightly dim it. Various southern-hemisphere telescopes are already looking for the 0.5% dimmings of Proxima Centauri’s brightness which would be observed if Proxima Centauri b were transiting. If it is, then it will be possible to study its spectrum by subtracting the star’s spectrum when the planet is hidden behind it from the spectrum measured during a transit.

Rainbow bridges

The exciting thing about the planet’s spectrum, however it is measured, is that it might reveal the water content and chemical composition of Proxima Centauri b’s atmosphere, if it has one. And that might, in turn, give a clue as to whether it harbours life. Life on Earth leaves a sign of its existence in the atmosphere, in the form of oxygen. This is produced by plants and it is such a reactive chemical that if their photosynthesis stopped it would disappear rapidly from the air. Free oxygen in Proxima Centauri b’s atmosphere would therefore get a lot of people excited—but possibly without justification, for there are ways (such as the dissociation of water by ultraviolet light) to put oxygen into atmospheres abiotically. A stronger indicator of life would be finding both oxygen and molecules associated with biology that cannot long persist in its presence, and must thus be produced continuously.

On Earth nitrous oxide and methane fit this bill, though these molecules are present in quantities too low to be seen light-years away. But David Catling, a colleague of Dr Barnes at the University of Washington, points out that there are models of planetary atmospheres which allow methane made by living things to build up quite a lot on a planet like Proxima Centauri b. If spectra showed methane and oxygen together, the likelihood of life on Proxima Centauri b would rise dramatically.

Another way to look for life on Proxima Centauri b would be to search for radio signals. Life in general does not generate radiation at radio frequencies. But intelligent life does—at least it does on Earth. And that Earth-bound life also puts a tiny bit of effort into looking for such emissions from elsewhere, an endeavour known as the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, or SETI. There have been SETI studies of Proxima Centauri in past decades, but they have not been particularly sensitive. If the inhabitants of Proxima Centauri b were beaming powerful transmissions at Earth all day and night they would have been heard; if they were merely using radio for their own ends, in the way that broadcasters and radar systems do on Earth, they would not.

Now, though, a big new SETI project bankrolled by Yuri Milner, a Russian billionaire with a taste for things interstellar, is collaborating with the Parkes radio telescope in Australia and the Meerkat radio array in South Africa. According to Dan Werthimer of the University of California, Berkeley, who works on Mr Milner’s programme, Proxima Centauri will now be getting a lot more attention.

That there is intelligent life in the nearest planetary system to Earth’s is surely the longest of shots. And despite its nice-sounding location in the “habitable zone”, the presence of any sort of life on Proxima Centauri b is far from a foregone conclusion. For one thing, there are doubts about how easy it is for planets around red dwarfs to develop and retain atmospheres. Though such stars are cool for most of their existences, in their early years they burn bright. A planet close enough to one to stay warm in later life might have seen its atmosphere burned off in the star’s brief blazing youth. Even if it avoids this problem, it will still be whipped by the star’s magnetic field and lashed by its flares. Though they are dim, red dwarfs are given to all sorts of eruptive activity and pump out X-rays at a prodigious rate. These are both things which might make an atmosphere hard to hold on to and life itself a bit tricky.

Journey’s beginning

Such doubts will not stop people looking, though. Indeed, the discovery of Proxima Centauri b may accelerate plans to construct space telescopes designed especially to observe exoplanets directly using what is known as a starshade, instead of a coronagraph, to block the light from parent stars. A starshade is a second spacecraft, flown in formation with the telescope, that eclipses the parent while leaving the planet visible.

The most radical form of follow-up, though, is an idea for interstellar flight that Mr Milner is working on in parallel with his SETI project. Light beams exert pressure. A powerful laser focused on a low-mass spacecraft could in principle accelerate it to a significant fraction of the speed of light. This would be awesomely difficult in practice. It would require hundreds of thousands of lasers yoked together to make a single coherent beam of 100 gigawatts or so. That is about the maximum electrical-power consumption of France. It would also require a spacecraft weighing just a few grams that could sit at the beam’s pinnacle without getting fried; a way of coping with high-speed collisions with dust particles that the craft would inevitably encounter en route; and a method of getting data back to Earth once the probe reached its destination. But it might not be impossible. Over the next six years Mr Milner’s “Starshot” programme plans to spend tens of millions of dollars to test the idea. If encouraged by the results, he may try to build a test rig in which a laser zaps a tiny object to the highest speed ever achieved by a machine other than a particle accelerator.

The thought, however outlandish, of actually visiting Proxima Centauri b underlines what is most notable about its discovery. It makes the study of exoplanets newly specific; not a matter of statistics, models and populations, but of a particular rock in a particular place, a rock to be scrutinised for signs of life by all the methods that can be brought to bear. Searches around other nearby stars, including Proxima Centauri’s more sunlike siblings, Alpha Centauri A and B, will add more such targets. But Proxima Centauri b will retain a special place: the nearest, and the first.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21705659-earth-sized-planet-has-been-discovered-propitious-orbit-around-nearby/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

How to find exoplanets

Round and round the mulberry bush

Two ways to detect what you cannot see

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



A PLANET orbiting a star tugs it gently this way and that, so it oscillates between moving towards Earth and away from it. The velocities involved are tiny: for Proxima Centauri about two metres per second, a brisk walk. Nevertheless, the effect on the star’s spectrum can be measured from the ground. When a star is approaching Earth, its light is slightly bluer; when away, slightly redder. For this method, the plane of the planet’s orbit need not be aligned with Earth.

The transit technique, by contrast, requires that it is, so that the planet passes between Earth and its parent star every orbit. When that happens, the parent star’s light will dim accordingly. Transiting was used with great success by Kepler, an American space telescope which detected well over 1,000 distant planets earlier this decade. Statistical analysis of that sample suggests many—possibly all—red dwarfs have rocky planets, and that they are likely to crop up quite frequently in a red dwarf’s habitable zone. Since red dwarfs are the commonest stars, the most likely place to find an Earthlike planet is in orbit around one.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21705681-two-ways-detect-what-you-cannot-see-round-and-round-mulberry-bush/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Oceanography

Deep waters

A Chinese voyage to the bottom of the sea may not achieve all that it could

Aug 27th 2016 | Shanghai | From the print edition

The good ship Zhang Jian over the New Britain trench

TO MAN or not to man, that is the question. In the great days of exploration—of deserts and jungles, of the Arctic and Antarctic, even of the Moon, there was no alternative. Now, though, machines can do most of what human beings can accomplish, and frequently more. Yet humanity continues to put men and women in harm’s way when robots would do the job perfectly well.

The latest example comes from China, where a scientific adventurer called Cui Weicheng hopes to reap glory for himself and his country by organising routine manned expeditions to the hadal zone—the deepest part of the ocean, defined as anything below 6,000 metres. Dr Cui is the founder and director of the Hadal Science and Technology Research Centre (HAST) at Shanghai Ocean University. He became a national hero four years ago when Jiaolong, a manned submersible whose construction he organised, successfully plunged 7,062 metres down into the Mariana trench in the western Pacific Ocean. That enrolled China into the small club of countries (other members: America, France, Japan and Russia) that have sent submersibles to explore the deep sea.

Since then, Dr Cui has set his eyes on the hadal zone in general, and in particular on the bottom of the Mariana trench. This, at nearly 11,000 metres below sea level, is the deepest part of the Earth’s surface. He has set up a firm called Rainbowfish Ocean Technology, also based in Shanghai but at arm’s length from HAST, and is using this to build a mobile seafaring laboratory consisting of a research ship, Zhang Jian, named after Shanghai Ocean University’s founder, a politician and entrepreneur of the late-19th and early-20th centuries, and five diving vessels pressure-proofed to survive the deepest hadal conditions.

Three of these vessels are landers that can be lowered to the deep seabed, where they will sit recording data until brought back to the surface. The fourth is a so-called hybrid vehicle, a mobile unmanned submarine that can operate either automatically or by following instructions transmitted to it through a tether. So far, then, so scientific. But the fifth vessel—which, unlike the others, has yet to be constructed—will be a manned submersible that can hold three people. This is less easy to square with HAST’s scientific credentials.

Dr Cui’s stated aim is to turn HAST into a research institution similar to the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) in Massachusetts, which combines scientific curiosity with hard-nosed technological nous. Indeed, he hopes to outdo it, for WHOI’s own (unmanned) hadal-exploration craft, Nereus, imploded at depth in 2014 after just 11 dives, and will not be replaced. The Rainbowfish project, which has a budget of $122m, is backed by a mixture of private and government money—the former from people hoping for some sort of return from specialised tourism and prospecting the deep seabed for minerals. Dr Cui says he hopes the project will provide facilities that scientists from around the world can use for basic research.

Inner space meets outer space

Zhang Jian set sail from Shanghai on her maiden mission in July and is now off the coast of Papua New Guinea, over the 9,000-metre-deep New Britain trench. If all goes well, she will return in September. Many in the field, though, have doubts about what the cruise will achieve.

The loss of Nereus means HAST has, for the moment at least, cornered the market on hadal exploration. The current voyage thus seems an ideal opportunity to do some proper science as well as to test the submersibles. But at the First International Summit on Hadal Zone Exploration, held in Shanghai in June—a few weeks before Zhang Jian set sail—the cruise still had no scientific plan beyond putting the unmanned submersibles through their paces. Instead, delegates were struck by HAST’s emphasis on the unbuilt manned craft which, at $61m, will consume half the project’s budget. They also raised eyebrows at Dr Cui’s personal goal to use this vehicle to emulate the dive made by James Cameron, a Canadian film-maker, to the bottom of the Mariana trench in 2012.

That ambition, scheduled for fulfilment in 2019, is reminiscent of the aims of certain American entrepreneurs who are backing private space-flight ventures in part because they wish to escape in person the surly bounds of Earth (see Technology Quarterly). It is a harmless aspiration, and one the government would no doubt like to see fulfilled for patriotic reasons. But it would be a pity if it got in the way of HAST’s wider mission to push the frontiers of human understanding to the very bottom of the ocean.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21705682-chinese-voyage-bottom-sea-may-not-achieve-all-it-could-deep/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Keeping ships clean

Foul play

To clear vessels of encrusting animals, first understand why they settle there

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Blistering barnacles!

“FOR God’s sake and our country’s,” wrote an 18th-century captain in Britain’s navy to the Admiralty in Whitehall, “send copper bottomed ships to relieve the foul and crippled ones.” Copper sheathing, first deployed widely in the 1780s, kept fouling at bay by inhibiting the growth of barnacles, mussels, tube worms and shipworms (actually a type of clam). But even today, when copper has been replaced by modern antifouling paints and wooden hulls have given way to metal ones, ship-fouling is still a problem.

Dealing with it costs billions of dollars a year and often involves toxic chemicals whose use is being progressively restricted. How the larvae of befouling creatures choose where to settle is thus of great interest. A paper just published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences by Nick Shikuma of San Diego State University and his colleagues sheds some light.

Dr Shikuma studies tubeworms. These shell-forming annelids have become model organisms for students of ship-fouling. Their research has already shown that tubeworm larvae like to attach themselves to surfaces covered with lots of bacteria. But how larvae and bacteria interact is only now being elucidated.

For tubeworms, the cue comes from Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea, a bacterium abundant on marine surfaces. Individual Pseudoalteromonas cells produce small spears, called phage-tails, to defend themselves against hostile bacteria. But phage-tails also induce metamorphosis in several types of larvae, including tubeworms’. Shortly after contact with a phage-tail, a larva slows down and settles. Within 30 minutes it loses its cilia, the tiny hairs it employs to swim. Soon thereafter, it begins to elongate and to secrete its characteristic calcium carbonate tube around itself.

Dr Shikuma suspected, however, that more than mere mechanical contact with phage-tails was involved in this process. To test his theory, he exposed tubeworm larvae to a suspension of Pseudoalteromonas. As expected, they began to settle down. Then, before they had lost their cilia, he removed the bacteria. Instead of continuing to metamorphose, the larvae backpeddled on the process and began swimming again in search of a new home. Clearly, the initial contact had not triggered an irreversible change; the continued presence of the bacteria was necessary for metamorphosis to go all the way.

Dr Shikuma then tinkered with Pseudoalteromonas’s genes to try to work out what was going on. First, he deleted the part of the bug’s DNA involved in phage-tail production. As he expected, larvae exposed to these mutant bacteria did not even begin to metamorphose. Further tinkering, though, revealed a second set of genetic triggers. Bacteria that had intact phage-tail genes, but had had a block of six other genes deleted, were able to induce larvae to settle down, but not to shed their cilia and complete their metamorphosis. What these genes do for Pseudoalteromonas is not known. But whatever it is they are producing, it clearly also acts as a “go” signal to larvae that all is well for them to complete their metamorphosis.

The discovery of this second pathway opens up an additional biochemical line of attack in the war against fouling. Once the signal the six newly identified genes are producing has been decoded, ways to interfere with it might be devised. That may lead to an environmentally friendly method of stopping sessile marine organisms growing in the wrong places. Even if it does not, Dr Shikuma’s approach seems likely reveal other weak points in the metamorphic process that can be exploited—both saving shipowners money and also saving the oceans from toxic chemicals.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21705680-clear-vessels-encrusting-animals-first-understand-why-they-settle/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Medical batteries

Dark arts

A bodily pigment may have industrial uses

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



SINCE their invention two centuries ago, batteries have been made from many things. The first were of copper and zinc. Today, lithium is preferred for a lot of applications. Lead, nickel, silver and a host of other materials have also been used. Until recently though, no one had tried melanin, the pigment that darkens skin and protects it against ultraviolet light. But, as he reported this week at a meeting of the American Chemical Society in Philadelphia, Christopher Bettinger of Carnegie Mellon University, in Pittsburgh, has now done just that. His purpose is to create a battery safe for use in the human body.

Melanin is not, at first sight, an obvious battery ingredient. It is a complicated molecule composed of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and hydrogen. To synthesise it on an industrial scale would surely require biotechnology rather than conventional chemistry. But it does have the ability to capture and release positively charged ions, known as cations. Batteries depend on the movement of ions, so this property is a good start. On top of that, being a normal ingredient of bodies, melanin is not toxic. This is in contrast to many conventional battery ingredients, including most of those listed above. If melanin were to leak out of an implanted medical device, it would simply be mopped up by enzymes.

The battery Dr Bettinger has come up with has a melanin cathode, an anode of sodium titanium phosphate, which is also non-toxic, and an aqueous electrolyte that can be charged with any soluble cation desired. He has experimented with ions of sodium, potassium, rubidium, caesium, magnesium, aluminium and iron. Most of the resulting batteries had modest voltages (between 0.5 and 0.7 volts) but stored enough energy to power one-shot ingestible devices such as capsule endoscopes (pill-shaped machines which can look at parts of the alimentary canal that conventional endoscopy cannot reach) or drug-delivery systems designed to release their payloads at a particular place in the gut.

Intriguingly, though the uses Dr Bettinger has in mind do not need a rechargeable battery, one of the experimental models his team produced—that containing magnesium—could be recharged. This goes against conventional wisdom, for previous attempts to make a rechargeable magnesium battery have failed. Given the abundance and cheapness of magnesium, that may be useful information for battery engineers seeking to outdo modern lithium-ion batteries. If so, then melanin or something like it might find itself in very heavy demand indeed.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21705683-bodily-pigment-may-have-industrial-uses-dark-arts/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




Karl Marx: False consciousness

Congo’s uranium: Rich pickings

Public transport in London: More than just getting from A to B

New fiction: Out of Africa

Hollywood and the Middle East: War games

Johnson: Rue the rules





Articles Sections Next

Karl Marx

False consciousness

The value of Marx in the 21st century

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



Karl Marx: Greatness and Illusion. By Gareth Stedman Jones. Allen Lane; 750 pages; £35. To be published in America by Belknap in October.

COMMUNISM collapsed nearly 30 years ago, but the influence of Karl Marx lives on. Marxist approaches are found in some of the most interesting history and sociology being published today. Marx’s works, including “The Communist Manifesto”, written with Friedrich Engels in 1848, may have had more impact on the modern world than many suppose. Of the manifesto’s ten principal demands, perhaps four have been met in many rich countries, including “free education for all children in public schools” and a “progressive or graduated income tax”.

There is no better guide to Marx than Gareth Stedman Jones of Queen Mary University of London. In a new book he offers rich descriptions of Marx’s life, much of which was spent in abject poverty. German-born “Karl”, as the author refers to him, would work three or four days straight without sleep and was constantly ill (his uncompromising diet, based on “highly seasoned dishes, smoked fish, caviar and pickled cucumber together with Moselle wine, beer and liqueurs”, can hardly have helped). He comes across as unpleasant: arrogant, racist and constantly borrowing money off Engels.

For readers most interested in such details, Francis Wheen’s biography of Marx, published in 1999, may be a better choice. Mr Stedman Jones’s book is above all an intellectual biography, which focuses on the philosophical and political context in which Marx wrote. He completed a doctorate in philosophy in 1841 and was surrounded by heated discussions about the consequences of industrialisation and the place of religion in the modern world. He was an avid reader of The Economist, while publicly dismissing it as the “European organ of the aristocracy of finance”.

In contrast to what is often supposed, Marx did not invent communism. Radicals, including Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809-65) and the Chartist movement in England, had long used language that modern-day readers would identify as “Marxist”—“to enjoy political equality, abolish property”; “reserve army of labour” and so forth.

What, then, was his contribution? Much of his time was spent disagreeing with other radicals, attacking Proudhon in particular, whom he likened to one of the “bourgeois economists”. Far more significantly, he attempted to provide an overall theoretical description of how capitalism worked, especially in “Capital”, which was published in 1867.

His characterisation of capitalism is elegant in its simplicity. Each day, he argued, workers produced a greater value of goods than was necessary to support themselves; capitalists appropriated what was left over. Workers could not get hold of that surplus because they did not own capital (machinery, buildings and so on). But as they produced more, they created more capital, thus reinforcing the domination by the capitalists. A “system ostensibly resting upon equal and fair exchange could consistently yield a surplus to one of the parties to the exchange.”

Mr Stedman Jones is an historian with Marxist leanings. As such the reader might expect a ringing endorsement of the great man’s ideas. However, in many parts the author is highly critical. For instance, he points out that Marx displayed “condescension towards developments in political economy”, a big mistake given how rapidly the field was changing at the time. More damning, the “Grundrisse”, an unfinished manuscript which many neo-Marxists see as a treasure trove of theory, has “defects [in the] core arguments”.

Mr Stedman Jones is even critical of parts of “Capital”. In one passage, Marx set out to answer a puzzle. Changing levels of supply and demand explain why the price of a commodity goes up or down, but does not explain why the equilibrium price of that commodity is what it is. For instance, why are strawberries pricier than apples?

To solve the puzzle Marx relied on the “labour theory of value”. He helped prove that the price of a commodity was determined by how much labour time had gone into it—which showed how workers were exploited. However, he “arbitrarily ruled out the relative desirability or utility of commodities,” says Mr Stedman Jones, which would strike most people as the obvious explanation. The author encapsulates a feeling of many students of Marx: read the dense, theoretical chapters of “Capital” closely, and no matter how much you try, it is hard to escape the conclusion that there is plenty of nonsense in there.

The real value of such a work, in Mr Stedman Jones’s eyes, lies in its documentation of the actual day-to-day life faced by the English working classes. Marx synthesised an “extraordinary wealth of statistics, official reports and pieces of press reportage” to show just how hard life was for many people living in the most industrially advanced country in the world. Still, even his empirical research had flaws, something Mr Stedman Jones skirts over. He did not pay enough attention, for example, to objective measures of living standards (such as real wages), which by the 1850s were clearly improving.

The overriding impression from this book is that Marx’s reputation (at least in some quarters) as an unrivalled economist-philosopher is wide of the mark. Marx had planned to write “Capital” in multiple volumes. He finished the first. But when it came to writing the second, on realising that he would face insurmountable intellectual hurdles, he pleaded illness (though seemed quite able to do other sorts of research). “Karl” was in the thick of the intellectual developments of the 19th century. But the myth is more impressive than the reality.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21705665-value-marx-21st-century-false-consciousness/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Congo’s uranium

Rich pickings

An intriguing account of why America was so interested in Congo in the 1940s

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



Spies in the Congo: America’s Atomic Mission in World War II. By Susan Williams. PublicAffairs; 369 pages; $28.99. Hurst; £25.

“A HOTBED of spies”, remarked Bob Laxalt when he arrived in Léopoldville, capital of the Belgian Congo, in 1944. Why, wondered the fresh-faced young code officer for the American Consul-General, was his government so interested in this “dark corner of darkest Africa”? After all: “There’s no war here.”

Laxalt was not alone in his ignorance. America’s interest in the Congo—and, specifically, in the resource-rich south-eastern province of Katanga—was one of the best-kept secrets of the second world war. Beneath its verdant soil lay a prize that the Americans believed held the key to victory. It was the race to control this prize that brought the spooks to Léopoldville. The Germans, they feared, might be after it, too.

The prize, Susan Williams explains in “Spies in the Congo”, was uranium. Congo was by far the richest source of it in the world. As the architects of America’s nuclear programme (the “Manhattan Project”) knew, uranium was the atom bomb’s essential ingredient. But almost everybody else was kept entirely in the dark, including the spies sent to Africa to find out if the heavy metal was being smuggled out of the Congo into Nazi Germany.

The men—and one woman—charged with protecting America’s monopoly of Congolese uranium worked for the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), an organisation set up by President Franklin Roosevelt as the wartime intelligence agency, and the precursor to what in peacetime became the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Ms Williams presents the reader with a large cast of characters, some of them quite eccentric. Wilbur Owings Hogue, a civil engineer and the OSS station chief in Léopoldville, was also a part-time author of popular fiction. Two of his colleagues were ornithologists. His assistant, Shirley Chidsey, was a friend of F. Scott Fitzgerald, who later inscribed one of his books for her.

The work these individuals undertook was dangerous. Hogue survived repeated assassination attempts. After the war ended, four of them—Hogue included—died young, quite possibly owing to exposure to nuclear radiation. Their work ensured that the essential Congolese ore (as far as is known) never reached Nazi Germany; without it, the Germans could not build an atom bomb. Yet their efforts went unacknowledged.

Ms Williams pieces together her history in forensic fashion. The result is a gripping, if occasionally dense, work that uncovers a world long cast in shadow. Yet it is no mere thriller. Much of what runs through “Spies in the Congo” will be wearily recognisable to the Congolese, and many Africans. America’s early nuclear supremacy was dependent on African uranium, just as Europe’s industrial pre-eminence had been sustained by African copper, iron and rubber. But Congo’s role in this has been forgotten, deliberately erased from the historical record by officials hailing the success of the Manhattan Project following the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

Shortly after the war ended the focus of America’s nuclear rivalry shifted. In 1949 the Soviet Union tested its own nuclear bomb, launching a new era for America, Congo and the rest of the African continent. Huge sums were pumped into Katanga to facilitate uranium export and to prop up Belgian defences. After Congo became independent in 1960 the CIA lingered there for decades to keep uranium and, later, other minerals out of Russian hands. Much of Congo’s tragic late-20th-century history is attributable to these machinations. Thus in her account of this wartime scramble for African raw materials, Ms Williams tells a little-known story, but one with a terribly familiar ring—and ultimately devastating consequences.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21705666-intriguing-account-why-america-was-so-interested-congo-1940s-rich-pickings/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Public transport in London

More than just getting from A to B

Crossrail and the history of London

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Early commuter

The Tunnel Through Time: A New Route for an Old London Journey. By Gillian Tindall. Chatto & Windus; 306 pages; £20.

CROSSRAIL, a new rail line running east-west through London and its suburbs, is described as the biggest construction project in Europe today. It is also one of Britain’s biggest-ever archaeological undertakings. Since construction started in 2009, archaeologists have made more than 10,000 discoveries. These include Roman horseshoes, a medieval reservoir under Oxford Street, ice skates made of bones, Venetian glass, chamber pots, pickled onions and human bones—lots and lots of bones.

The bones come from plague victims spanning centuries. They come from executed murderers, highwaymen and petty thieves unlucky enough to be caught and strung up. They come from Christian martyrs of all stripes, those who in the bloody early half of the second millennium belonged to the wrong faith in the wrong place at the wrong time. They come from sanctified churchyards piled deep as the centuries passed, for London has a lot of history and a lot of people live in this great metropolis, but many more have died in it.

The soil unearthed by Crossrail and the discoveries made by archaeologists provide rich material for Gillian Tindall, a historian who has written biographies of Bombay, London’s South Bank and the Left Bank of Paris. The line also gives her a framework around which to construct a story that moves through both space and time. In the eastern fields of Stepney, close to Whitechapel station, she finds aristocrats and landed gentry who desired open fields and country estates yet enjoyed proximity to the City. It is a very different East End from the district of poverty and workhouses that would follow.

On the site of Liverpool Street, one station over, she recounts the story of the Priory of St Mary of Bethlehem, which was founded in 1247. It survived centuries of religious turmoil and eventually became an insane asylum, giving the English language the word “bedlam”, a contraction of its name. To the west, where Crossrail crosses rails with two tube lines and a future second line, she chronicles the evolution of St Giles, once a far-flung outpost of London, which sank into disrepute and found lasting fame as the setting for Hogarth’s Gin Lane. At each location Ms Tindall skilfully blends ancient histories, archaeological findings and contemporary context.

As London expanded and metamorphosed from one century to the next, as institutions, churches and homes came up, thrived, decayed and were regenerated, what remained the same are the routes that wind between the wood, brick and concrete. When Crossrail opens fully in 2018, it will trace a similar path to the one taken most days by John Pocock, a young messenger boy in the early 19th century, as he walked from his home near Paddington to the City. By the second half of the century, Crossrail’s earliest ancestor, the Metropolitan underground line, had started ferrying commuters between the same two destinations. Crossrail is only, as the book’s subtitle puts it, a new route for old journeys. It is a rewarding trip.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21705668-crossrail-and-history-london-more-just-getting-b/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

New fiction

Out of Africa

A delicate story of a Kenyan-Asian family

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition

A story of old—and new

Who Will Catch Us As We Fall. By Iman Verjee. Oneworld; 442 pages; $15.99 and £12.99.

A FAR cry from the outsider-in-Africa literature made famous by Karen Blixen and Elspeth Huxley, “Who Will Catch Us As We Fall” is an unflinching novel about an Indian family in Nairobi. Set between 1995 and 2007, it is a portrait of Kenya’s capital, a place that may cling to its moniker—“the green city in the sun”—but thanks to its reputation for crime, is known more commonly as “Nairobbery”. Violence, prostitution, corruption, poverty, police brutality, political impunity and the often seemingly insurmountable divisions of tribe and race are laid bare in this book.

An assured insight into the culture of the Indian-Kenyans who arrived during the colonial era, this is the second novel by Iman Verjee (pictured), who grew up in Kenya. An idealistic father, Raj Kohli longs for his son Jai to take up the mantle left by Pio Gama Pinto, a politician who was assassinated just over a year after independence. Jai yearns to be accepted in his homeland while his mother, Pooja, strives to protect her family from it. Leena, the Kohlis’ daughter, and Michael, their erstwhile housemaid’s son, struggle to know if their relationship can overcome their divisions. Their story runs alongside Jeffrey’s, once an idealistic policeman but corrupted through a sense of betrayal by his country, “a place where thieves are celebrated and good men die unremarkable deaths”.

The book is striking but not perfect. Ms Verjee simplifies issues and some of her characters feel too much like vessels for the author’s voice. She has said that, growing up, she was “guilty of possessing certain old-fashioned stereotypes”. Maybe it is in an attempt to make amends that the book veers into idealism and cliché: “This country is beautiful and full of life…who will fight for it, if not us?” But the story’s message of hope, resilience and redemption is as important as it is timely. Just as the novel’s timeline moves unstoppably into the bloody elections of 2007, from which the country has not recovered, Kenya today is preparing itself for a new poll next year. If only Kenyan politicians and police had as much idealism as this book.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21705664-delicate-story-kenyan-asian-family-out-africa/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Hollywood and the Middle East

War games

How Hollywood learned to stop worrying and love the war zone

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



ABOUT a decade ago, a series of earnest and mostly dull Hollywood films weighed the cost of America’s wars in the Middle East. Paul Haggis’s “In the Valley of Elah” came out in 2007 and “Stop-Loss”, directed by Kimberly Peirce, in 2008. These downbeat dramas were followed by a generation of action movies which fetishised the danger of being a soldier in Afghanistan and Iraq. Chief among them was Kathryn Bigelow’s “The Hurt Locker” (2008), Peter Berg’s “Lone Survivor” (2013) and “American Sniper” directed by Clint Eastwood a year later. More recently, Hollywood’s embrace of war in the Middle East has shifted again.

Its latest dispatches from the front line, or just behind it, are raucous comedies. Their protagonists are American civilians who learn that there is adventure to be had and money to be made by flying to a war zone. In these films—which are mostly, loosely speaking, based on true stories—Baghdad and Kabul are lawless gold-rush towns where failures can reinvent themselves as hard-partying successes, and where the bullets whizzing past their ears are all part of the rowdy fun.

First came “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot” (“WTF”—get it?) in which Tina Fey’s television journalist finds fame and romance as a war correspondent in Afghanistan. “In New York, you’re like a six, seven,” a colleague tells her. “Out here you’re a nine, borderline ten.” Next was Barry Levinson’s misbegotten “Rock the Kasbah”. Inspired by an Afghan singer, Setara Hussainzada, who upset conservative Muslims by dancing without her hijab on a televised talent contest, the film focused not on the singer, but on a washed-up rock’n’roll manager played by Bill Murray. The third, and by far the best, of these Middle-East-meets-the-Wild-West comedies is “War Dogs”, a trenchant and very funny satire co-written and directed by Todd Phillips, the maker of “The Hangover” and its sequels.

Its anti-heroes are two Miami 20-somethings, David Packouz (Miles Teller) and Efraim Diveroli (Jonah Hill). In 2005 the easily-led David is tired of trudging from mansion to beachside mansion as a massage therapist, so he jumps at the chance to go into business with Efraim, an old schoolmate who is now a cocaine-snorting wheeler-dealer. Efraim introduces him to a public website (“eBay but for war”) on which the Pentagon puts out the tenders for its military-procurement contracts.

A few corporations are invariably chosen to supply the tanks and missiles, he says, but smaller hustlers can pick up a million dollars here and there by selling guns and ammunition. David has his qualms, because he marched against the Iraq war with his girlfriend (a beautiful cipher, as women in Mr Phillips’s films always are). But Efraim persuades him that they might as well try to make their fortune as international arms dealers, given that the war is happening anyway. Now all the new partners have to do is drive a lorryload of Beretta pistols from Jordan to Baghdad.

Much like “The Big Short” and “The Wolf of Wall Street” (which also co-starred Mr Hill), “War Dogs” is, on one level, a celebration of those devil-may-care opportunists who spot a little-known way to turn a big profit. With enough gall and entrepreneurial spirit, it suggests, anyone can end up driving a Porsche and living in a marble-floored luxury apartment.

But the film also asks pointed questions about a system which lets companies profit handsomely from warfare, and which lets them falsify bank records in the process. “War Dogs” stresses that David and Efraim are a long way from being the charmingly roguish Robin Hoods they think they are. David is a liar and a stooge, whereas Efraim’s ugly-American boorishness is accentuated by Mr Hill’s wired intensity and seal-barking cackle. It’s a boldly obnoxious performance which may well earn him a third Oscar nomination.

As enjoyable and laudable as “War Dogs” is, though, it does have one thing in common with all the other war films mentioned above—not just the rollicking comedies, but the liberal dramas and the gung-ho thrillers. Its emphasis is squarely on the Americans who visit the Middle East. The people who live there have to stay in the background.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21705669-how-hollywood-learned-stop-worrying-and-love-war-zone-war-games/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

Rue the rules

Early years of English teaching should focus on reading and writing, not abstract grammar

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



BRITISH children will soon go back to school. As they settle into their English lessons, they will be made to learn grammar, spelling and punctuation as if these were as fixed as the stars in the sky.

Most pupils will be unaware that parents, teachers, policymakers, researchers and critics have been wrangling over what kind of grammar should be taught; when it should be taught; how students should be graded and, in particular, how they should be tested. After an overhaul several years ago, the “Key Stage 2” tests given to 11-year-olds have been particularly controversial. Critics say that the terminology is too advanced for 11-year-olds. They also say that the teachers are unprepared themselves, since grammar teaching went out of fashion for decades in the English-speaking world. And the terminology they are expected to know has changed since the days when those who were lucky enough to study grammar did so in the mid- and late 20th century.

No one disputes that children need to be able to write. But do 11-year-olds need the skill of identifying—by name—a “relative clause” (eg, the house that I live in), “modal verb” (eg, can and must) and “determiner” (a term better known to linguists than schoolteachers, including a, the, each, every and some)? The tests aren’t finding out whether youngsters can use these things, but whether they can “tick one box to show which part of the sentence is a relative clause,” or “circle all the determiners in the sentence below.”

Michael Rosen, a radio presenter, children’s author and himself a teacher at Goldsmith’s College, points out that in the question asking “Which of these sentences is a command?” all four are instructions to do something, but only one of them (“Before you go out, ask your mother for a shopping list”) has a grammatical imperative. The others say things like “I want you to clean out the playhouse this afternoon.” Students are to know that this is not a “command” on the test—even if it certainly is a command when their parents say it.

Deliberate study never killed anyone. But does this help kids write? Surely a curriculum would be introduced only after research indicated that it did—except that there is no evidence of that. One large meta-study (which looks at a host of previous studies) concluded that, of the teaching strategies designed to get kids writing better, nearly all had a positive effect—except for this kind of grammar teaching, which had a slightly negative one.

At “English Grammar Day”, an event at the British Library this summer, Bas Aarts, a syntactician at University College London, eloquently defended explicit grammar teaching. It prepares students for learning a foreign language, when metalinguistic thinking will be useful. It trains certain useful abstract concepts. And since language is one of the most intricate and astonishing capacities of the human mind itself, studying it is a rich exercise all on its own. Mr Aarts is sceptical of any pedagogical philosophy based on pure utility, rightly noting that arts, history and other subjects will quickly be out the window if schools narrowly test only what will make a more efficient worker-bee.

He is right. But 11 is too young for this work. At that age, kids are just beginning to read for pleasure in earnest. Good reading is probably more essential to good writing than any other activity; students can produce effective English only by consuming great quantities of it first, finding their rhythm, and absorbing the grammar of the written page by reading, much as they learn the spoken language when they are younger by listening. Of course, many annoying elements of English, like the fact that it’s is not a possessive or that their, they’re and there are different, need to be explicitly taught. But that teaching will stick best with good, curious and frequent readers.

Explicit and overly abstract grammar teaching before the age of 11 is a bit like throwing seeds, that one hopes will turn into healthy plants, onto thawing early-spring ground yet to be ploughed. At this young age, spelling and punctuation—which are necessary but straightforward memorisable drudgery—can be introduced. But to expect the teaching of the modal verb and the determiner to make good writers out of young students is not “raising standards”. It is making a category error: writing and explaining syntax are related but not identical. Young children should read, then they should write, write and read again. The formal terms can wait for a later age.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21705667-early-years-english-teaching-should-focus-reading-and-writing-not-abstract/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Donald Henderson: Man versus virus





Articles Sections Next

Donald Henderson

Man versus virus

Donald Ainslie (“D.A.”) Henderson, epidemiologist, died on August 19th, aged 87

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition



THE director of the World Health Organisation knew the plan would fail. To rid the world of smallpox was impossible. Each year, 2m people still died of it. Total global vaccination was a chimera. Besides, no disease had ever been eradicated. But since he had been pushed into it by the Soviet Union and the United States, he would put an American at the head of it, so that when everything went down the tubes it would be America’s fault. The year was 1966; he asked for Donald Henderson.

In terms of revenge, he picked wrong. D.A., as everyone called him, was not at all inclined to fail. Brawny, brimming with confidence and not a sufferer of fools, he was already fixed on smallpox. He dated his obsession to 1947, when in supposedly smallpox-clear New York a man visiting from Mexico died of the disease, 12 others caught it, and the city went wild with fear—that age-old fear of a disease that killed a third of its victims, had ravaged the native tribes of the Americas, and left the faces of survivors gouged with scars.

After that, he had no interest in any old dull doctor’s life. He wanted to study the causes, spread and suppression of epidemics. Rather than serve in the army he joined the Epidemic Intelligence Service at the Communicable Disease Centre in Atlanta, for what he called “firefighter” training. As soon as a disease broke out anywhere in the world, he would dash to tackle it—becoming a proper “shoe-leather” epidemiologist, as opposed to a “shiny-pants” desk-bound sort. When he was hauled away from his anti-smallpox work in west Africa and sent to Geneva for the WHO in 1967, at 38, he wasn’t thrilled. But if they wanted the world rid of the virus in ten years, he would give it his best shot.

Not by himself, of course. “Target Zero” came to involve almost everyone in the affected countries, from scientists in labs to government ministers to local health officers and elders who could neither read nor write. His modus operandi, “surveillance-containment”, required not mass vaccination but pinning down each case and vaccinating all contacts; it needed the co-operation even of villagers and schoolchildren, who learned to spot the tell-tale rash of Variola major, like buckshot embedded in the skin. His own staff was tiny; but some 200,000 locally recruited people also worked for him, in 50 countries.

This crowd of helpers, which delighted him, meant that no Nobel prize could be given for wiping out smallpox. If it had been, he might have shared it with William Foege, who first devised surveillance-containment, and Benjamin Rubin, inventor of the bifurcated needle, an easy and ingenious instrument which used a mere 25% of the normal amount of vaccine. But he was the man who kept the whole show on the road, strong-arming governments to provide funds and to make their own vaccines of the necessary purity, potency and stability; conducting his own cold-war diplomacy with the notably helpful Russians; muscling past the tentacular regional bureaucracies of the WHO; sending out continual reports on progress; and answering within three days, before e-mail, every plea that came in from the field.

Problems rose up constantly. In Ethiopia, rebels attacked the vaccinators. Afghanistan brought deep snow and no maps. In Bangladesh trucks could not cross the bamboo bridges; in India mourners had to be stopped from floating smallpox corpses down the Ganges. He experienced most of this himself, frequently decamping from cramped Geneva armed with “Scottish wine” (his favourite medicine) to urge on the troops. Out in the trenches he also faced the full horror of what he was fighting. At a hospital in Dhaka the stench of leaking pus, the pustule-covered hands stretched towards him, the flies clustering on dying eyes, convinced him anew that he had to win this war.

Overall—and only he had the full picture—the effort ebbed and flowed. Good progress in a country might be suddenly reversed by war, as in Biafra, Ethiopia and Bangladesh, by flows of infected refugees or, in Somalia, by nomads wandering across a border. Heartening figures might turn out to be colossal under-reporting. By 1975, however, almost all of Asia and Africa was free of smallpox. The last naturally occurring case, a Somali cook, was recorded in 1977. There followed two anxious years of more surveillance, when Dr Henderson was not quite sure they had really done it. By December 1979 he knew they had.

The lurking menace

Yet this was not the end of his worries about smallpox. Some still survived in the world, in various laboratories, which might be weaponised and used against a population which, increasingly, would have no herd immunity. From his new positions, as professor of epidemiology at Johns Hopkins and an adviser to presidents, he called for the virus to be destroyed and, at the same time, for vaccine to be stockpiled again. In 2001 he masterminded a simulation, “Dark Winter”, in which a smallpox epidemic hit the Midwest and America’s health system failed.

“Future generations”, wrote Thomas Jefferson to Edward Jenner, the inventor of the smallpox vaccine, “will know by history only that the loathsome smallpox has existed.” Two hundred years later Dr Henderson was almost able to have that confidence. But not quite.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21705644-donald-ainslie-da-henderson-epidemiologist-died-august-19th-aged-87-man-versus-virus/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Youth unemployment

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21705691/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Economic data

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21705696-economic-data-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21705694-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21705693-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Youth unemployment

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition





Youth unemployment is on the rise again, after years of decline. Worldwide, the unemployment rate for 15- to 24-year-olds will rise to 13.1% this year, according to the International Labour Organisation. Arab states will see the highest rates of unemployment on average. Regional aggregates mask variations. In South Africa, for example, more than half of young people are expected to be unemployed this year. Even those with jobs face problems. Globally 38% of working youths are living in extreme or moderate poverty, compared with 26% of those in work aged 25 and over. In the European Union more than a third of young people in 2015 were in temporary jobs because they could not find permanent work.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21705695-youth-unemployment/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Aug 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21705692-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Thu, 25 Aug 2016]

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



Space exploration: Brave new worlds





Colombia and the FARC: Ending a half-century of war





Monetary policy: When 2% is not enough





Turkey and the West: Don’t lose the plot





The desire for children: Wanted





Letters



On Taiwan, obesity, Labour, China, Alaska, Ultimate Frisbee, economics, jazz: Letters to the Editor





Briefing



Demography and desire: The empty crib





In vitro fertilisation: An arm and a leg for a fertilised egg





United States



Immigration economics: Wage war





Alaskan agriculture: Growing farmers





An American mystery: Down in the valley, up on the ridge





Lexington: Clinton Republicans





The Americas



Colombia’s peace accord: Unlearning war





Chile’s pensions: The perils of not saving





Asia



Kashmir: Vale of tears





Communists in the Philippines: Rebels in their dotage





Karachi: Slammer dunk





Leafy Singapore…: Move over, Merlion





…and sooty South Korea: Bad air days





Learning English in Japan: Talk like a gaijin





China



Sexual abuse of children: A horror confronted





Banyan: A spot of localist bother





Middle East and Africa



The war in Syria: Smoke and chaos





The Brotherhood returns: The ballot and the Book





Religion in Zimbabwe: Tithing troubles





The Central African Republic: Nostalgia for a nightmare





Mining in the Democratic Republic of Congo: The richest, riskiest tin mine on Earth





Europe



Turkey’s anger at the West: Al-Malarkey





Sarkozy returns: The revenant





Croatian stagnation: Pining for the partisans





An earthquake in Italy: Beauty and tragedy





War and peace in Ukraine: Fighting for position





Britain



Scottish education: Not so bonny





Brexit and immigration: Raising the drawbridge





Olympic success: The brass behind the gold





Football iconography: Put out more flags





Television subtitles: Read my lips





Political comedy: Laugh or cry?





Bagehot: The 2016 vintage





International



School reform: After freedom, what?





Technology Quarterly



Remaking the sky: A sudden light





Satellites: The small and the many





Earth observation: Anywhere and everywhere





Launchers: Getting a lift





The role of robots: Construction and destruction





Human space flight: The orphans of Apollo





Brain scan: Space chips





Business



Linux and AWS: Cloud chronicles





Viacom: In the name of the father





Cement manufacturers: Cracks in the surface





Football: Winging it





Direct selling in China: Rebirth of a sales firm





Schumpeter: Mafia management





Finance and economics



Central banking: The Jackson four





India’s central bank: Reserve player





American business investment: Econundrum





Drought insurance in Africa: ARC’s covenant





Rising LIBOR: SECular shift





Hedge funds: Law of averages





Free exchange: Believing is seeing





Economics brief



The Mundell-Fleming trilemma: Two out of three ain’t bad





Science and technology



Hunting for aliens: Proximate goals





How to find exoplanets: Round and round the mulberry bush





Oceanography: Deep waters





Keeping ships clean: Foul play





Medical batteries: Dark arts





Books and arts



Karl Marx: False consciousness





Congo’s uranium: Rich pickings





Public transport in London: More than just getting from A to B





New fiction: Out of Africa





Hollywood and the Middle East: War games





Johnson: Rue the rules





Obituary



Donald Henderson: Man versus virus





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Youth unemployment





Markets





