The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Special report: Indonesia

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



After protracted negotiations that ran into the night, David Cameron declared victory in obtaining “special status” for Britain in the European Union. He promptly set a referendum for June 23rd to ask voters if they want to stay in or leave the EU. But London’s mayor, Boris Johnson, attacked him for scaremongering and declared allegiance to the leave campaign. Some cabinet members also took a different position to their leader, including the ministers for justice (Michael Gove), pensions (Iain Duncan Smith) and Northern Ireland (Theresa Villiers). The prime minister will have to rely on the opposition Labour Party to help persuade the public; MPs in his own party are split down the middle. See here and here.

The potential for an exit from the EU spooked markets, sending sterling into a spiral. The pound dropped from $1.44 to below $1.39 and also tumbled against the euro.

The migrant crisis sweeping Europe is likely to get worse rather than better, as new figures from the International Organisation for Migration showed that arrivals in Greece and Italy have already breached 110,000 this year. It took until June last year before 100,000 arrived. Greece is bearing the brunt. In February alone nearly 43,000 had arrived, as many as in the whole of 2014.

Hungary called a referendum on whether or not it should be forced to take in refugees under a resettlement scheme. Viktor Orban’s government has mounted a legal challenge against the relocation of migrants across Europe. A number of countries are restricting the numbers of refugees who cross their borders.

After two months of deadlock in Spain, the Socialist party agreed to form a government with the centrist Ciudadanos party. However, the parties only make up 130 seats in the 350-seat parliament. This means that the support of either the conservative People’s Party or the far-left Podemos movement will still be needed to form a majority.

In France trade unions opposed the Socialist government’s proposal to reform the country’s notoriously rigid labour laws. The government wants, among other things, to clarify redundancy rules and weaken the 35-hour work week. The proposal will officially be presented next month and will require the support of the right-wing opposition.

Thanks, but no thanks



Bolivians narrowly voted against a referendum proposal to allow the left-wing president, Evo Morales, to run for a fourth term. Mr Morales, the country’s first president of indigenous descent, has been in office since January 2006. If he had been allowed to contest the next election in 2019 and won he would have stayed in power until 2025.

Police in Brazil arrested João Santana, who managed the successful election campaigns of the president, Dilma Rousseff. They say they have evidence that he received money paid in bribes by firms that won contracts with Petrobras, the state-controlled oil giant. Mr Santana says the charges are “baseless”. The electoral court is investigating allegations that bribes were funnelled towards Ms Rousseff’s campaign in 2014.

Jats your quota

Rioting by Jats, a caste-like community, in Haryana state threatened the water supply to Delhi, the capital of India. The local government promised to grant “backward” caste status to the fairly prosperous group, guaranteeing Jats a quota of government jobs. See article.

America and China said they had made progress in their discussions about a UN resolution in response to North Korea’s recent nuclear and missile tests. After meeting in Washington, China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, and America’s secretary of state, John Kerry, said they had agreed on a draft proposal. Mr Kerry hinted that, if passed, the resolution would “go beyond” previous ones, which have imposed economic sanctions on North Korea.

Not a vote for change

Iran was due to hold a parliamentary election on February 26th. Thousands of moderate candidates have been excluded, but hardliners could still take a beating if voters want to show their appreciation of the nuclear deal that has led to many sanctions being lifted. See article.

A ceasefire in Syria was ready to come intoeffect, though Russian and American strikes on Islamic State and the al-Qaeda-linked group Jabhat al-Nusra will continue. Chances are not high that the ceasefire will hold. See article.

Ibrahim Sharif, a prominent Bahraini opposition figure, was sentenced to a year in prison for insulting the Gulf state’s monarchical system.

Saudi Arabia and Bahrain warned their citizens not to travel to Lebanon, and the United Arab Emirates said it was banning its nationals from visiting the country. This was in response to Lebanon’s failure to condemn an Iranian attack on Saudi Arabia’s embassy in Tehran last month.

Oh Jeb!



Jeb Bush dropped out of the presidential race after finishing a distant fourth in the Republicans’ South Carolina primary. He had outspent all his rivals and a year ago was the favourite to become the party’s candidate, but a lacklustre campaign left him way behind Donald Trump and most of the others. After Mr Bush pulled out Marco Rubio picked up more endorsements from party bigwigs as the candidate best placed to beat Donald Trump, who chalked up another handsome victory, in Nevada. On the Democratic side Hillary Clinton won the party’s caucuses in Nevada. The candidates face a big test on March 1st, Super Tuesday, when a dozen states will vote.

Barack Obama renewed his call on Congress to close the Guantánamo detention centre, which still houses 91 suspected terrorists. Congress is unlikely to oblige the president, especially as he didn’t say where the prisoners should be relocated.

Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee dashed hopes of holding hearings to confirm a replacement for the late Antonin Scalia on the Supreme Court. Every one of them signed a letter saying it was their “consensus view”. It is unlikely that this will stop Mr Obama from exercising his constitutional right to nominate someone. Reports suggest he is considering Brian Sandoval, the Republican governor of Nevada.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21693641-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



The London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse hoped it would be third time lucky, as the pair confirmed they were in advanced talks about merging. The London and Frankfurt exchanges tried to integrate in 2000 and 2005, but their overtures were rejected by shareholders. Times have changed since then. Only 10% of the LSE’s and Deutsche Börse’s revenues now come from trading in equities; both have expanded into derivatives, clearing houses and other financial services. See article.

Deposed from office

China’s government ousted Xiao Gang as head of the securities regulatory commission for failing to prevent the bubble, or manage the bust, in the country’s stockmarkets, which fell sharply again this week. Mr Xiao’s replacement is Liu Shiyu, the chairman of Agricultural Bank of China and a former deputy governor of the People’s Bank of China. See article.

China, including Hong Kong, has surpassed America as the country with the most dollar billionaires, according to Hurun, a publication, and is home to 568 billionaires compared with America’s 535. The figures for China were based on share prices in January, and take account of tumbling stockmarkets. India came third on the list with 111 billionaires. Britain and Germany were joint fourth with 82 each, followed by Russia on 80.

Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, again dampened expectations of an interest-rate rise this year when he told a committee in Parliament that, on the contrary, he wasn’t ruling out cutting the bank’s benchmark rate to zero if the British economy worsened.

Focus on Asia

A fall in profit in its Asian business helped push HSBC to an $858m quarterly pre-tax loss (pre-tax profit for all of 2015 came in at $19 billion). It also had to put aside money for legal costs as American regulators have now added HSBC to the list of banks they are investigating for employment practices in Asia. Standard Chartered made an annual loss of $2.4 billion, its first since 1989.

Saudi Arabia’s oil minister surprised energy markets by reiterating that he would be happy to see oil prices fall to $20 a barrel to squeeze out “inefficient, uneconomic producers”. The minister’s remarks somewhat undermine the kingdom’s pact with Russia to freeze oil production in order to boost prices (though only if other big producers do the same).

BHP Billiton joined the list of mining giants to publish dismal earnings on the back of the slump in commodity prices, when it reported a $5.7 billion six-month loss. Andrew Mackenzie, the Anglo-Australian company’s chief executive, said the mining industry was in a “new era” and needed “a different dividend policy to handle that”. BHP duly slashed its dividend by 74%.

A proposal that would have seen a Chinese tech company take a stake in an American one fell apart after the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, a government body, said it would open an investigation. The $3.8 billion deal would have given Tsinghua Unigroup, which is linked to Tsinghua University in Beijing, a 15% holding in Western Digital, which is based in Irvine, California.

Sharp, a struggling Japanese electronics company, said it had agreed to a takeover from Foxconn, a Taiwanese firm that assembles the iPhone in China. But Foxconn announced a delay to sealing the bid because Sharp had inserted new terms into their agreement. Foxconn had bid for Sharp against a fund backed by the Japanese government.

Sysco, an American company that is the world’s largest supplier of catering food, agreed to buy Brakes Group, a food-services firm in Britain with operations in other European countries, in a deal valued at $3.1 billion. Brakes supplies food to pubs as well as hospitals, restaurants and schools.

The rhetoric intensified between the FBI and Apple over a legal order to get the company to unlock an iPhone used by one of the attackers in last December’s terrorist attack in California. A Department of Justice filing claimed that Apple’s argument—that unlocking the phone would weaken its encryption protections—was a marketing ploy to strengthen its business model. Tim Cook, Apple’s boss, said that what the FBI was asking it to do was the “software equivalent of cancer”.

Last year’s must-have

America’s consumer-safety commission deemed that no brand of hoverboard (self-balancing scooters that don’t actually hover) currently on the market is safe. The agency said it had received 52 reports of fires caused by batteries overheating in hoverboards in the past few months, which in two cases caused homes to burn down.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21693642-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21693643-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




The Republicans: Time to fire him

Britain and the European Union: The real danger of Brexit

Making Indonesia work: Open up

Traffic in megacities: Jam today

Privacy and security: Code to ruin?





Articles Sections Next

The Republicans

Time to fire him

Donald Trump is unfit to lead a great political party

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



IN A week’s time, the race for the Republican nomination could be all but over. Donald Trump has already won three of the first four contests. On March 1st, Super Tuesday, 12 more states will vote. Mr Trump has a polling lead in all but three of them. Were these polls to translate into results, as they have so far, Mr Trump would not quite be unbeatable. It would still be possible for another candidate to win enough delegates to overtake him. But that would require the front-runner to have a late, spectacular electoral collapse of a kind that has not been seen before. Right now the Republican nomination is his to lose.

Worse, it might not stop there. Polls show that 46% of Americans of voting age have a “very unfavourable” opinion of Mr Trump, which suggests his chances of winning a general election are slight. But Mr Trump’s political persona is more flexible than that of any professional politician, which means he can take it in any direction he wants to. And whoever wins the nomination for either party will have a decent chance of becoming America’s next president: the past few elections have been decided by slim margins in a handful of states. When pollsters ask voters to choose in a face-off between Mr Trump and Hillary Clinton, the Democratic front-runner wins by less than three percentage points. Mr Trump would have plenty of time to try to close that gap. An economy that falls back into recession or an indictment for Mrs Clinton might do it for him.

That is an appalling prospect. The things Mr Trump has said in this campaign make him unworthy of leading one of the world’s great political parties, let alone America. One way to judge politicians is by whether they appeal to our better natures: Mr Trump has prospered by inciting hatred and violence. He is so unpredictable that the thought of him anywhere near high office is terrifying. He must be stopped.

The world according to Trump

Because each additional Trumpism seems a bit less shocking than the one before, there is a danger of becoming desensitised to his outbursts. To recap, he has referred to Mexicans crossing the border as rapists; called enthusiastically for the use of torture; hinted that Antonin Scalia, a Supreme Court justice, was murdered; proposed banning all Muslims from visiting America; advocated killing the families of terrorists; and repeated, approvingly, a damaging fiction that a century ago American soldiers in the Philippines dipped their ammunition in pigs’ blood before executing Muslim rebels. At a recent rally he said he would like to punch a protester in the face. This is by no means an exhaustive list.

Almost the only policy Mr Trump clearly subscribes to is a fantasy: the construction of a wall along the southern border, paid for by Mexico. What would he do if faced with a crisis in the South China Sea, a terrorist attack in America or another financial meltdown? Nobody has any idea. Mr Trump may be well suited to campaigning in primaries, where voters bear little resemblance to the country as a whole, but it is difficult to imagine any candidate less suited to the consequence of winning a general election, namely governing.

With each victory, the voices trying to make peace with Mr Trump’s hostile takeover of the Republican Party grow louder. He has already been endorsed by some Republican congressmen. Some on the left point out that he is less conservative on social and economic questions than some of his rivals (while privately hoping the Republicans nominate him so that Mrs Clinton can give him a shellacking). Some on the right argue that Mr Trump is merely playing a role, blowing chilli powder up the nostrils of the politically correct, and that in essence he is a pragmatic New York property developer who likes to cut deals. Were he to win the nomination, their argument runs, he would be privately intimidated and would appoint sensible advisers to whom he would defer.

This is wishful thinking by those who want their side to win at any cost. There is nothing in Mr Trump’s career—during which he has maintained close control of the family business he runs, and often acted on instinct—to suggest that he would suddenly metamorphose into a wise chairman, eager to take counsel from seasoned experts. For those who have yet to notice, Mr Trump is not burdened by a lack of confidence in his own opinions.

Republican in name only

For too long, the first instinct of Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, the leading alternatives to Mr Trump, has been to avoid criticising the front-runner in the hope of winning over his voters later. The primaries may at times resemble a circus, but they also provide a place to test candidates for leadership and courage. So far both men have flunked that test. Republicans need to take Mr Trump on, not stand transfixed by what is happening to their party. More than 60m people voted for Mitt Romney in 2012. A big majority are decent, compassionate, tolerant people who abhor political violence, bigotry and lying. Thoughtful conservatives will be heart-broken if asked to choose in November between a snarling nativist and a Democrat.

If The Economist had cast a vote in the Republican primaries in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina or Nevada we would have supported John Kasich. The governor of Ohio has a good mixture of experience, in Congress and in his home state as well as in the private sector. He has also shown bravery, expanding Medicaid in Ohio though he knew it would count against him later with primary voters, as indeed it has. But this is not Mr Kasich’s party any more. Despite his success in New Hampshire, where he came second, Mr Kasich is the preferred choice of less than 10% of Republican voters.

If the field remains split as it is now, it is possible for Mr Trump to win with just a plurality of votes. To prevent that, others must drop out. Although we are yet to be convinced by Mr Rubio (see article), he stands a better chance of beating Mr Trump than anyone else. All the other candidates—including Mr Cruz, who wrongly sees himself as the likeliest challenger— should get out of his way. If they decline to do so, it could soon be too late to prevent the party of Abraham Lincoln from being led into a presidential election by Donald Trump.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693579-donald-trump-unfit-lead-great-political-party-time-fire-him/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Britain and the European Union

The real danger of Brexit

Leaving the EU would hurt Britain—and would also deal a terrible blow to the West

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition





THE battle is joined, at last. David Cameron has called a referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union for June 23rd, promising to campaign hard to stay in. What began as a gambit to hold together his divided Tory party is turning into an alarmingly close contest. Betting markets put the odds that Britons opt to leave at two-to-one; some polls suggest the voters are evenly split; several cabinet ministers are campaigning for Brexit. There is a real chance that in four months’ time Britain could be casting off from Europe’s shores.

That would be grave news—and not just for Britain. A vote to leave would damage the economy, certainly in the short term and probably in the long run. (As financial markets woke up to the prospect, the pound this week fell to its lowest level against the dollar since 2009.) It would imperil Britain’s security, when threats from terrorists and foreign powers are at their most severe in years. And far from reclaiming sovereignty, Britons would be forgoing clout, by giving up membership of a powerful club whose actions they can influence better from within than without. Those outside Britain marvelling at this proposed act of self-harm should worry for themselves, too. Brexit would deal a heavy blow to Europe, a continent already on the ropes. It would uncouple the world’s fifth-largest economy from its biggest market, and unmoor the fifth-largest defence spender from its allies. Poorer, less secure and disunited, the new EU would be weaker; the West, reliant on the balancing forces of America and Europe, would be enfeebled, too.

Dreams, meet reality

The Brexiters’ case is that Britain is held back by Europe: unshackled, it could soar as an open economy that continued to trade with the EU and all round the world. That is possible in theory, but as our briefing (see Briefing) explains, it is not how things would work in practice. At a minimum, the EU would allow full access to its single market only in return for adherence to rules that Eurosceptics are keen to jettison. If Norway and Switzerland (whose arrangements with the EU many Brexiters idolise) are a guide, the union would also demand the free movement of people and a big payment to its budget before allowing unfettered access to the market.

Worse, the EU would have a strong incentive to impose a harsh settlement to discourage other countries from leaving. The Brexit camp’s claim that Europe needs Britain more than the other way round is fanciful: the EU takes almost half Britain’s exports, whereas Britain takes less than 10% of the EU’s; and the British trade deficit is mostly with the Germans and Spanish, not with the other 25 countries that would have to agree on a new trade deal.

To some Eurosceptics these hardships would be worth it if they meant reclaiming sovereignty from Europe, whose bureaucrats and judges interfere with everything from bankers’ bonuses to working-time limits. Yet the gain would be partly illusory. In a globalised world, power is necessarily pooled and traded: Britain gives up sovereignty in exchange for clout through its memberships of NATO, the IMF and countless other power-sharing, rule-setting institutions. Signing up to treaties on trade, nuclear power or the environment involves submitting to regulations set jointly with foreigners, in return for greater gains. Britain outside the EU would be on the sidelines: notionally independent from, but in fact still constrained by, rules it would have no role in formulating. It would be a purer but rather powerless sort of sovereignty.

One exception is immigration, the area over which many Eurosceptics most long for control. Half of Britain’s migrants come from the EU, and there is little the government can do to stop them. If Britain left the union, it could. But doing so would have a double cost. Gaining the right to stop immigration from the EU would almost certainly mean losing full access to the single market. And reducing the numbers of immigrants would hurt Britain’s businesses and public services, which rely on French bankers, Bulgarian builders and Italian doctors.

A global concern

The longer-term costs would go beyond economics. Brexit might well break up the United Kingdom itself. Scotland, more Europhile than England, is again agitating for a divorce; if Britain decides to leave Europe, then the Scots may at last have a point. Brexit could also dangerously unsettle Northern Ireland, where the peace process over two decades has depended on the fact that both Ireland and Britain are members of the EU. The Irish government is among the most vocal foreign supporters of the campaign for Britain to stay in.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

Ireland is not the only country that would suffer. European leaders know Brexit would weaken a club already in deep trouble over such issues as migration and the euro crisis. And Europe would be poorer without Britain’s voice: more dominated by Germany; and, surely, less liberal, more protectionist and more inward-looking. Europe’s links to America would become more tenuous. Above all, the loss of its biggest military power and most significant foreign-policy actor would seriously weaken the EU in the world.

The EU has become an increasingly important part of the West’s foreign and security policy, whether it concerns a nuclear deal with Iran, the threat of Islamist terrorism or the imposition of sanctions against Russia. Without Britain, it would be harder for the EU to pull its global weight—a big loss to the West in a troubled neighbourhood, from Russia through Syria to north Africa. It is little wonder that Russia’s Vladimir Putin is keen on Brexit—and that America’s Barack Obama is not. It would be shortsighted for Eurosceptics to be indifferent to this. A weakened Europe would be unambiguously bad for Britain, whose geography, unlike its politics, is fixed.

A lot thus rests on the tight race now under way. For those who believe, as this newspaper does, in free trade and freedom of movement, the benefits to Britain of its membership of the EU have never been in much doubt. What more sceptical sorts must now recognise is that Brexit would also weaken Europe and the West. The stakes in Mr Cameron’s great gamble are high; should he fail, the losses would be widely felt.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693584-leaving-eu-would-hurt-britainand-would-also-deal-terrible-blow-west-real-danger/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Making Indonesia work

Open up

The next revolution that Indonesia needs

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



AN INDONESIAN trade minister, Rachmat Gobel, once wanted to ban the import of secondhand clothing because, he said, it could transmit the HIVvirus. He also restricted imports of beef to promote the dubious goal of self-sufficiency; the result was not rendang in every pot, but soaring beef prices, butchers’ strikes and protests. Mercifully, Mr Gobel was shown the door last August, and his replacement, Tom Lembong, seems to believe that a country’s trade ministry should facilitate rather than impede free trade.

But Mr Gobel’s views remain all too common in Indonesia, and Mr Lembong’s all too rare. The world’s fourth-most populous country is blessed with a natural bounty of coal and oil under ground and, above it, forests and plantations producing rubber and palm oil. But its huge potential in other areas is still unrealised (see our special report in this week’s issue). As with many resource-dependent economies, protectionism and rent-seeking have flourished. The government shields large domestic players at the expense of consumers. In 2007 Indonesia expanded the number of industries in which foreign investment is barred or restricted from 83 to 338, making it South-East Asia’s most hostile country to foreign capital. When commodity prices were high and China was buying, this model appeared to work reasonably well. Indonesia’s economy grew, and if foreign companies wanted what was in Indonesian mines they had to play by Indonesian rules. Now that commodity prices have plummeted, output is sputtering and Indonesia’s weaknesses are apparent.

Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s president (pictured above), who is widely known as Jokowi, came to power promising reform. He has said a lot of sensible things about boosting infrastructure, reducing subsidies and attracting foreign investment, particularly the sort that brings high-value manufacturing and service jobs. But the kinds of firms that produce these jobs are choosy. If Indonesia does not create the right conditions, they will not invest, and Jokowi’s promise to return Indonesia to 7% growth—a tall order at the best of times—will go unkept.

Unfortunately, his record has fallen short of the reformist rhetoric. He got a few big things right after taking office, cutting wasteful fuel subsidies and introducing a one-stop shop for business licensing, which simplified a notoriously Byzantine process. More recently he has trimmed Indonesia’s negative investment list, removing barriers to foreign investors in 30 areas of the economy, including cold storage and warehousing, which should help stabilise food prices and help fishermen sell their catches.

The other Jokowi

Alas, these reforms have been countered by other policies that smack of the old protectionism. Even as Jokowi lowered some restrictions, he increased barriers to foreign investment in 19 other industries. In July he unveiled a law requiring that at least 30% of components in tablets and smartphones sold in Indonesia should be made in the country—despite lacking the industrial base to produce them.

This balance-sheet is not good enough. If Jokowi is to be the man to lead Indonesia to sustained prosperity, he needs to toughen his reformist mettle—and quickly. The to-do list is a long one, starting with slashing the negative-investment list and lifting restrictions on agriculture that keep rice prices high. None of this will be easy in a country where powerful vested interests have ensured that protectionism has predominated for decades. But it is not impossible. Indonesians have shown great bravery in their revolutions for independence and freedom. Now the economy needs to be unchained.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693576-next-revolution-indonesia-needs-open-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Traffic in megacities

Jam today

To get the world’s biggest cities moving, stop subsidising driving

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



CITIES are the world’s economic engines—and the bigger they are, the better. Middle-aged ones like London and New York are booming, and would be doing even better if they were not constrained by green belts, zoning and other NIMBYism. But the real giants are in the emerging world. Fast-growing metropolises like Lagos and Manila, with populations of more than 15m, perform an amazing alchemy by turning poor rural migrants into better-educated, wealthier urbanites. Unfortunately, these engines can barely run.

Megacities are seizing up. Surveys of São Paulo suggest that half of all adults spend at least two hours a day travelling. Lagos has such epic traffic jams that an army of street hawkers plies the roads, selling peanuts, Christmas trees and puppies to a captive market of drivers. Last autumn the chairman of Manila’s transport authority was an hour late for a live television interview. He was stuck in traffic, of course (see article).

Residents shake their heads and blame corruption, potholes, undisciplined drivers and growing affluence for the jams. They are partly right, especially about the affluence. More urbanites with more money means more wheels on the road: new-car sales in the Philippines jumped by 91% between 2013 and 2015 alone. But the main reason the megacities are stuck is that their governments are doing almost nothing to reduce traffic, and quite a lot to make it worse.

Some continue to fix fuel prices at artificially low levels. Others have cut subsidies, although oil prices have been so low that consumers are yet to be convinced that governments will allow costly fuel. And governments favour drivers in other ways. Most megacities have minimum parking rules, which specify how many parking spaces must be provided whenever a new shop, office or block of flats is built. Lagos insists on one parking space for every 40 square metres of “worshipping area” in a church. These laws greatly encourage driving and, in effect, impose a tax on non-drivers, because businesses pass on the cost of building the spaces to all their customers.

Even megacities that try to force drivers out of their cars often achieve the opposite. The modish method, which is used to tackle air pollution as well as traffic, is to ban cars from the roads on specific days, determined by the last digit of their number plates. Beijing was an early adopter. Delhi tested an odd-even scheme in January and will have another go in the spring. But the history of these schemes, in Mexico City and elsewhere, suggests that they do not cut traffic for long. Instead they are a boon to carmakers: any family that can afford it simply buys a second car with a different number plate.

Inching forward

Many big cities are now building “rapid bus” networks, with dedicated lanes. If well designed, these are a cheap, effective form of public transport. But governments that invest in public transport while retaining the inducements to drive are mostly wasting their money. Ideally, all would follow London, Singapore and Stockholm in charging drivers to move around the city at congested times. But cutting subsidies would be a good start. So hats off to the great cities of Latin America, which are doing more than those in Africa or Asia to reform. São Paulo has abolished parking minimums; Mexico City has quietly allowed its number-plate scheme to fade, while building a large rapid-bus network. These cities are still stuck, but the road ahead is clearing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693577-get-worlds-biggest-cities-moving-stop-subsidising-driving-jam-today/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Privacy and security

Code to ruin?

The rights and wrongs of Apple’s fight with the FBI

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



CITIZENS have a right to both security and privacy. The difficulties arise when these two rights are in conflict, as they now are in the battle between the world’s most valuable company and its most famous law-enforcement agency. Apple has refused to comply with a court order to help the FBI unlock an iPhone used by Syed Farook, one of the terrorists involved in the San Bernardino shootings in December. The company says the government’s request fundamentally compromises the privacy of its users; the feds say that Apple’s defiance jeopardises the safety of Americans (see article).

Some frame the stand-off in terms of the rule of law: Apple cannot pick and choose which rules it will obey, they say. That is both true and beside the point. The firm has the right to appeal against a court order; if it eventually loses the legal battle, it will have to comply. The real question is whether Apple’s substantive arguments are right. That hinges on two issues.

The first is whether the FBI’s request sets a precedent. The law-enforcers say not. This is not an attempt to build a generic flaw in Apple’s encryption, through which government can walk as needed. It is a request to unlock a specific device, akin to wiretapping a single phone line. The phone belonged to a government department, not Farook. Apple and other tech firms regularly co-operate with the authorities on criminal cases; this is no different. Yet Apple is being asked to do something new: to write a piece of software that does not currently exist in order to sidestep an iPhone feature that erases data after ten unsuccessful password attempts. Later models of the iPhone than the one Farook used are harder to compromise in this way. But if the court’s ruling is upheld, it signals that companies can be compelled by the state to write new operating instructions for their devices. That breaks new ground.

The second issue is whether that precedent is justified. And that entails a judgment on whether security would be enhanced or weakened by Apple’s compliance. In the short term, the answer is that security will be enhanced. Farook was a terrorist; his phone is the only one being unlocked; and the device might give up the identity of other malefactors. But in the longer term, things are much fuzzier.

Security does not just mean protecting people from terrorism, but also warding off the threat of rogue espionage agencies, cybercriminals and enemy governments. If Apple writes a new piece of software that could circumvent its password systems on one phone, that software could fall into the hands of hackers and be modified to unlock other devices. If the capability to unlock iPhones exists, so will the temptation for the authorities to use it repeatedly. And if tech firms are forced to comply with this sort of request in America, it is harder for anyone to argue against similar demands from more repressive governments, such as China’s. This newspaper has long argued against cryptographic backdoors and skeleton keys on these grounds. It is possible to imagine a scenario that might override such concerns: if information is needed to avert a specific and imminent threat to many lives, for example. But in this instance, Apple’s case is the stronger.

Core arguments

This battle presages others. If the courts rule against Apple, it will work to make its devices so secure that they cannot be overridden by any updates. In that event (or, indeed, if the tech firm wins the Farook case), legislators will be tempted to mandate backdoor access via the statute book. If Tim Cook, Apple’s boss, is not to hasten the outcome he wishes to avoid, he must lay out the safeguards that would have persuaded the firm to accede to the FBI’s request. Tech firms are at the centre of a vital policy debate (see article). Apple has rejected the authorities’ solution. Now it must propose its own.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21693578-rights-and-wrongs-apples-fight-fbi-code-ruin/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




International students, Trump history, China's economy, monuments, tax reliefs, linguistics, Supreme Court: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

International students, Trump history, China's economy, monuments, tax reliefs, linguistics, Supreme Court

Letters to the editor

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



Let them in

Britain should be rolling out the red carpet for the best and brightest foreign students (“Train ’em up. Kick ’em out”, January 30th). The country’s global status in science and innovation is built on the creativity that is sparked when people from different cultures collaborate.

What do Ernst Chain, Andre Geim and Venkatraman Ramakrishnan have in common, apart from their Nobel prizes? They were all welcomed to Britain from abroad: a world without their pioneering work at British universities on penicillin, graphene and ribosomes would be a much poorer one.

Foreign students propelled Silicon Valley and now they drive innovation and entrepreneurship in Britain. If we turned our backs on international students, Britain’s economy and society would lose. The cost to the world would be incalculable.

ALICE GAST

President

Imperial College

London

Your article explores the many arguments for opening the doors of colleges and societies to international students (“Brains without borders”, January 30th).

There are many benefits. It can lower costs to host societies in interactions with global communities—as foreign students learn English, America and Britain have to train fewer people in foreign languages to do business with the world.

As professionals, the skills and systems learned as international students, such as accounting and logistics management, can be transferred to their home countries. Also, when firms from the host country go overseas, foreign students who have returned home are potentially superior recruits because of their knowledge of the language and culture of the employer. Additionally host universities could tap foreign-born alumni for big endowments.

ANNY WONG

The Woodlands, Texas





The origin of species

Your article on the origins of the Trump family (“Kallstadt’s king”, February 13th) missed an important event in the story of the young Friedrich Trump. You had him arriving in America and eventually making his financial “nest-egg” in Washington state before returning to Germany. In fact, he, like so many others in 1897, was caught up in the Klondike Gold Rush. He sold his business in Seattle and joined the thousands who travelled by steamer to Dyea and carried supplies over the Chilkoot Pass to the Klondike. Along the way he opened a canteen for hungry miners, and he set up a hotel and restaurant in Bennett and Whitehorse. Mr Trump ran a fine eatery but the bulk of the profits came from liquor and sex (normal for hotels in that area). He was shrewd enough to know that the real money was in “mining the miners”, which is essentially still what the Trump business does today. He left the Yukon after three years when the Mounties began to tighten up on gambling and prostitution and returned to Germany with $582,000 in today’s money: the source of the future Trump property fortune.

Donald Trump owes other things to Canada too. His first wife, Ivana, lived there before moving to New York.

ROBERT HOLMES

Whitehorse, Canada





Promoting the economy

*“Grossly Deceptive Plans” (January 30th) raised the point about local officials in China who are promoted for boosting GDP growth. Local officials often lack the knowledge or capacity to develop and implement polices that achieve the targets set by central government. As in other countries, China’s local officials do not always understand the complicated relationship between social, environmental or poverty alleviation policies. In some cases, gains in one area can be undermined by actions in another.



The fact these areas are managed by a number of different ministries, each with varying degrees of power and agendas, means it is difficult for provincial officials to obtain meaningful data in these fields. Because of this, for many officials GDP is the easiest measure by which to report “progress”. Poverty reduction through economic growth is still seen as the ultimate aim of policy planning.



REBECCA NADIN

Asia-Pacific Director

INTASAVE-CARIBSAVE

Beijing





Filling in the gaps

What to do about Confederate monuments? One suggestion as you reported is to add plaques to them explaining their background (“Recast in stone”, February 6th). Statues and monuments are immediately visual experiences, not reflective mental experiences. Remove the sabre from the hand and put into it a lash and from the other hand a chain that leads to a collar around the neck of some poor miserable wretch. Add one or more statues of slaves to every monument to the Confederacy and the viewer will immediately and viscerally understand what the civil war was about and what Confederate soldiers fought for. Instantly those men will be deprived of the patina of nobility and gallantry that they did not earn and do not deserve to have attributed to them.

STEPHEN MERRIMAN

Bang Bua Thong, Thailand





Nothing personal

Although you get much right about the need to simplify tax reliefs (“Spaghetti Junction”, February 13th), your praise for the personal allowance for income tax is undeserved. Far from being a “simple and progressive policy”, continued increases in the allowance primarily benefit the top half of the income distribution, with the lowest-paid 20% of workers not benefiting at all.

To prevent the policy being even more regressive, it is also withdrawn at £100,000 ($140,000) further complicating the tax code. If you envisage tax relief as public spending, it is a hugely inefficient and wasteful policy compared with other options. The £86 billion that HMRC loses in the personal allowance is almost triple the £30 billion it spends on the entire tax-credit system, which does much more to improve the finances of the low paid, and incentivise work. A first step to creating a better system would be to stop increasing the personal allowance and spend the money on reducing the withdrawal rates of social-security benefits, so that the lowest paid keep more of what they earn.

DUNCAN EXLEY

Director of the Equality Trust

London

* In your article about the government’s fiscal policy you suggest that the value of the British film tax relief to the British economy is unclear. However, figures on actual film production spend in Britain on production facilities, locations and jobs published by the British Film Institute (BFI) are crystal clear. They show that over £1.4 billion ($1.9 billion) was contributed to Britain’s economy last year alone and over £10 billion since the film tax relief was introduced in 2007. HMRC’s own published statistics state that £1.5 billion has been paid out through the film tax relief directly to film producers since 2007.

The film tax relief has been a key factor in enabling the British film industry to achieve a leading position in a global industry making films that people in Britain and around the world want to see.

TINA McFARLING

Media Advisor, Corporate, Partnerships & Industry, BFI

London





Linguists unite

The return of the Johnson language column to the print edition is a wonderful offer to your readers (“What would the doctor prescribe?”, January 30th). As a bilingual who has always been fascinated by words, reading such a column is always a pleasure to me. In this digital age of instant messaging where words are contracted and defaced beyond recognition, engaging in some lexicographic exercises has advantages. It will allow us to pause and think about the most important tool of the human race—language.

Our casual attitude toward the improper usage of words and phrases, which I also notice in my own native tongue, Amharic, the national language of Ethiopia, is developing a culture of carelessness that is reflected in our written and spoken communications. I hope your fortnightly column will continue to raise issues that are relevant to the predicaments that the world’s languages face at present.

TEWODROS ABEBE

Washington, DC





Order, order



The Republican-controlled Senate will probably deprive Barack Obama of the opportunity to appoint a new Supreme Court justice (“Courting controversy”, February 20th). But the Democrats could have the last word. Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders should pledge, prior to the election, that they will appoint Mr Obama to the Supreme Court if they win the presidential election. Mr Obama is brilliant, has the experience of dealing with constitutional-law matters, and he wouldn’t be the first former president to be appointed to the Supreme Court.

PAUL FEINER

Greenburgh, New York

* Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21693550-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Britain and the EU: The Brexit delusion

Britain’s EU reforms: A change of status





Articles Sections Next

Britain and the EU

The Brexit delusion

David Cameron will struggle to win a referendum on Britain’s EU membership. If he loses, the result will be messy at best and at worst disastrous

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



THE referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union that David Cameron has called for June 23rd will be not only the most crucial event in this parliament but the most important in Europe in years. It will determine the prime minister’s future, for a start: it is hard to see him staying in office if he fails to win his campaign to remain in the EU. It may be decisive for the future of the United Kingdom, as Scottish Nationalists have said a Brexit would trigger another vote on Scottish independence. And the departure of one of the heavyweight members would have a huge impact on the future of the EU.

The referendum was called after Mr Cameron completed his promised renegotiation of the terms of Britain’s membership at a marathon EU summit in Brussels that ended late on February 19th. In all four areas where he demanded change, he won concessions that could prove useful, even if they do little to swing the result of the referendum (see article).

Yet it is hard to portray these relatively small reforms as the fundamental change in Britain’s relationship with Europe that Mr Cameron once promised. Nor did he secure the “full-on” treaty change he once said he needed. As a result, his deal suffered a predictable trashing in Britain’s Eurosceptic press and from many backbench Tory MPs. This was a blow to Mr Cameron. But the referendum will be decided not on the details of his deal but on the far bigger issue of whether voters believe that Britain is better off in or out of the EU.

On this, a heavier blow for the prime minister came when six of his 29 senior ministers confirmed, after a special cabinet meeting on February 20th, that they would campaign to leave. Besides such usual suspects as Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, their number included Michael Gove, the justice secretary and a close friend of the prime minister. And on February 21st came the biggest setback to Mr Cameron, when Boris Johnson, the popular mayor of London and aspirant to the Tory leadership, announced that he too would campaign to leave (see article).

Even before these leading Tories had come out, opinion polls suggested the outcome of the referendum would be close. Since Mr Cameron first promised an in/out referendum in a speech at the London office of the Bloomberg news agency in January 2013, there has usually been a clear lead for staying in (see chart 1). As worries have grown over Europe’s economic woes and its migration crisis, the gap has narrowed. The adverse reception of Mr Cameron’s Brussels deal and the decision of Mr Johnson to throw his weight behind the leave campaign may shift opinion further.



Belatedly business and the financial markets have woken up to the rising danger of Brexit. This week sterling slid to its lowest level against the dollar in eight years. Bosses of many of the biggest companies in Britain have come out strongly in favour of remaining in. Yet the chances that Brexit may happen look greater than at any time in the past five years. And that makes it worth dwelling on what Brexit would entail—and how it measures up to the promises of would-be leavers.

An infernal article

The merits of the claims of the leavers are hard to judge because nobody can be sure what relationship a departing Britain would have with the EU. There is no precedent aside from Greenland. It left the club in 1985, but it is tiny and remains a dependency of Denmark, which is still in the EU. The assumption, now confirmed by Mr Cameron, is that a vote for Brexit would trigger an application to withdraw under article 50 of the Lisbon treaty.

Article 50 provides that the EU will negotiate a new agreement with the withdrawing country over two years. That can be extended, but only by unanimous agreement. The article also specifies that, when agreeing a new deal, the EU acts without the involvement of the country that is leaving. To get a feel for the negotiating dynamic, imagine a divorce demanded unilaterally by one partner, the terms of which are fixed unilaterally by the other. It is a process that is likely to be neither harmonious nor quick—nor to yield a result that is favourable to Britain.

Indeed, the incentive for other EU countries is not to act with generosity. A decision to leave will be seen by many as a hostile and destabilising act for a union that is already in deep trouble. Voters across Europe are disillusioned with Brussels. Populist parties in France, the Netherlands, Italy and elsewhere are watching the Brexit debate closely. The EU will be desperate to show that a decision to leave does not have a painless outcome.



The immediate effects of a Brexit vote are likely to be bad. Prolonged uncertainty over Britain’s new relationship with the EU will discourage investment, especially foreign direct investment, of which Britain is the biggest net recipient in the EU. This is particularly worrying for a country with a large current-account deficit that must be financed by capital inflows. Fears about the current account, Britain’s credit rating and Brexit have been drivers of the pound’s recent fall (see chart 2).

The longer-term effects of Brexit are also likely to be adverse. Most studies suggest that economic growth would suffer. A detailed analysis from the Bank of England in October found that EU membership had benefited the British economy. Attempts to model the consequences of Brexit point to economic damage. Two American banks, Goldman Sachs and Citigroup, recently warned that growth and the pound would fall further after a vote to leave the EU.

The trickiest issue for a post-Brexit Britain would be how to maintain full access to the EU’s single market, the world’s biggest. This is crucial since almost half Britain’s exports go to the rest of the EU. It matters greatly for the fastest-growing component of exports, services (including financial services). It will not be simple.

Norway and Iceland have access to the single market through their membership of the European Economic Area (EEA). But they are obliged to observe all the EU’s single-market regulations without having a say in them, to make payments into the EU budget (in Norway’s case, around 90% of Britain’s net payment per head) and to accept free movement of EU migrants. As a Norwegian minister once put it, “if you want to run Europe, you must be in Europe. If you want to be run by Europe, feel free to join Norway.”

Switzerland, which is not in the EEA, has negotiated bilateral agreements that give access for goods but not most services. It has to keep to most single-market rules, contribute to the budget and accept free movement of people. The Swiss have been warned that, if they try to implement a 2014 referendum demand for limits on the latter, their trade agreement with the EU will lapse.

Countries such as South Korea and, now, Canada, have free-trade deals with the EU that do not require observing all its rules, paying into the budget or accepting migrants. But such deals do not circumvent non-tariff barriers, nor do they cover financial services. Moreover, the EU has or is negotiating free-trade deals with America, China and India, from which a post-Brexit Britain would be excluded. The EU has 53 such deals. Britain would have to try to replicate them, a huge challenge given its lack of trade negotiators and the length of time even simple trade talks take.

Heading for the Brexit

The Brexit lobby responds with three arguments. The first is to assert that both sides have a strong interest in a free-trade deal. This is true but any deal is unlikely to cover services. The second is to claim that, because Britain runs a big trade deficit with other EU countries, they need the British market more than Britain needs theirs. This is a fallacy: Britain accounts for only 10% of EU exports, while the EU takes almost half of Britain’s. Moreover, most of the British trade deficit with the EU is with just two countries, Germany and Spain—yet a trade agreement must be endorsed by the other 25 members too.

The third argument is that a post-Brexit Britain could strike new free-trade deals swiftly. Yet experienced trade diplomats are doubtful. Tough negotiators like the South Koreans are unlikely to offer Britain the same deal they gave the EU. America, China and India have made clear that they would be more interested in a deal with the EU than one with Britain alone. When it comes to opening China to more trade, say, the negotiating clout of the world’s biggest market far outweighs Britain’s alone.

The next issue is regulation. The leave campaign claims that EU red tape hobbles Britain’s firms and strangles growth. Yet studies by the OECD, a rich-country club, find that, despite being in the EU, Britain’s product and labour markets are among the rich world’s least regulated. Moreover, a post-Brexit bonfire of market-unfriendly rules is fanciful. Britain led the charge for environmental rules, for example. The biggest interventions in the market, such as tight planning laws and a new living wage that will reach £9 ($13) an hour by 2020, are home-grown.

Immigration policy, on the other hand, would surely change post-Brexit. Although libertarians who want to leave favour more, not less migration, most Brexiters do not. Indeed, the big selling-point of their campaign is to restore British control of the frontiers by stopping free movement of people. It will be hard to do this and keep full access to the EU’s single market; it may also compromise the position of 2m British citizens who live in other EU countries. But the bigger point is that immigration curbs would do economic damage. Studies find that immigrants are net contributors to the economy because they pay far more in taxes than they take out in benefits.

Brexit would also have implications for the survival of the United Kingdom. The Scottish National Party is campaigning to stay in. If the leave side wins thanks to English votes, which is quite possible, the SNP will demand another independence referendum, which it expects to win. Northern Ireland is also troubled by Brexit: Britain’s economic, trade and political relations with Ireland depend heavily on both belonging to the EU. This helped underpin the peace process in Northern Ireland.

Then there are the implications for the EU’s place in the world. As opinion polls have shown, voters in other EU countries agree with their governments in wanting Britain to stay in. Besides its size, global reach and free-trade instincts, Britain is a useful counter to the dominance of Germany and France. And, as the biggest military power in the EU, it is central to the club’s foreign-policy and security clout.

Less clout if it’s out

The growing role of the EU in global diplomacy, ranging from the imposition of sanctions on Russia through a nuclear-weapons deal with Iran to action against piracy off Somalia, would be severely diminished were Britain no longer in the club. The fight against terrorism would also be harder. It may be possible to try to replicate the police, security-service and judicial co-operation built up within the EU to fight terrorism, but it would take time and might not work as well.

Brexiters answer that NATO, not the EU, is the guarantor of the West’s security. A post-Brexit Britain could still co-operate with the EU on security issues, including the European arrest warrant and exchanges of information. They also see no reason why leaving the EU should upset either Northern Ireland or the union with Scotland. Mr Cameron disagrees. In Brussels he said firmly that Britain would be safer and stronger, not just more prosperous, in the EU. In the coming weeks, he will make domestic and national security a large part of the argument for remaining in.

The strongest argument for Brexit is that it is the only way to restore sovereignty to Parliament and escape the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice. Mr Cameron’s plan to counter this with an act that reasserts parliamentary sovereignty will not convince many, for the ECJ would still stand supreme. In a world with a network of international treaties and obligations, sovereignty is not a completely binary matter; as Mr Cameron put it this week, it would be possible to regain the illusion of sovereignty but without real power.

The conclusion is that the purported benefits from Brexit are uncertain and may prove illusory, while the risks are much greater if voters choose to leave. Similar sentiments led Britons to vote to stay in the European project in 1975, and Scots to remain in the union in 2014. And yet the outcome in June seems more uncertain.

That is partly because the leave side has had a good few weeks. But it is also because voters will be influenced not by a cool calculation of costs and benefits but by their general view of Europe. And in the midst of a huge refugee crisis and stuck in the economic doldrums, Europe does not look inviting. Referendums are always unpredictable: a sudden shock in the markets, or even a terrorist incident, could swing voters. There is all to play for.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21693568-david-cameron-will-struggle-win-referendum-britains-eu-membership-if-he-loses/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Britain’s EU reforms

A change of status

Britain’s prime minister got his deal—but it will make little difference

Feb 27th 2016 | BRUSSELS | From the print edition

Have they made Cameron feel special?

AFTER 48 hours of hard bargaining and little sleep David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, emerged from a summit meeting of European leaders at midnight on February 19th to announce a deal on his four demands for reforms to the European Union. Donald Tusk, the European Council president, declared the creation of a “special status” for Britain. Whether it will count for much in the referendum is much less certain.

Agreement came most easily on competitiveness and the promise of more free-trade deals, to which all EU countries pay lip service, even when obstructing them in practice. Mr Cameron’s demands on sovereignty were harder to settle. All agreed to give the EU’s 28 national parliaments a “red card” whereby support from 55% of them could block EU laws. But several leaders were hostile to Mr Cameron’s insistence on an exemption for Britain from the EU’s goal of “ever closer union”. He won it by what he called a “live and let live” approach: Britain will not impede others’ desire for deeper integration so long as it can opt out.

The most important change Mr Cameron wanted was a guarantee that the bigger euro-zone block could not gang up on non-euro countries. The 19-strong euro area, with votes weighted according to the size of countries, now has the power to legislate for the entire EU. He has secured agreement for enhanced observer status for non-euro countries in euro-zone meetings and an understanding that a non-euro country can appeal to an EU summit if it objects to decisions taken at such meetings.

The most heated argument came over Mr Cameron’s desire to stop new EU migrants to Britain from claiming in-work benefits for four years, and to cut the level of benefits paid for children whom they have left in their home countries. As a compromise, he secured an “emergency brake” that will let Britain delay paying benefits for a seven-year period and cut child benefits for existing migrants after 2020. East Europeans are unhappy with these changes. Yet they seem unlikely to reduce the numbers of EU migrants, since most come to Britain to work, not to claim benefits.

Mr Cameron insists his changes are legally binding and irreversible. But though promises were made to change the treaties in future and the European Parliament said it would help with legislation, some may still be challenged either politically or in the European Court of Justice. One proposal he was, however, happy to accept: that if Britons vote for Brexit, the entire deal will lapse. This is meant to bolster Mr Cameron’s insistence that a vote to leave is just that—and not as Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, suggests, merely a prelude to getting a better deal from Brussels.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21693569-britains-prime-minister-got-his-dealbut-it-will-make-little-difference-change-status/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





United States




Marco Rubio: The moral of his story

The Nevada caucuses: Winning big

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

The religious left: The least of these

Fringe movements: Finding Keepers

Lexington: A Latino firewall totters





Articles Sections Next

Marco Rubio

The moral of his story

To some the Republicans’ best hope is a shallow opportunist; to others, an extremist. Might Marco Rubio be both?

Feb 27th 2016 | GILBERT, SOUTH CAROLINA AND TALLAHASSEE | From the print edition



HIS father Mario, a struggling bartender; Oriales, a hotel maid and devoted mother; Pedro, his garrulous, cigar-smoking grandfather, known to the grandchildren as Papá; an elder brother, also Mario, who became a Green Beret: the supporting cast in Marco Rubio’s back-story is a technicolour pageant of striving Cuban immigrants turned patriotic Americans. If Mr Rubio somehow manages to seize the Republican nomination from Donald Trump—a feat he seems best-placed to achieve—Americans will hear his story often. But what, exactly, is its moral?

In Mr Rubio’s telling, his biography is a fable of America, which “changed the history of my family”. In no other country could someone who, as a child, was taken by his father to ogle the dreamlike mansions of the rich, rise to the Senate, and possibly beyond. It follows that America must not forsake its rugged individualism: “We don’t want to become like the rest of the world,” Mr Rubio insists, delighting his many fellow exceptionalists.

It is also, of course, a story about Mr Rubio’s own exceptionalism—as some voters, knowing American meritocracy is often more promise than reality, intuitively understand. “It’s really cool,” said a young man cradling a baby after a rally in Rock Hill, South Carolina, “that he could navigate through all these obstacles—it wasn’t just handed to him on a silver platter.” The contrast with some other candidates, privileged in money, schooling or connections, is plain. As for his difficulties with mortgage payments and ill-advised property dealings, which some have used against him: Mr Rubio adduces them, like his student debt and rueful talk of post-dating cheques in pinched times, as yet more evidence that he alone can “talk to people who are living the way I grew up”.

With its hardscrabble, Everyman beginning, the tale also has a gratifyingly upbeat pay-off, featuring a photogenic family—his student-sweetheart wife is a former Miami Dolphins cheerleader—as well as success. And, as no other candidate could, Mr Rubio recounts all this as insinuatingly as a Hollywood weepie. Were he not a politician, it has been said, he could have been a televangelist; he might also have made it as a stand-up comic. His scripted jokes are actually funny, and, contrary to the impression created by his robotronic malfunction in the Republican debate in New Hampshire, he ad-libs with an easy charm. He explains complex subjects, such as the national debt, persuasively. He likes hip-hop.

These attributes bolster his claim that, in a field of Republican gargoyles, he is the likeliest to prevail in November. Yet the longer he remains in the race, the louder two key criticisms will become. They seem contradictory, but both contain elements of truth. One is that, beneath the altar-boy haircut, winning smile, chirpy voice and banter about football, Mr Rubio is as ideologically extreme as anyone in the contest. The other is that the feel-good narrative masks a void.

“Marco Rubio”, Jeb Bush once said, “makes me cry,” a remark that would have been prophetic had he not added “for joy”. Mr Bush was Florida’s governor during Mr Rubio’s lightning rise through its House of Representatives, from whip, to majority leader, to become, at 34 (he is now 44), its first Cuban-American Speaker. Alongside the portraits of his more grizzled predecessors in the capitol in Tallahassee, his is startlingly boyish. Mr Bush presented him with a sword, symbolising conservatism; at least, that is what it symbolised then.

The pollster in the sky

Strikingly, in the face-off that ended with Mr Bush’s withdrawal on February 20th—which, in a saner primary season, might have been the headline drama—most of Florida’s Republican establishment lined up behind the former governor. “They all went in one direction like fish in a tank,” says Johnnie Byrd, a previous Florida Speaker and among the minority who favoured Mr Rubio. Gratitude for Mr Bush’s patronage helps explain the preference; some “Jebbies” may just have jumped too early. But it also reflects a sense, even among the operators in Tallahassee, that the younger man’s breakneck ambition was offputting. Dwelling on polls, fundraising, the mechanics of the game, Mr Rubio’s memoir, “An American Son”, reinforces the image of a pure politician. “Did God read polls?” he asks when, during his long-shot bid for the Senate in 2010, his wife tells him to trust the Almighty.

Both the resentment, and the air of weightless ambition, have been reinforced by his luck. For if Mr Rubio could not rely on a parental Rolodex, as he puts it, his career has been blessed in other ways: seats opening up at serendipitous moments, money and well-paid jobs magically materialising. Norman Braman, a Miami car-dealing tycoon, took a lucrative shine to him, donating generously and employing his wife. Not long after he secured the Florida Speakership, Mr Rubio landed a $300,000-a-year post at a politically connected legal firm (he once specialised in land-use law). Some of his jobs were not terribly demanding, suggesting, to his critics, a pattern of absenteeism stretching to his poor attendance record in the Senate.

“He’s just like Barack Obama,” worried a woman in Florence, where Tim Scott, a South Carolinian senator, whooped Mr Rubio onto the stage like a boxing announcer. The implicit concern is that he has more offices to his name than achievements, or, some say, principles. They point, above all, to his gymnastics over immigration: running for the Senate, he opposed a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants, then embraced it as part of a doomed reform in 2013; now, in the xenophobic heat of the campaign, he downplays that idea, arguing that terrorism has upended even unrelated aspects of his policy. (This revision could forfeit some of the Hispanic votes that Republican apparatchiks covet—though given the tensions between Hispanic communities, confidence that he would deliver them may be naive.)

Still, anyone who thinks Mr Rubio entirely devoid of convictions should watch his farewell speech in Tallahassee in 2008. “God is real,” Mr Rubio passionately declared: “He loves you...whether you are an embryo or behind bars.” God’s providence, and Mr Rubio’s gratitude for it, often feature in his story. His faith is longstanding: as a boy, he would don a sheet after mass and pretend to be a priest. (It is also ecumenical: in Miami, he attends both Catholic and Baptist churches, and during a childhood spell in Las Vegas went to a Mormon one.)

And for all his pole-climbing, his philosophy has been consistent. A better reading of his flip-flop-flip on immigration may be that his liberal stance was an anomaly. His tougher line today—no Syrian refugees; fewer family-reunion visas—fits into anultraconservative outlook that his story has sometimes camouflaged.

Smile and smile and be a Tea Partier

A standard critique of Republican strategy is that it exploits social issues to divide and distract groups whose economic interests lie in more redistributive government. Mr Rubio’s tactic, alleges an old adversary from his days in Florida politics, is to “use [his background] as a shield to push forward his agenda”. Or, as Mr Rubio writes of Mr Obama in his memoir: “His personality and language gave an impression of moderation, but his ideas and voting record” revealed a zealot.

Take his avowed commitment to helping the little guy. He acknowledges the alienation some members of minorities feel, drawing on his own experiences in cosmopolitan Miami. He speaks warmly of early intervention for disadvantaged toddlers, and of leniency towards mildly straying youngsters. He can be insightful about America’s precarious place in a globalised, post-industrial economy. But when it comes to taxation, his priorities lie elsewhere. One of his favourite lines is that the poor are not made richer by making the rich poorer. Under his plans there is no fear of that: his proposal to scrap taxes on capital-gains and dividends would instead make the rich richer.

The exigencies of the primaries have sharpened Mr Rubio’s tone. But, in content, he is a veteran hardliner. Dan Gelber, formerly the Democratic minority leader in the Florida house, calls him “the best spokesman that the severe right-wing could ever hope for” (adding that he “was never dishonest or disreputable”). Indeed, while Mr Rubio is more clubbable than his fire-breathing rival Ted Cruz—witness his ongoing stream of endorsements from congressmen and governors—he and Mr Cruz, another Cuban immigrant’s son and devout first-term senator, have more in common than either cares to admit.

An elegant weapon for a more civilised age

For example, though Mr Rubio doesn’t deny climate change, as Mr Cruz does, he says, in effect, that America shouldn’t do much about it. He claims gun controls fail wherever they are tried. Like Mr Cruz he wants to abolish the Department of Education; ditto, naturally, Obamacare. He opposes abortion unless the mother’s life is endangered. He wants the legalisation of gay marriage to be reversed.

His upbringing shaped his global outlook as well as his morality. His focus on foreign affairs may partly be designed to imbue his youthfulness with gravitas. But it can also be traced to the entrepôt of Miami-Dade, which, quips Mr Gelber, may be the only county with a foreign policy. What he somewhat prematurely calls “the Rubio doctrine” reflects the congenital neoconservatism of many exiles: he may not be quite as hawkish as his revered Papá, who thought Margaret Thatcher should invade Argentina as well as the Falklands, but he comes close. He says he would cancel the nuclear deal with Iran on his first day in office, and undo the normalisation of relations with Cuba. He wants to send troops into Syria, and take on Bashar al-Assad and Islamic State at once. He threatens to pack off more terrorists to Guantánamo.

The final chapter

“Just because someone is wrong,” Mr Rubio says, “doesn’t mean they are bad.” Wrong is wrong, however, and, beyond the politesse, he shows little appetite for compromise on the neuralgic issues that will continue to divide America under its next president. That might hamstring him in the White House; more immediately, it might prevent him reaching it. His well-honed formula—robust conservatism with a smile—will attract some voters who share his instincts but are repelled by harsher rhetoric. Whether it can convert moderates in sufficient numbers is unclear.

That is where the story comes in. “It makes him a whole person, a real person,” said a supporter in a barn in Gilbert, as the obligatory country music rolled. Transmuting astringent economics into compassion, promising tolerance without a cost, wreathing jeremiads in sunshine, the story might even do the trick. Mr Rubio’s inauguration is the climax its logic demands. In the end, its meaning is simple. The moral of the story is its teller, Marco Rubio.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693424-some-republicans-best-hope-shallow-opportunist-others-extremist-might/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Nevada caucuses

Winning big

Donald Trump hits the jackpot in the Silver State

Feb 27th 2016 | LAS VEGAS | From the print edition

It doesn’t stay in Vegas

MANNING the front desk of the Trump Hotel, where the gold wallpaper and drinking fountains match the building’s mirrored-gold exterior, Gabriel said he would leave work early to vote for his boss at the Republican caucuses on February 23rd. Nataly, who was standing at the entrance of the restaurant on the ground floor to welcome diners, said she didn’t even know that the caucuses were taking place, though in the morning she had glimpsed the blond chevelure of Donald Trump himself, who sometimes stays in his hotel.

An unrepresentative survey of staff members at Mr Trump’s five-star extravaganza, each of them of Hispanic extraction, reveals that Mr Trump put no pressure, however subtle, on his employees to vote for him. He possibly felt he had no need to. A member of the Trump team, who was sitting by the hotel pool in a blue T-shirt emblazoned with the Trump campaign slogan, “Make America Great Again”, was so confident about the outcome of the vote that she explained matter-of-factly that Mr Trump would speak just after his victory was announced, and that the victory party would be held in the ballroom of Treasure Island, a gargantuan hotel next door which is fronted by two life-size pirate ships.

After winning the South Carolina primary by around ten percentage points and Nevada by more than 20, Mr Trump looks almost unstoppable. Next comes Super Tuesday, on March 1st, when about a dozen states award delegates. To secure the nomination, a candidate needs to win 1,237 delegates. By March 2nd, half that number will have been awarded. There follow a handful of big winner-take-all states, where all the delegates go to the candidate with the most votes (the states that vote on Super Tuesday award delegates proportionally). Florida, on March 15th, could be the moment of Mr Trump’s coronation. He has a sturdy lead in the polls there.

The best chance of beating him would be if all but one candidate were to drop out. But which one? Ted Cruz is the only other candidate to have won a contest, and is expecting to do well in Texas and Arkansas. Marco Rubio has come second in the past two contests; John Kasich came second in New Hampshire.



America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

At the Trump victory party in Las Vegas, the candidate, flanked by two of his sons, Eric and Donald junior, started his speech graciously, thanking everyone involved. He then promised to “get greedy for the United States” and “grab and grab and grab”, as he has done in his business career. Mr Trump reiterated his promise to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it. “They will be thrilled to be paying for the wall,” he said (rather puzzlingly, exit polls suggested that Mr Trump won a healthy 44% of the 6,000 votes cast by Hispanics in the caucus). The list of things he said he loved included “the poorly educated”, the Second Amendment, Liberty University in Virginia, which was founded by Jerry Falwell, a televangelist, and “the evangelicals”. He promised to keep Guantánamo open and “load it up with bad dudes”.

Reports of confusion and chaos at caucus sites in Nevada circulated throughout the early evening. At the Ed W. Clark high school, one of the sites in central Las Vegas, proceedings were organised, if casual. Volunteers wore T-shirts or sweatshirts with Trump campaign logos, which seemed odd for a task requiring impartiality. Almost everyone agreed that Mr Trump would win. Many of his supporters were moderate and thoughtful. Bruce Bongardt, a volunteer who used to be an independent, explained that he likes many of the things Hillary Clinton says, but believes that America now needs someone with “a bit of a harder edge”. Mr Bongardt thought Mr Trump would probably back away from extremist views once he wins. He may not have to wait long to find out.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693586-donald-trump-hits-jackpot-silver-state-winning-big/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The campaigns

Heard on the trail

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



A day is a long time...

“Well I like the mandate. OK…I don’t want people dying on the streets.”

Donald Trump on CNN, February 18th.

…in politics

“I was asked about health care…and have been consistent—I will repeal all of Obamacare, including the mandate.”

Mr Trump on Twitter, February 19th.

Girls gone wild

“A lot of people think…we’re just hookers and all we know is how to have sex and we don’t know anything about politics. But that’s not true.”

Entice Love of Hookers 4 Hillary. Politico

Thin skin

“Donald Trump is a very nice person.”

Mr Trump contradicts Pope Francis.

Manners maketh man

“I wouldn’t go that far, sir.”

Marco Rubio politely rebuffs a supporter who called Hillary Clinton a traitor.

Go north, young man

“Hi Americans! Donald Trump may become the president of your country! If …you decide to get the hell out… might I suggest moving to Cape Breton Island!”

A Canadian island spots a marketing opportunity, from an unofficial website.

The meaning of “is”

“You’re asking me to say, have I ever [lied]? I don’t believe I ever have...I don’t believe I ever will.”

Hillary Clinton, CBS News

It’s the journey

“I don’t know if my purpose is to be president. My purpose is to be out here doing what I think I need to be doing…It doesn’t matter the size of the crusade. It’s the fact that you are in a crusade.”

John Kasich waxes philosophical.

Born free

“I’ve never breathed a breath of air on this planet when I was not a US citizen. It was the act of being born that made me a US citizen.”

Ted Cruz on his birth, again. CNN

Money pit

Ben Carson has spent $795 per vote, Jeb Bush $368, Mr Trump $64.

Washington Post

Faint praise

“He’s one of my four favourite sons.”

Barbara Bush helps Jeb in South Carolina.

Presidential plumbing

“The vegan diet is what I like the best…I never clog...And I feel good.”

Bill Clinton on his diet. Politico



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693585-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The religious left

The least of these

Even evangelical Christians are not uniformly right-wing

Feb 27th 2016 | RALEIGH AND ATLANTA | From the print edition



“SOMETIMES I wonder,” said Doug Long, shivering among the demonstrators in Raleigh, North Carolina, on February 13th, “whether everyone who defines themselves as Christian really believes in the same God.” As a rabbi sharing the interfaith stage blew a shofer, and a protest group called the Raging Grannies denounced restrictions on voting rights, Mr Long, a pastor in the United Church of Christ, explained that, in his view, Jesus would have stood for racial and sexual equality. Another clergyman told the crowd that, since everyone is made in the image of God, legislators should remember that “the harm they do unto others, they do unto [Him].”

Waving placards celebrating Planned Parenthood and public schools, and proclaiming that immigrants “make America great”, the marchers processed to the state capitol. There they were addressed by the brother of a Muslim murdered in North Carolina last year, the brother of a civil-rights activist killed in Mississippi in 1964, and finally by Reverend William Barber, the star turn and one of the rally’s organisers. He complained that the state’s politicians had “made it easier to get a gun than they have to vote”. Citing the Book of Isaiah, he declared: “Woe unto those who legislate evil and rob the poor of their rights.”

This is not the sort of politics typically associated with devout Christians these days. Several Republican primaries are said by psephologists to turn on the votes of evangelicals; Ted Cruz, one of the front-runners, has based his strategy on the hunch that they can send him to the White House, endeavouring to motivate them with fire-and-brimstone denunciations of liberal depravities. On the face of it, this perception—of evangelicals as irate ultraconservatives—has some legitimacy. Once left-leaning, many evangelical congregations swung behind the Republicans under Ronald Reagan, shepherded by influential televangelists, and have since, as Jim Guth of Furman University puts it, “come to believe the Republican Bible cover to cover”. Growing majorities of white Protestants, and indeed white Catholics, have since embraced his party.

That realignment has not been driven by faith alone. Class and (especially in the South) race have also played a role. But Christianity is part of the story, not just in moral concerns about abortion, homosexuality and the church’s place in public life, but in economic attitudes too: for many evangelicals, self-reliance is the corollary of personal salvation, wealth a divine blessing and overweening government anathema. Some, at least, see helping the poor as a private obligation rather than the state’s. Yet another Christian constituency doubts that God would approve of, say, the construction of a wall on the Mexican border, or a squeeze in health-care provision.

That includes Mr Barber. “We can no longer allow a heretical adaptation of evangelical faith to take centre-stage in this country,” he says, decrying the term “religious right” because “We don’t think they are religiously right.” By his own lights a conservative evangelical, Mr Barber started the Moral Mondays initiative, a multiracial, unobtrusively religious campaign of protests against North Carolina’s skimpy education funding and failure to expand Medicaid, which has spread to other states. An evangelical, he argues, adducing scripture, must bring good news to the poor. After all, he says, Jesus was a radical.

Part of the trouble with how Christianity is perceived, thinks Jim Wallis, the founder of Sojourners, a Christian social-justice organisation, is that the media is mostly secular-minded and prone to demonising believers. They say “Iowa evangelicals”, for example, when really they mean “old, white people”. The Bible, Mr Wallis points out, contains 2,000 verses touching on poverty, rather more than mention homosexuality; a worldview that neglects “the least of these”, he insists, “makes no biblical sense”. Among the outfits that agree is the PICO Network, an ecumenical alliance of religious communities which, says Reverend Michael-Ray Mathews, feel “compelled by faith” to tackle communal problems such as gun violence. Participants, he explains, use prayer and religious texts to develop “a vision of a better life”.

In black churches, the tradition of social activism stretches through the civil-rights movement to abolitionists and slave rebellions. Many are evangelical (as are rising numbers of Hispanics); their congregations mostly vote Democratic, invalidating any glib equation between that strand of Protestantism and right-wing ideology. As with American Christians as a whole, the politics of black churches is more nuanced than is sometimes assumed.

Trials here below

Consider a recent Sunday service at the Vision Church in Atlanta. Along with sensational music, it featured moving re-enactments of recent police killings of black Americans, scenes counterpoised with members’ own stories of triumph and resilience: alcoholism and deprivation overcome, degrees earned, businesses started. It also, in a largely gay congregation, contained frequent allusions to sexual tolerance and AIDS. “Some of us are not supposed to be here,” intoned a preacher, “but He preserved us.” A fur-clad worshipper rose from his pew to sing beautifully the refrain to “Can’t Nobody do me like Jesus”.

The presiding minister, Bishop Oliver Allen, founded the Progressive Pentecostal denomination to which the church belongs; it is now a national fellowship of gay-friendly, predominantly black churches. “Civil rights cannot just be for black people,” Mr Allen says. “If we’re not liberating people, what good are we?” Christians of all stripes, he thinks, should not allow their faith “to be hijacked by the loudest political voices”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693555-politics-american-christians-more-nuanced-sometimes-assumed-not-all/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Fringe movements

Finding Keepers

Why armed men vowing to defend the constitution keep cropping up

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Watching over the flock in Ferguson

WHEN anti-federal activists occupied a nature reserve in Burns, Oregon last month, members of the Oath Keepers, an association of current and former soldiers, police officers and other all-action types, grabbed their weapons and flocked to the high-desert town. The group’s leader, an Ivy League-educated lawyer and ex-serviceman called Elmer Stewart Rhodes, opposed the occupation but felt his men could end the stand-off. When one of the occupiers was killed on January 26th, Oath Keepers rushed to evacuate women and children from the scene, fearing an attack by the Feds.

Beyond the group’s main objective of defending the constitution, Mr Rhodes believes Oath Keepers have a duty to protect those unwilling or unable to protect themselves. “When we hear gunfire, we run towards it,” says Mr Rhodes on the phone from his home in Kalispell, a logging town in Montana. In November 2014, when protests erupted in Ferguson, Missouri after a grand-jury decision not to indict a white policeman for shooting an unarmed black teenager, Oath Keepers hurried there, climbed onto its rooftops and patrolled back and forth, cradling rifles. “If we hadn’t guarded the buildings, they would have burned to the ground. Fact,” says Mr Rhodes. After an attack on a military recruiting centre in Tennessee last July, armed Oath Keepers stood guard outside similar offices across America.

The Oath Keepers’ size (there are thought to be around 30,000 members) is unusual, but its existence is not. According to Ryan Lenz of the Southern Poverty Law Centre, an advocacy group, the number of what it calls “patriot groups” has grown from 149 in 2008 to 998 in 2015. As well as having a deep mistrust of government, most also subscribe to outlandish conspiracy theories. The Oath Keepers’ website suggests that George Soros, a financier and philanthropist, and the Council on Foreign Relations are exploiting the refugee crisis for their own gain. Other groups believe a shadowy elite is plotting to rule the world through one tyrannical government.

Mr Lenz attributes the rise in patriot groups to the election of Barack Obama, which spurred those with extreme anxieties about likely government expansion and extra gun controls to band together. After waning for a few years, the number of groups then jumped by 14% from 2014 to 2015—an increase Mr Lenz chalks up to a confrontation in 2014, when the father of two ranchers involved in the Oregon stand-off faced down government officials on public land in Nevada.

Brian Levin of California State University at San Bernardino thinks deeper forces are at work. Scepticism of centralised government is baked into America, he argues. Now, with the country’s future as a hegemon uncertain and confidence in its institutions eroded, that doubt has intensified. A recent poll by the Pew Research Centre found that only 19% of Americans trust the government in Washington most or all of the time, compared with 73% when they began asking the question in 1958. This inspires more people to support maverick politicians, and motivates others to opt out of the system entirely.

Beyond the fringe

It was such disenchantment that prompted Mr Rhodes to start the Oath Keepers. An eloquent if gruff Renaissance man, he has worked as a professional sculptor, once crafting a Minuteman for a Las Vegas hotel, and was a paratrooper before enrolling at Yale Law School. There he is remembered for taking his Bill of Rights class to a shooting range and winning an award for his paper on that document.

Mr Rhodes’s studies overlapped with the September 11th attacks, and he observed the government’s response with horror. He still gets angry when he talks about the Patriot Act and the Supreme Court’s ruling in Hamdi v Rumsfeld (2004), which held that the constitution does not prevent the government from treating its own citizens as unlawful combatants. “It’s called the treason clause, and it’s right there in front of your face!” he bellows. He is also troubled by many things that worry progressive civil-libertarians: the government’s surveillance of its own citizens, warrantless searches, belligerent police. “I definitely think we’ve crossed the Rubicon. We’re going down the same road as Nazi Germany or Stalinist Russia.”

Mr Rhodes worked on Ron Paul’s 2008 campaign for the Republican nomination. When Mr Paul ended his bid, he abandoned mainstream politics and started the Oath Keepers. He hoped that by reminding its members to obey the constitution above all else, he and they would help “put the brakes on” creeping authoritarianism.

When police officers and military servicemen enroll in their respective forces, they pledge to “defend the constitution against all enemies, foreign and domestic”. Mr Rhodes believes that oath should be kept under all circumstances, even if it means flouting the demands of a higher-up. He uses William Calley, a lieutenant in the Vietnam war who claimed he was merely following orders when he killed 22 unarmed civilians at My Lai, to illustrate what can go wrong when individuals stray from that creed. He praises Hugh Thompson, who intervened before more civilians were massacred, as an exemplar.

Mr Rhodes may be typical only of a fairly small fringe. But even there, concern about political polarisation seems widespread. “When Bush was in power I could get liberals to listen to me,” he explains. “It has a flipside. I can talk to Republicans now because they hate and fear Obama because he’s a nasty Democrat. But once Trump’s elected—God forbid—I think they’ll all go back to sleep. And then you’ll see liberals going ‘Oh my God! He’s violating the Bill of Rights’.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693609-why-armed-men-vowing-defend-constitution-keep-cropping-up-finding-keepers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

A Latino firewall totters

Hillary Clinton’s once-solid support among Hispanics is being tested

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



SOME politicians campaign in poetry, others in prose. Too often Hillary Clinton—a lifelong policy wonk—sounds like a set of PowerPoint slides. So it is striking that the best television advertisement of her 2016 presidential campaign to date offers a dose of almost undiluted emotion. Filmed at a recent meeting with Hispanic women in Las Vegas, the spot shows a young girl, Karla Ortiz, tearfully explaining that her parents may soon be deported. Offering the child a hug—“Come here, baby”—Mrs Clinton fixes her with a gaze that is part headmistress, part-grandmother, and promises to do “everything I can” so that Karla need not be scared. “Let me do the worrying, I’ll do all the worrying, is that a deal?” says the former secretary of state, senator and First Lady, as women around them wipe their eyes.

In the ad Mrs Clinton comes across as a battered-but-unbowed, worldly-but-compassionate matriarch. That is not a bad summary of Mrs Clinton’s image among many Hispanic Democrats, a group that she won by a two-to-one margin when she last sought the presidency in 2008. The spot is credited in Clinton-world with contributing to their candidate’s victory in the Nevada caucus of February 20th over her left-wing challenger, Senator Bernie Sanders, not least by shoring up her support with Latinos (different pollsters disagree as to whether Mrs Clinton narrowly won or lost the Nevada Hispanic vote). The ad is now showing on TV in Colorado, which holds its Democratic caucus on “Super Tuesday”, March 1st, when a dozen states hold presidential contests. Colorado is home to half a million Hispanic voters, and no Democrat can win the state without their help.

To Hispanic fans the Clintons are family, praised for ties stretching back to 1972, when an owlish Hillary Rodham helped register Mexican-American voters in the wilds of south Texas. Ken Salazar—a former senator, secretary of the interior and Clinton-backer—recalls how Mr Sanders voted against immigration reforms in 2007, shortly after being elected to the Senate from Vermont. Back then Mr Sanders often cast immigration as a threat to American workers. He has since reversed his stance, promising that he will “absolutely” fight to pass comprehensive immigration reform in his first 100 days as president. The Vermont senator “is new to these issues,” says Mr Salazar, tersely.

A mood of slightly mournful realism hangs over Mrs Clinton’s encounter with Karla Ortiz. The candidate does not promise to save the girl’s mother and father, because she cannot. An executive action by President Barack Obama would have shielded Karla’s parents, but is currently blocked by lawsuits filed by Republican-run states. In contrast with Mr Sanders’s bold (and implausible) talk of passing immigration reforms within weeks, Mrs Clinton says only that she would introduce an immigration bill in her first 100 days, before working to sell it to Congress. That pragmatism resonates with nine Hispanic women gathered for caucus-training at a home in Denver. An elegant group, sipping pink wine and nibbling canapés, the women include retired teachers, school principals and longtime Democratic activists. They are fired up about this election: one prompts tut-tutting as she describes nine year-old pupils who are frightened of Donald Trump, the Mexico-bashing bully running for the White House as a Republican. But they are wary of Mr Sanders’s fiery solutions and calls for revolutionary change. “Revolution is not a word that connects with us,” says Rosemary Rodriguez, a stalwart of the state Democratic Party, noting that many peers have ties to countries racked by instability. “We prefer Hillary, and evolution.”



Hispanic America: Tu casa es mi casa

The Democratic primary contest has exposed a generational chasm, with Mr Sanders winning younger voters by crushing margins and Mrs Clinton doing best with older, more affluent voters, especially women. Those are good allies to have: older folk are reliable voters. The generational divide especially complicates the contest for Hispanics. Colorado’s Latino electorate is “extraordinarily young,” with more than 40% born since 1981, notes Joelle Martinez of the University of Denver. That should help Mr Sanders, who dominates among such so-called millennial voters. But Hispanic millennials are hard to turn out: in the 2012 presidential election, just 38% cast votes nationwide.

Talking about a revolution

The Sanders campaign is working hard. Caucus-training at the University of Colorado in Boulder—a mostly white campus crammed with Sanders-loving hipsters—draws a handful of Hispanics, among them Zurisadai Juarez Delgado. The undergraduate hails Mr Sanders for radical policies that would help all “marginalised” Americans and not just Latinos. She proudly reports that she has converted her mother, a former Clinton-fan. Across the state Mr Sanders has tapped into traditions of radical campaigning by Chicano activists and Hispanic union organisers. In north Denver Lexington watched young activists hit gritty streets bounded by railway lines and a roaring highway, bearing Spanish brochures hailing Mr Sanders as a son of poor immigrants.

The Clinton camp is working hard, too. Mrs Clinton has a near-lock on a different political tribe: the state’s elected Hispanic Democrats, many of them moderates who needed lots of Anglo votes to win office. Nor is she surrendering millennials to Mr Sanders. Her national Latino vote director, Lorella Praeli, is a young immigration activist who explicitly praises Mrs Clinton for making promises that she can keep. “She is not going to set the community up for failure,” says Ms Praeli.

Mrs Clinton actually faces two tests in Colorado. Mr Sanders may well win the caucus: Colorado is a proudly anti-establishment state. It is arguably more important for Mrs Clinton to win a clear majority of Latino votes. For the contest for Hispanic hearts and minds is in part a proxy fight: a dispute about how to help the disadvantaged, pitting practicality against idealistic fervour. That is a fight Mrs Clinton can ill-afford to lose.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21693587-hillary-clintons-once-solid-support-among-hispanics-being-tested-latino-firewall/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Crime in Mexico: Mean beaches

Urban architecture: Biography of a building

Bello: Evo Morales’s fall from grace





Articles Sections Next

Crime in Mexico

Mean beaches

After a decline the murder rate is rising. But the president’s crime-fighting plan is making slow progress

Feb 27th 2016 | ACAPULCO | From the print edition



A TACO seller points to two spots on Acapulco’s beach where people have been shot dead in recent days. An American on a sunbed recalls having a massage within sight, he later realised, of the body of a murdered vendor. The mayhem in Acapulco, the world’s fourth most violent city, is largely confined to its periphery, but tourists are beginning to notice it. Soldiers patrol the beaches, provoking unease rather than inspiring confidence. A Canadian, who started coming to Acapulco in the 1970s, says he will not be returning.

The bloodshed on the beach does not tell the whole story about crime in Mexico. Many parts of the country are more peaceful than they once were, especially in areas where wars between drug gangs have ended with victory for one side. In Acapulco, in the south-western state of Guerrero, the fight for control of trade in heroin, made from locally grown poppies, is still raging. Some sorts of crime, including kidnapping and extortion, appear to be diminishing.

But after three years of decline the national murder rate jumped in 2015 and has continued to rise this year (see chart). The number of murders in January was 11% higher than during the same month last year. This does not portend a return to the horrific violence of 2010-12; almost 40% of the recent rise is accounted for by gang-infested Guerrero.



Even so, it greatly increases pressure on the president, Enrique Peña Nieto, who promised to “step up the pace” on security in the second half of his term, which runs until 2018. An astonishing 99% of all crimes are never punished, a level of impunity that encourages criminality of all sorts. Mexico came 58th out of 59 countries in a global impunity index published recently by the University of the Americas in Puebla, south-east of Mexico City.

Several recent outrages have piled on the pressure for change. So far this year four journalists have been murdered, one more than in all of 2015; the mayor of Temixco, south of Mexico City, was killed after just a day in office; 49 inmates of Topo Chico prison in the northern state of Nuevo León died in a riot in February. In the state of Veracruz five people vanished after their arrest by state police, an ugly echo of the disappearance in September 2014 of 43 students in Iguala, about 220km (135 miles) inland from Acapulco.

Peña has a plan

Mr Peña’s response to the public revulsion caused by the students’ disappearance was to announce a ten-point anti-crime programme. It is making halting progress. A law that would allow the federal government to take over local administrations infiltrated by organised crime is stalled in Congress, largely because of fears among opposition politicians that the government could abuse its power. Also stuck is a law that would assign a unique ID number to each citizen, making it easier to track those suspected of committing crimes.

Political wrangling is holding up a measure that the president considers vital, a federal law that would subject Mexico’s 1,800 or so local police forces to the control of the 32 state governments, a policy known as mando único (unified command). Like his predecessor, Felipe Calderón, Mr Peña relies on the army and navy to combat serious crime, largely bypassing local police forces. Under mando único state police forces, which are supposedly more competent and effective than local ones, could play a more active role.

Mr Peña’s plan is competing with proposals put forward by opposition parties, one of which would let big towns keep their police forces. Odds are that a federal law will eventually be passed, in part because the interior minister, Miguel Ángel Osorio Chong, is thought to have presidential ambitions. In the meantime mando único is being implemented in piecemeal fashion; more than half the states have introduced a version of it. In Guerrero, just a few towns have agreed so far to let the state government run their police forces.

The policy is not the cure-all the government seems to think it is. State police forces have not been shown to be less corrupt or more effective than municipal ones. Incompetent officers serve at both levels. Four of the seven state policemen arrested in connection with the recent disappearances in Veracruz had failed tests of their fitness for duty.

In Guerrero, mando único could “decontaminate” some of the local police forces that have been infiltrated by organised crime, says Gabino Solano of the state’s Autonomous University. But what Guerrero needs more, he says, is a rigorous federal response to such problems as its weak economy, poor health and education and the lethal competition among drug gangs.

The fragmentation is in part a consequence of the government’s success in hunting down crime bosses. Mr Peña’s administration has so far “neutralised” 99 of the 122 it singled out in 2013. “The government has proved that it can catch capos,” says Alejandro Hope, a security analyst. Now it “needs to show that it can prosecute them and keep them in jail.”



Daily chart: The world's most violent cities

It must also dismantle their organisations. After beheading the gangs the government has failed to seize assets and to arrest the leaders’ closest accomplices, says José Antonio Ortega of Security, Justice and Peace, an anti-crime NGO. Edgardo Buscaglia of Columbia University calls for states to establish “economic investigative units”, which would work with independent prosecutors to find criminal assets such as factories and trucks.

A judicial reform, enacted into law in 2008 and due to be fully implemented by June this year, should make justice fairer. This will replace closed-door criminal proceedings, in which judges render verdicts on the basis of written statements, with oral arguments between prosecutors and defendants’ lawyers. The reform strengthens defendants’ rights, including the presumption of innocence, which is inscribed in the constitution but often ignored in practice. It allows perpetrators of minor crimes to be punished with sentences other than jail time.

If Mr Peña is to entrench the rule of law, corrupt politicians, as well as gun-slinging gangsters, will have to be held to account. His proposal for an “anti-corruption system” of independent watchdog agencies is working its way through Congress. Mr Peña himself has been embarrassed by conflict-of-interest allegations related to the financing of his wife’s house; an investigation cleared him of wrongdoing. If Mexicans are to take seriously their leaders’ crime-fighting credentials, politicians will have to police themselves better.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21693606-after-decline-murder-rate-rising-presidents-crime-fighting-plan-making-slow/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Urban architecture

Biography of a building

The changing fortunes of an apartment block, and its city

Feb 27th 2016 | SÃO PAULO | From the print edition

World’s tallest tilde

MASSIVE yet graceful, Edifício Copan partakes of the monstrousness of the city that surrounds it but is shaped by the sensuality of its architect, Oscar Niemeyer. Its curved form is meant to suggest the tilde above the “a” of São Paulo, Brazil’s biggest city. With 5,000 residents in 32 floors of flats stacked atop 72 shops and restaurants, the building has its own postcode. Two framed certificates in the office of Affonso de Oliveira, Copan’s “prefeito” (mayor), attest that in the mid-1990s the apartment block held a Guinness record as Latin America’s biggest residential building. It remains the city’s largest, most recognisable dwelling.

In its 50-year history (its birthday is in May, if you count from the day city hall issued the first residency permit), Edifício Copan’s changing fortunes have at different times mimicked and diverged from those of São Paulo itself. These days, the building is doing better than its city. São Paulo’s 11m people, who produce a tenth of Brazil’s GDP, are suffering as the country enters its second year of recession, although not as badly as much of the rest of the country. Copan, along with the town’s centre, is thriving.

Niemeyer’s modernist masterpiece, conceived during a wave of industrialising optimism in the early 1950s, never fulfilled the ambitions of its builders. Its name is short for Companhia Pan-Americana de Hotéis e Turísmo (Pan-American Hotel and Tourism Company). But the developer ran out of money in the mid-1950s and sold the entire plot to a bank, which now occupies the site reserved for the hotel. A planned terrace garden, dividing the residential tower from the shops below, never materialised. The blueprints were erased and redrawn so many times they became translucent, recalls Carlos Lemos, who supervised the construction.

The first residents arrived in 1962. By the time they held their first condo meeting, in 1971, São Paulo’s elegant centre was in decline. Middle-class paulistanos, now rich enough to buy cars manufactured on the city’s outskirts, forsook the centre’s narrow streets. Businesses followed them to the broad avenues radiating south and east from the inner city. The city’s population swelled—from 6.6m to 9.6m between 1973 and 1991—crowding into favelas (shantytowns) on its periphery. The proportion living in such precarious neighbourhoods expanded from 1% to 9% over that period.

Industry quit the city altogether in search of cheaper land, cleaner air and a refuge from crime. Between 1980 and 1985, as Brazil’s hyperinflationary “lost decade” was getting started, São Paulo lost 200,000 manufacturing jobs. Services grew, but not enough to compensate fully. By 1999 the unemployment rate had climbed to 18% and the murder rate had reached 69 per 100,000 people, among the world’s highest. Copan’s surroundings assumed a dystopian air of urban decay. Empty offices and flats became squats. Crack dealers and addicts terrorised the neighbourhood. Prostitutes offered quick consolation.

When Mr de Oliveira assumed his mayoral duties in 1993, after training as a chemical engineer and spending three decades as a bureaucrat, he found a building in physical and financial disrepair. One in four flats stood empty and more than a dozen served as brothels. Mr de Oliveira, or Senhor Affonso, as he is universally known, promptly evicted the prostitutes, fixed the building’s finances and started fining rule-breakers. “Things have got a thousand percent better,” says Antônio Alberto, who brews espresso at the Café Floresta, a Copan fixture since 1972. Daniel Trench, a graphic designer who moved in four years ago, compares Mr de Oliveira to Rudolph Giuliani, New York’s crime-busting mayor in the 1990s.

Copan and its neighbourhood are now chic. When Mika Lins, an actress, bought a three-bedroom flat in 2001, her friends said she was insane. Today the 28th-floor apartment, with a spectacular view of São Paulo’s concrete sprawl, is worth perhaps 1.1m reais ($280,000), ten times what she paid for it. Property prices have risen by a third as much in São Paulo at large. Now just 14 of Copan’s flats are vacant, and they “won’t be for long”, promises Mr de Oliveira. Even the studio and one-bedroom apartments in “Block B”, long considered the dodgiest of the six, are now thought to be bijou. Ms Lins is renting one for her mother.

The revived condominium has helped spruce up São Paulo’s centre, and benefited in turn from the area’s new spirit of edgy respectability. Bar da Dona Onça became the building’s first hip restaurant in 2008. Pivô, a contemporary-art gallery, moved in four years ago. Cyclists have replaced streetwalkers in nearby streets. Mr Alberto gripes that he serves just 500 cups of espresso a day, a quarter of what he sold 15 years ago, but that is because Café Floresta is no longer the only source of good espresso in the neighbourhood.

His fellow paulistanos, worried about recession and angry about corruption in Brasília—the purpose-built national capital that is Niemeyer’s most famous work—are likely to oust São Paulo’s mayor, Fernando Haddad, when local elections are held in October. He belongs to Brazil’s ruling Workers’ Party, which has been tarnished by a massive bribery scandal centred on Petrobras, a state-controlled oil giant. Mr Haddad’s constituents are not keen either on the cycle lanes that have helped revive the city centre, part of his ambitious plans to coax residentsout of their cars.

Copan’s prefeito is more secure, but he still has plenty of work to do. Niemeyer’s curvaceous façade is crumbling, and is draped in blue netting to protect pedestrians from falling tiles. Restoration will cost 23m reais and will take at least three years. The building’s 1,600-seat cinema has been boarded up since its last occupant, a Pentecostal church, was forced to leave in 2008 because of fears that its structure was unsound. The building of Copan has “never really ended”, muses Mr Lemos. It is in permanent flux, like São Paulo itself.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21693626-changing-fortunes-apartment-block-and-its-city-biography-building/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

Evo Morales’s fall from grace

Another setback for Latin America’s hard left, and a new political cycle

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

ALTHOUGH he has more than three years left of his current term as Bolivia’s president, Evo Morales called a referendum for February 21st to change the constitution to allow him to run for a fourth term in 2020. This excess of forward planning in a region accustomed to last-minute improvisation smacked of nervousness about tougher times ahead in Bolivia. It backfired: with nearly all of the votes counted, the “No” vote stood at 51.3%. Albeit narrowly, Bolivians have inflicted on Mr Morales his first serious electoral defeat since he was elected in 2005.

This setback for Bolivia’s president will echo around South America. Despite his support for Hugo Chávez’s “Bolivarian revolution” in Venezuela and his unremitting anti-American rhetoric, Mr Morales is the most fiscally responsible of the left-wing leaders in the region. He is also the most popular and was the strongest of them politically, thanks to his ethnicity (he is of indigenous Aymara descent), his stress on social inclusion and recent pragmatic overtures to the private sector. Buoyed by natural gas and mining exports, the economy has grown at around 5% a year for a decade. Now it is slowing. Mr Morales’s government has been rocked by corruption scandals. “Perhaps our support is not what it was,” he admitted to El País, a Spanish newspaper, on the eve of the referendum.

That goes a fortiori for the left elsewhere in the region. It has suffered electoral defeats in Argentina and Venezuela. In Ecuador Rafael Correa has said he will not run again next year. In Brazil the government of Dilma Rousseff is not certain to survive to the end of its term in 2018. This week João Santana, her campaign guru, was arrested on suspicion that he was paid with money from bribes. If substantiated that could prompt the electoral court to call a fresh election. In Chile, Michelle Bachelet, a once-adored president, languishes in the opinion polls.

Three things are behind the left’s fall from grace. One is the end of the commodity boom. The governments in Venezuela (especially), Brazil and Argentina made no effort to save the windfall gains from the boom. Impelled by a refusal to risk unpopularity and electoral defeat, they carried on spending even as commodity prices began to fall. That is an old mistake. As Mr Morales says, he advised Chávez that “you can’t carry on subsidising so much”. He added that “to maintain the ideology, you have to guarantee [that people have] food”. The second factor is corruption, especially in Venezuela and Brazil. Of the left-wing governments only Uruguay’s is unscathed by scandal. Third, after a decade or more of left-wing dominance voters want fresh faces and the alternation of power.

All this means that Mauricio Macri’s victory in Argentina’s presidential election last November may presage further electoral success for the centre-right. After a decade in which much of Latin America looked to China, Barack Obama will be widely applauded when he visits Argentina and Cuba next month.

But governing has got harder for everyone in the region. True, the difference between well-managed countries, like Colombia and Peru, and those that made mistakes is significant: rates of economic growth of 2-3% and inflation of 2-7% feel much better than recessions and inflation of over 10%. But the days of limitless fiscal revenue and easy popularity are over. And corruption is not a monopoly of the left: witness Otto Pérez, the conservative president of Guatemala, who was toppled by a citizens’ movement last year and is on trial for embezzlement.

Tackling corruption requires the patient work of building the rule of law. And boosting economic growth demands the hard grind of improving productivity and competitiveness, through investing more in infrastructure, better education, more efficient labour markets and so on. Above all, these tasks need leaner but stronger and more effective states.

How to get there? “The most important economic problem today is political: that the various spheres of society reach agreement to put much more stress on productive transformation,” counsels Enrique García of CAF, a development bank.

That is something Latin America has been poor at. In the past the right ignored inequality and poverty. The left can claim credit for placing these issues at the heart of the political agenda, where they belong. But the commodity boom also served to give old ideologies a new lease of life. Too many of the left’s leaders ruled through the politics of confrontation rather than consensus-building. The region is now in for a period of shorter, more volatile political cycles in which the winners will be those who succeed in marshalling support for difficult but overdue changes.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21693528-another-setback-hard-left-and-new-political-cycle-last-bolivarian/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Caste in India: Backward ho!

Individualism in South Korea: Zero to hero

Politics in Japan: What’s in a name?

Traffic in the Philippines’ capital: Slowly does it

Politics in Cambodia: Same old, same old

Banyan: Taking arms





Articles Sections Next

Caste in India

Backward ho!

Higher castes demanding lower status make a mockery of positive discrimination

Feb 27th 2016 | DELHI | From the print edition



A CITY under siege can resist many things, but not thirst. On February 22nd both the national government and that of Haryana, a state that rings Delhi, the Indian capital, on three sides, crumpled after rioters sabotaged a canal that supplies nearly half the water to the sprawling metropolis. Some 28 people died as police backed by soldiers struggled to control arsonists and looters, as well as more peaceable protesters, who blocked roads and railways into Delhi. But with taps running dry it was easier to capitulate to the rioters’ main demand, which is to allow the Jats, a caste-like community that is powerful in Haryana, to gain “reservations”—that is, a share of state favours formally reserved for the supposedly poor and downtrodden.

It is not the first time that a relatively privileged group among India’s 3,000-odd castes has resorted to threats and blackmail to win inclusion in an official category known as “other backward classes”, or OBCs. Such protests have become alarmingly frequent. Last August in Gujarat a protest by the Patidars, a caste which, like the Jats, is traditionally composed of yeomen farmers but has increasingly joined the urban middle class, brought a crowd of perhaps 500,000 people on to the streets of Ahmedabad, the state’s main city. Ensuing riots left a dozen people dead. In late January the Kapus of Andhra Pradesh set railway carriages ablaze. The Gujjars of Rajasthan are another ethnic group, many of whose members, no longer wholly rural, are prospering. Accounting for 6-7% of the state’s people, they staged protests in 2008, 2010 and again last May.

At stake are the spoils from a policy of identity-based benefits, the equivalent of America’s “affirmative action” programmes. India’s elaborate system of positive discrimination stems from the constitution adopted in 1949. Its chief architect, B.R. Ambedkar, a brilliant jurist, was born a Dalit, that is, from one of the castes regarded as “untouchable” and kept wretched by untold generations of discrimination. He envisaged an active role for the new state in righting those wrongs. As the system evolved at state and federal levels, quotas for government jobs and places at universities were reserved for “scheduled castes”, meaning Dalits, along with a smaller portion for “scheduled tribes”, that is, members of poor, remote communities outside the caste system. The quotas have gone some way to relieving social stigmas and materially advancing India’s poorest groups.

But the constitution left open another, vaguer category. Article 15 mentions “socially and educationally backward classes” that might also become eligible for aid. First in state laws and later in national ones, Indian governments have recognised myriad groups as OBCs, deemed to suffer some disadvantage compared with the uppermost castes, and deserving of a helping hand.

In 1990 the federal government set national criteria for defining OBCs, fixing their quota at 27% and capping the overall reservations for all three groups at 50%. Further tinkering has created an increasingly elaborate structure of reservations. Some states certify hundreds of caste groupings as OBCs, while others have pushed their quota closer to 70%. Government commissions that vet applications for OBC status have grown increasingly imaginative, uncovering such subcategories as “backward-forward” castes, parts of a caste group that have fallen behind the rising status of other parts, or the so-called “creamy layer”, ie, members of an OBC who are denied benefit because their family income is above a defined maximum (about $10,000).

Caste down



A continent masquerading as a country: Explore India in our interactive map

Increasingly castes are clamouring to be recognised as lowly in order to reap whatever benefits accrue from being counted in the bottom half. It has been a boon to a certain kind of politician. The rapid economic growth of recent years, accompanied by growing social mobility, has taken castes from the places or professions that first defined them. Yet caste persists as a source of identity and as a locus for various ill-defined grievances.

The Jats, who describe themselves as an ethnic group rather than a caste, take pride in a tradition of martial prowess. Spread across northern India and Pakistan, they make up nearly a third of Haryana’s people. With India’s urban economy offering more chances than rural life, those Jats left tilling the soil have suffered a reduction in their status. But they have used their voting strength to push for reservations. Before state elections in late 2014 the state and national governments, then both controlled by the Congress party, granted their wish. The promised inclusion would have reserved around 2,000 state jobs for Jats, who would otherwise have had to compete for them. But then Congress lost power to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). And Indian courts anyway blocked the move, arguing that Jats do not meet the criteria for backwardness.

What precisely triggered the latest rumpus in Haryana is not clear. Congress supporters point to statements from BJP leaders dismissing Jat demands. The BJP hints instead that Congress may have instigated the riots to embarrass it. Bad as such political wrangling is for India, it is not so bad as the precedent set by caving in to the Jats. Pressed by the government of the prime minister, Narendra Modi, to resolve the embarrassing issue, but wary of angering other OBCs, Haryana’s state government looks set to finesse the problem by granting Jats a special, extra quota of perks.

At Ambedkar’s insistence, the preamble to India’s constitution included a call for fraternity along with justice, liberty and equality. Its framers envisioned reservations primarily as a weapon to target social exclusion, and saw it as a temporary measure. Their long-term goal was to do away with the iniquity of caste barriers altogether. Instead, by appealing to one category or another for votes, India’s politicians have perpetuated and entrenched a system that fragments the country into jealous islands of class privilege.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693613-higher-castes-demanding-lower-status-make-mockery-positive-discrimination-backward-ho/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Individualism in South Korea

Zero to hero

Hobbyists and obsessives, long ostracised, are being celebrated

Feb 27th 2016 | SEOUL | From the print edition

Robot Taekwon V comes out

A GIANT model of Robot Taekwon V, a 1970s South Korean superhero, glares at the salarymen passing Figure Museum W, a cross between a museum and a theme park that opened a year ago in a plush business district of Seoul, South Korea’s capital. It boasts a kaleidoscopic display of 800-odd artefacts mainly from the universe of Japanese manga (comic books) and anime (animation), and American cartoons. Most of its visitors are adult men.

The museum’s enthusiastic young guide says it is “heaven for deukhu like me”. The term comes from the Japanese otaku, and denotes those who pursue obsessive interests—think a “nerd” or an “anorak” with few social skills and a fetish for some aspect of popular culture. In South Korea, deukhu has long been a slur. Many associate it with a dangerously unpatriotic indulgence in Japanese cultural exports, many of them banned in South Korea from the end of Japan’s imperial rule in 1945 until as recently as the 1990s. More broadly deukhu were assumed to lead idle, unproductive lives, shut away in dingy flats playing video games or scouring the web for their next frivolous curio.

Now attitudes are shifting. The social-media networks of cool 20-somethings are abuzz with the hashtag deukmingout: coming out as a fanatic. A South Korean daily declared the Figure Museum W to be “a Mecca” for geeks going public. A 28-year-old deukhu, a fan of a South Korean pop star, Kim Jun-su, has started a blog about her coming-out. In it she argues that deukhu pursuits can be highly productive: the example of her idol has inspired her to get fit and to take up the piano and guitar. “I work even harder in my day job to prove a deukhu can be successful,” she says.

Kim Yong-sub, who has written a book on South Korean trends in 2016, says that as more prominent deukhu have created content from their pastimes—by writing online comics, for example, known in South Korea as webtoons—they have aspired to “a new social standing and role”. Ji Jin-hee, a dashing 44-year-old actor, revealed that he bought piles of secondhand Lego to build models and sell them for a small fortune (he appeared on the cover of Elle Korea surrounded by his creations). Other Korean celebrities have been admitting to their own eccentricities: fans now affectionately refer to Shim Hyung-tak as “Shimdakhu” after the actor disclosed a passion for Doraemon, a Japanese robot-cat cartoon character beloved of East Asian children. A member of a hip-hop group, Block B, revealed that he kept 700 tropical fish.

Stars are helping to push the idea that geekishness is cool. But beyond that, Mr Kim says, is the growing cachet of not following mainstream taste: a turnaround for South Koreans under powerful social pressure to conform. As more people pursue their individual preferences, they become more accepting of others’ too, for example, of the rise of the samchonpaen (“uncle fans”), middle-aged men who are unabashed groupies of teenage pop bands. Since November “Super-skilled People”, a television show, has invited deukhu, from bread enthusiasts to weapons buffs, to show off remarkable abilities or specialisms. The studio’s audience members all wear smiling paper bags over their heads—representing those who have yet to do their deukmingout.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693640-hobbyists-and-obsessives-long-ostracised-are-being-celebrated-zero-hero/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Politics in Japan

What’s in a name?

A lacklustre opposition shows signs of life

Feb 27th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



WHAT meagre challenges Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has faced in office have come not from the opposition but from his own side. So it is a triumph of hope over experience that the biggest opposition grouping, the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), thinks that will change. The party that underwhelmed in office from 2009 to 2012 has announced a merger with the third-biggest opposition party, the Japan Innovation Party (JIP). The move is part of the DPJ’s attempts to remake itself after its recent utter defeats and to be better prepared not only for scheduled elections for the upper house of the Diet (parliament) in July but even for a snap general election for the lower house that Mr Abe may call at the same time (or sooner).

The last time Mr Abe called a snap election, for December 2014, the DPJ failed so much as to get a real campaign going. Fool me twice: this time it has chosen a slate of candidates for the lower house and hammered out co-operation agreements with other opposition parties, including the Japan Communist Party. But it will be an uphill task, given that in opinion polls only a tenth of the public supports the DPJ. A full two-fifths support the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. And even after the JIP’s two-dozen lawmakers are absorbed, the combined group will hold a mere fifth of the seats in the lower house and less than a quarter in the upper.

The question is what the JIP brings to the party. It had the stuffing knocked out of it when its charismatic right-wing founder, Toru Hashimoto, split away to form an Osaka-based party last year. To many inside the DPJ, it seems too much that their leader, Katsuya Okada, has given in to the JIP’s demand to rename the merged party. A new name could hurt prospects at the polls: in both houses (though differently) a proportion of seats is allocated via party lists, and voters might forget a new name—not that one has yet been agreed. Still, says Akihisa Nagashima, a DPJ heavyweight, much more important to remember is that voters punished the party last time not because they could not remember its name but because of its unconvincing message and lousy campaigning.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693622-lacklustre-opposition-shows-signs-life-whats-name/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Traffic in the Philippines’ capital

Slowly does it

Rising car ownership and appalling transport policies block the roads

Feb 27th 2016 | MANILA | From the print edition



AT SIX o’clock on a Thursday evening the most important road in Manila, known as EDSA, has become a car park. Five lanes heading north and five heading south are clogged with cars and buses, many of them pointlessly honking their horns. “Traffic in Manila is not ordinary”, says a taxi driver, wearily. He means that it is extreme, not that it is rare.

When people meet in Manila, they talk about traffic. “It rules everything”, says Julia Nebrija, a cycling advocate. Some stories are funny, like the one about the transport official, Francis Tolentino, who missed a live TV interview because he was stuck on EDSA, or the one about the archbishop who was so fed up with one jam that he got out of his car and started directing traffic. Business people tell more worrying tales. As commutes grow longer, productivity is suffering, says Jaime Ysmael of the Ayala Corporation, a conglomerate.

Filipinos will vote for a new president in May, and the candidates are trying to blame each other for the parlous state of Manila’s roads and public transport. The very fact that one of them, Manuel Roxas, used to be transport secretary was held against him in a televised debate on February 21st. The candidates tout diverse plans, from building more roads to increasing taxes on second cars to moving government offices out of the metropolis. Such is the level of angst that anybody who cracks Manila traffic would have a good shot at the top job.

Even with a perfect transport plan, Manila would probably have a problem. The population of the entire capital area rose from 18m to 23m between 2000 and 2010. It is dense: Shlomo Angel of New York University, who measures cities, estimates that it crammed 274 people into each hectare a decade ago, compared with 64 per hectare in Paris—and Manila will have got only more squashed since. What is more, the capital has an unfortunate hourglass shape. The middle, which contains the main business districts, is pinched by Manila bay to the west and Laguna lake to the east. Suburbs sprawl to the north and south. So traffic is funnelled, and the funnel often blocks up.

On top of that, Manila’s transport plans have been terrible—among the most foolish adopted by any great city. The Philippines has a complex history: it was a Spanish colony for four centuries, then an American one. It is as though Manila has taken the worst aspects of American urban planning and applied them to a dense, Spanish-style metropolis before adding not a few mistakes of its own. It has the jams it deserves.

The city’s first fault is its failure to build an extensive, high-volume public transport system. Seven metropolitan railway lines have been planned but only three have been built since work began in the early 1980s, and the connections between them are poor. At rush hour, the queues just to get into the stations are long.

If Manila has too few trains, it probably has too many buses. Hundreds of small operators ply the roads—the fruits of a radical liberalisation in the 1990s. EDSA alone is served by 266 bus companies, while 1,122 operate somewhere in Manila. Competition and plentiful supply should be good for passengers, except that drivers are paid partly based on the number of fares they collect. So they race each other to busy stops and then loiter for as long as they can, blocking other drivers.

Yet the biggest reason Manila’s roads move so slowly is that so many people now drive. The economy of the Philippines grew by 5.8% last year, and a swelling middle class is buying lots more cars (see chart). Driving, nicer and often quicker than public transport, is encouraged by minimum-parking rules, imported from America, which oblige developers to provide lots of parking spaces. Cars are thought to carry about 30% of people in the metropolis but account for 72% of traffic.



Road transport in Manila is commendably diverse. As well as cars and buses it has motorbikes with sidecars and perhaps 50,000 Jeepneys—stretched Jeeps that can hold more than a dozen passengers each. Yet many roads are tightly restricted. Buses are often kept out of the smarter business districts, and some are barred from EDSA at rush hour. Gated housing developments ban all vehicles without residents’ stickers, forcing drivers around the edges. That seems increasingly bizarre, since some of those leafy suburban developments now lie next to booming business districts. Yet the armed guards will probably stay. China’s government announced this week that gated communities should stop blocking traffic, only to retreat following an outcry. And China is not a democracy, unlike the Philippines.

Belatedly, Manila is trying something sensible. In December the Philippines approved a “rapid bus” route in north-east Manila, with buses travelling along dedicated lanes. Similar systems have worked well in Brazil and China. Karl Fjellstrom of the Institute for Transportation and Development Policy, a New York outfit, says he looks for three things when assessing whether a city is suited for a rapid bus system: traffic congestion, demand and physical infrastructure (that is, wide roads). Manila scores highly on all three.

So perhaps the city will unblock. But Manila will need to be both clever and quick if it is to start moving again. A combination of fast growth and dismal planning got it into a jam. If the second cannot be changed, the first comes into question.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693631-rising-car-ownership-and-appalling-transport-policies-block-roads-slowly-does-it/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Politics in Cambodia

Same old, same old

A young country is saddled with politicians fighting old battles

Feb 27th 2016 | PHNOM PENH | From the print edition

They cheered Sam Rainsy in 2013

TWO recent college graduates now working for the Cambodia branch of an NGO, the Asia Foundation, spend their free time in typical 20-something ways: watching films, playing video games and hanging out with friends. How different were the lives of the parents of the two graduates when they were the same age as their children are now, under the dark rule of the Khmer Rouge. Those of Menghun Kaing eked out a living farming, with no prospect of university, while the father of Daramongkol Keo spent 18 months in hiding from the brutal regime in the forest, extinguishing his campfire whenever he heard soldiers approaching. Like many from that generation, the parents rarely talk about the past. To survive in those days, Ms Menghun Kaing explains, people had to “work hard and not say anything, just keep everything to themselves.”

Today about one-third of Cambodians, and a much higher proportion in Phnom Penh, the capital, have internet access, mainly via smartphones. Young Cambodians are coming of age in a still-poor but quickly developing country: with gross national income of $1,020 per person in 2014, Cambodia is on the threshold of the World Bank’s definition of a lower-middle-income country. Two-thirds of Cambodians are under 30 and thus were born long after the Khmer Rouge regime was toppled by Vietnamese forces and Cambodian rebels in early 1979.

Memories of the horrors of the Khmer Rouge period are fading. Young people’s concerns are coming to resemble those of the young in any other country. They worry about the environment: Cambodia is suffering rapid deforestation, often following illegal land grabs by well-connected businessmen. They want better education and job prospects. And they want clean government. Too bad many of their politicians are stale, often corrupt and mired in battles from the past.

The country’s central political figure, Hun Sen, the 63-year-old head of the Cambodian People’s Party (CPP), is a former Khmer Rouge commander turned rebel whose early rise to political power was sponsored by the Vietnamese. Recently, even Asia’s longest-serving autocrat has felt the need to woo younger Cambodians by turning more emphatically to social media. Facebook, which he took to in September, shows him not only meeting world leaders—last week he was at a summit for South-East Asian leaders hosted in California by Barack Obama. He is also to be admired playing with his grandchildren, sitting on the ground in a shell suit eating noodles, and padding along the beach in a bathrobe and flip-flops.

But the velvet glove slips off easily. Mr Hun Sen’s government has locked up opposition politicians on flimsy charges, pursued individuals through the courts for defamation, blocked the websites of NGOs, and introduced draft laws on cybercrime and telecommunications that would criminalise the publication of material “deemed to generate insecurity [and] instability.” The Corruption Perception Index compiled by a pressure group, Transparency International (TI), ranks Cambodia 150th out of 168 countries, and bottom in South-East Asia.

The government has been either unwilling or unable to clean up Cambodia’s rotten judiciary—the chief problem in curbing corruption, according to Kol Preap, who heads TI in Cambodia. Nor has it stopped land grabs and illegal logging that are wreaking havoc in the countryside.

Leading the opposition to Mr Hun Sen, as he seems to have done for years, is Sam Rainsy. A cosmopolitan 66-year-old former banker from a political family, he heads the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP). His party has often accused Mr Hun Sen of being too close to Vietnam, Cambodians’ historically overweening neighbour. But to end months of rioting following an election in 2013 that many believe was rigged, Mr Sam Rainsy began a curious rapprochement with Mr Hun Sen, having returned from exile in Paris shortly before.

It was too unlikely to last. The strains grew until, in November, Mr Hun Sen snapped on hearing Mr Sam Rainsy comparing himself to Myanmar’s Aung San Suu Kyi, with the implication that history was not on Mr Hun Sen’s side. A court dusted off an old arrest warrant for defamation, parliament stripped Mr Sam Rainsy of his lawmaker’s immunity and he has not returned to Cambodia since.

The pattern has grown familiar: Mr Hun Sen woos his old foe home, only to threaten him with jail, whereupon Mr Sam Rainsy returns to Paris. Some think that Mr Sam Rainsy has carved out a rather too comfortable life for himself as a professional opposition politician. Not all in the CNRP leadership admire him. And though he retains a devoted following, some younger activists are turning away.

Disappointment among them set in last November when hundreds of protesters got ready, at the height of Mr Hun Sen’s fury, to greet Mr Sam Rainsy at the airport on his return from a trip to East Asia. But he suddenly cancelled his return and flew to France instead. He says he did this to avert bloodshed and deny Mr Hun Sen an excuse to crack down. But younger activists wonder how the opposition can organise around their central figure if he is absent. Some of the energy has therefore gone out of the opposition-centred enthusiasm for political change that was palpable at the time of the last election.

As for ordinary Cambodians, many still tell opinion pollsters that they approve of their country’s direction and trust that the CPP under its fatherly leader will implement reforms that will spread prosperity, lessen inequalities and entrench the rule of law. That may be taking a lot on faith. Sophal Ear of Occidental College in California says that the chances of the governing party instilling a proper rule of law “are, unfortunately, dismal”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693635-young-country-saddled-politicians-fighting-old-battles-same-old-same-old/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

Taking arms

The Asia-Pacific region is at peace—but it is buying a lot of weapons

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



THOUGH parts of Asia are racked by long-running insurgencies, terrorist groups, banditry or low-level civil wars, it is striking that the continent has not suffered a full-scale war between countries since China’s brief and bloody punitive invasion of Vietnam in 1979. All the more striking, then, that the region now accounts for almost half of the global market for big weapons—nearly twice as much as the war-ravaged Middle East, and four times more than Europe.

This week the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, which maintains a database of arms transfers, published data showing that six of the ten largest importers of heavy weapons are in Asia and the Pacific: India, China, Australia, Pakistan, Vietnam and South Korea. From 2011-15 the region as a whole bought 46% of global arms imports, up from 42% in 2010-14. Asia is not witnessing a classic arms race between two great powers and their allies, of the sort Britain and Germany engaged in before the first world war, or a cold-war contest like that between America and the Soviet Union. But certainly Asian countries are competing to modernise their military forces. The “Military Balance”, an annual report by the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), a British think-tank, noted this month that most have seen “sustained, multi-year increases in defence spending”.

China’s rise and recent assertiveness are most often cited for the arms build-up. In the East China Sea, tensions have grown between China and Japan over the uninhabited Senkaku, or Diaoyu, islands. Since 2012 China has been sending ships and planes close to the islands in ways designed to challenge Japan’s claim to be administering them. In the South China Sea, China finds itself at odds with a number of South-East Asian countries, especially the Philippines and Vietnam, over even tinier islets, rocks and reefs. By means of massive artificial island-building over the past two years, disregarding the concerns of rival claimants, China seems simply to be taking what it thinks is its own. That helps explain, for example, why Vietnam’s arms imports in 2011-15 were eight times higher than in the previous five years, taking its share of the global total to 2.9%. The country has bought eight combat aircraft, four fast-attack craft and four submarines. A further six frigates and two submarines are on order.

Even were China not filling in the sea so enthusiastically, its military build-up would probably provoke a reaction. In particular the rapid expansion of its navy, with the apparent intention of eventually upsetting American primacy in the western Pacific, represents a big shift in the strategic order. Other regional navies are also modernising—above all by buying submarines. Besides Vietnam’s purchases, India has ordered six from France, and Pakistan has bought eight from China, which is also providing two to Bangladesh. Germany is to deliver two to Singapore and five to South Korea, which has sold three of its own manufacture to Indonesia. Australia is to buy between eight and 12, with fierce competition for the order between France, Germany and Japan.

But Tim Huxley, Asia director of the IISS, says it is misleading to see military spending in the region as “all about China”. Rather, it points to a much longer trend reflecting the region’s rapid economic growth and increased wealth. Countries have a range of external and internal security concerns. For example, despite its tiny size, Singapore is much the biggest defence spender in South-East Asia, outspending even Indonesia, with 45 times more people. Yet Singapore has no territorial claim in the South China Sea. Rather, its (unstated) fears have more to do with potential instability in its own immediate neighbours.



Peninsula of provocation: A timeline of clashes between North and South Korea

Also encouraging continued military spending is that none of Asia’s big strategic fissures, dating back decades, is really narrowing. India and Pakistan have been arguing and at times going to war over Kashmir since 1947. For China, victory in the civil war in 1949 was incomplete, because Taiwan remained outside its grip, and it has never ruled out the eventual resort to military force to achieve “reunification”, if peaceful means run out of steam. The Korean war ended in 1953 with an armistice but no peace treaty; North Korean dictators—three generations of belligerent Kims—have stoked tension ever since. China’s invasion of northern India in 1962 and subsequent withdrawal left the two countries’ competing claims over each other’s territory unresolved.

At times back-channel talks over Kashmir have led to hints of a breakthrough between India and Pakistan. But none of these disputes—nor those in the South and East China Seas—is subject to anything resembling a peace process, and none is discussed in more than broad-brush terms at any of the various regional security talking shops. Armies, lobbying for a budget to buy the latest kit, can always point to the risk that a dispute might flare up into conflict; and to the need to build up a deterrent capacity.

THAAD’s the way they don’t like it

One country’s deterrence, of course, can be another’s threat. In response to North Korea’s nuclear and missile tests this year, for example, conservative politicians in South Korea are again calling on the government to develop its own nuclear deterrent. They are very unlikely to have their way. But the South has been in talks to deploy an American anti-missile system, known as Terminal High-Altitude Area Defence, or THAAD.

This in turn alarms China, which argues that the associated radar threatens its own security and has lobbied hard to dissuade South Korea from adopting THAAD. Another aspect of China’s assertiveness is its readiness to intervene in other countries’ security policies. It has even suggested to Australia that it should think twice about buying Japanese submarines, because of historical sensitivities over the second world war. This diplomatic expansionism, however, tends to have much the same effect as the sea-filling kind: raising alarm and hackles, and driving China’s neighbours closer to America—and to suppliers of heavy weaponry.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21693619-asia-pacific-region-peacebut-it-buying-lot-weapons-taking-arms/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Football: Patriotic goal

Single parents: Pariahs

Online dissent: Punching high





Articles Sections Next

Football

Patriotic goal

Big spending on foreign football players has a political aim, too

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



CHINESE demand for the world’s commodities may be sputtering, but not for the most vital ingredient of football: its players. In recent weeks, the country’s football clubs have been on their biggest ever spending spree, signing up foreign talent for sums which, by Asian standards, have been jaw-dropping. One local newspaper in China said anyone who paid attention to Chinese football would conclude that the clubs had “gone mad”.

Jiangsu Suning, a club owned by an eponymous retail chain, broke a record on January 27th when it paid £25m ($35m) for Ramires, a Brazilian midfielder (known only by his forename) who had been playing for Chelsea, an English team. That was the most an Asian club had spent on a footballer. Seven days later Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao took Jackson Martínez from Atlético Madrid, a big Spanish team, for $45m. Within a couple of days Jiangsu had smashed the record again, paying a Ukrainian team, Shakhtar Donetsk, $53m for Alex Teixeira, another Brazilian midfielder.

By the time China’s two-month-long winter transfer-period ends on February 26th, its top-division clubs will have spent a net amount of around $300m (the amount spent on buying players minus the amount received for selling them). That is more than the combined net outlay of all the clubs in Europe’s top five leagues during the winter period. The net spending of clubs in the English Premier League was the second highest ($220m); those in China’s second division ranked third, at $55m.

President Xi Jinping may be less inclined to call this mad. Oddly for someone with so much else to worry about, from reviving a slowing economy to fighting corruption, he has set much store by football. A year ago a committee charged with overseeing wide-ranging economic and social reforms turned its attention to an area of great concern in the football-loving nation: its dismal performance in the game. The committee, headed by Mr Xi, endorsed the Communist Party’s first ever plan for “football reforms” (with “Chinese characteristics”, naturally). These, it said, were aimed at ending the “backward” state of football in China and helping the country realise its “dream of sporting great-powerdom”. The plan says the number of football academies should increase tenfold to 50,000 by 2025. It decrees that football be made compulsory at school.

Football is particularly important for Mr Xi. He has been a fan since childhood. For a while after he took over as China’s leader his office, or at least the room said to be such in official photographs, featured the above picture of him as vice-president kicking a ball in Ireland. Mr Xi’s reform plan says football can help boost patriotism and a “collective spirit”—attributes Mr Xi is keen to inculcate in a society fractured by rapid economic change.

Chinese businesses are keen to play along. Four companies have taken over a first-division Chinese football club in the past two years. In October China Media Capital (CMC), a venture-capital firm, agreed to pay $1.3 billion for five years of television rights to the Chinese Super League (CSL), more than 25 times the amount paid by state television for the football season in 2015. (On February 23rd, the firm resold the first two years of rights at a 35% profit.) In December CMC bought a 13% stake in Manchester City, an English club, weeks after CMC’s chairman accompanied Mr Xi on a tour of the club’s facilities. Wang Jianlin, China’s richest man, recently snapped up a 20% stake in Atlético Madrid. Dalian Wanda, a firm owned by Mr Wang, is spending millions of dollars on the coaching of 180 Chinese players at world-class facilities in Spain.

Money talks

As well as signing up expensive foreign players, CSL clubs have been recruiting former managers of the English and Brazilian national teams. Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao employs dozens of coaches from Real Madrid to train the 3,000-odd youngsters enrolled at its academy. The drawback of working for a little-known team can be offset by a big pay-packet (Ezequiel Lavezzi, an Argentine forward from Paris St-Germain, a French team, recently joined a provincial squad in China for a reported salary of more than $300,000 a week). The CSL appears likely soon to eclipse Major League Soccer in America as a destination of choice for footballers who are more after money than prestige.

Mr Xi sees the game as a useful tool of diplomacy (his overseas visits often involve football-related events). But China’s league is still a long way from exerting the kind of soft power that the English Premier League bestows upon Britain (ask any taxi driver in China). Mr Xi has said he dreams of China winning the World Cup. England itself has no blueprint for that.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21693572-big-spending-foreign-football-players-has-political-aim-too-patriotic-goal/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Single parents

Pariahs

Single mothers have a tough time in China. So do their children

Feb 27th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition

AFTER more than three decades of often brutal interference by the government in citizens’ reproductive choices, it seemed something of a breakthrough when, in October, it decided to allow all couples to have two children. Previously, many had been limited to just one. Last month there was a further concession: children born in violation of the erstwhile rules would be given the registration document that is needed for everything from getting a place at school to opening a bank account. For children born out of wedlock, however, the nightmare of bureaucratic non-recognition persists. Attitudes to sex have been changing fast in China, but not the taboo surrounding extramarital births.

The government imposes stringent penalties on the very few unmarried women brave enough to have children. Giving birth requires permission from family-planning authorities. They will not give it without proof of marriage. Violators usually have to pay the equivalent of several years’ working-class income.

Then there is the problem of registering the child. Until last month it was impossible for many of those born in violation of family-planning rules to get identity papers. Now it is easier, as long as both parents can prove they are related to the child. But a mother who does not know who the baby’s father is, or who cannot convince the father to submit to a DNA test, is out of luck. The child cannot be registered. Hence it cannot obtain other vital documents such as an identity card (essential, not least, for travel on long-distance transport).

To avoid such horrors, some unmarried women leave China in order to have their children. Their babies would then have foreign proof of birth, and a chance of growing up normally abroad.

Xiao Min, a successful 36-year-old businesswoman who lives in Shanghai, decided to stay put. Her relatives acquiesced to her decision two years ago to have a child even though she had not found a husband. “I’m lucky to have so much support and a career that allows me to hire a full-time nanny,” says Ms Xiao. “I do not want to hurry to find someone to marry just so I can have children.”

Ms Xiao is also lucky because she managed to persuade a friend to donate his sperm and enter into a sham marriage with her. Armed with a marriage certificate, she had a baby daughter without paying a hefty fine, or “social maintenance fee” in official language. (In July, when asked by reporters why single parents were punished this way, a senior family-planning official insisted the fines were needed to maintain “reproductive order”.)

Most women, however, try their best to avoid extramarital births altogether. Abortions are readily available. Those who do not want to terminate their pregnancies are sometimes forced to do so by officials. Mei Fong, a former Beijing correspondent of the Wall Street Journal who wrote a book about the one-child policy, says the cost of raising a child on one’s own is such that it is usually only rich people who try.

“I want to make my parents happy and I want to have a baby,” says a 30-year-old woman in Beijing who works as a low-paid office assistant. “But if I’m not married and can’t pay the fines, the child would become like a ghost, without legal standing. How could I do that to my own child?”





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21693590-single-mothers-have-tough-time-china-so-do-their-children-pariahs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Online dissent

Punching high

An outspoken tycoon challenges Xi Jinping’s views

Feb 27th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition

Big Gun takes on a big’un

MOST of China’s rich try to keep their heads down and avoid offending the Communist Party. Ren Zhiqiang (pictured), a retired property developer, is an exception. He is not only wealthy, but also has a microblog account with 38m followers—roughly the number of people living in California—whom he regales with snide comments on the country’s politics. What gives these added sting is that he is a party member. Adoring netizens call him “Big Gun Ren”.

Despite President Xi Jinping’s onslaught on dissent since he took power in 2012, Mr Ren has kept up his criticisms. This makes him all the more extraordinary. In recent days his microblogs have taken on Mr Xi himself, commenting scornfully on the president’s inspection tour on February 19th of the party’s main mouthpieces: the People’s Daily, Xinhua News Agency and China Central Television. Mr Xi reminded them to toe the party line, or, as he put it, to keep “the surname ‘Party’”.

Mr Ren took issue. “When all media have surnames and do not represent the people’s interests, the people will be cast aside into a forgotten corner!” he complained on his microblog hosted by Weibo, a Chinese social-media site. In another post Mr Ren asked: “Since when has the people’s government been turned into the party’s government?” He said that taxpayers’ money should not be wasted on things that do not provide them with services.

Mr Ren’s posts were quickly deleted. A website run by the party committee of Beijing’s city government published a commentary that accused him of displaying “brazen anti-party spirit” and of representing a “capitalist troublemaking faction” trying to create Western-style government in China.

Mr Ren appears unfazed. Another of his posts hinted that he would like to take the website and its owners to court. Plenty of other bloggers have fallen foul of the law for taking digs at the party. But Mr Ren’s prominence may afford him (and even his Weibo account, to which he has posted more than 90,000 times) some protection. He even remains an adviser to the capital’s government—one of the few worth listening to.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21693588-outspoken-tycoon-challenges-xi-jinpings-views-punching-high/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Trade within Africa: Tear down these walls

Ethiopia’s drought: On the edge of disaster

Syria: Russia calls the shots

Consanguineous marriage: Keeping it in the family

Israeli politics: An Arab agenda

Iran’s election: Even hardliners want reform

Kurdistan: Fin de renaissance





Articles Sections Next

Trade within Africa

Tear down these walls

Africa’s internal trade deals look good on paper. A pity that they are rarely followed

Feb 27th 2016 | SHARM EL-SHEIKH | From the print edition



TWO of the largest regional trade accords in history were agreed on last year. The Trans-Pacific Partnership involves 12 countries in Asia and the Americas, and was the subject of headlines and heated debate. But most people have never heard of the Tripartite Free Trade Area (TFTA), which covers 26 African countries. It will create the biggest free-trade area on the continent, “from Cairo to the Cape”, as its supporters boast.

Many in the developing world see global trade as rigged in favour of rich countries. But African regional integration is all the rage. The continent features 17 trade blocs. The TFTA aims to join up three of them: the East African Community (EAC), the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA). At a conference on African business on February 20th-21st in the Egyptian resort of Sharm el-Sheikh, several leaders called for a united African market.

An abundance of borders has long divided the continent’s 54 countries, limiting economies of scale. Fixing common problems such as a shortage of roads takes teamwork—and in turn should lead to more integration. Average transport costs in Africa are twice the world average and are thought to harm trade on the continent more than tariffs and other barriers.

A shame, then, that regional economic deals are often poorly implemented. An African firm selling goods on the continent still faces an average tariff rate of 8.7%, compared with 2.5% overseas, says the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). That is one reason why intra-African trade as a percentage of total African trade is well below what is seen in other poor regions (see chart).

Nearly all African countries are party to more than one regional agreement. These overlapping allegiances can tie them in knots. Members of COMESA, for example, impose a common external tariff on goods of non-members. But several members are also in the SADC free-trade area, which requires lower tariffs on goods from some non-COMESA states. The TFTA is meant to iron out these differences, but the details are still to be decided.

African countries vary in size, geography and resources, so trade deals affect each differently. Manufacturing tends to cluster in powerhouses such as Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa. Small agricultural producers fear being swamped with food from larger neighbours. There are no mechanisms for helping the losers. So it is difficult to convince countries to make sacrifices in order to increase trade.

Whether to protect their dominance or avoid hardship, most countries revert to protectionism. Take the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It is meant to be a customs union, but has an extensive list of exceptions. Two decades after it promised free movement of people, goods and transport, implementation is poor. East Africa does better, but Karim Sadek, the director of Rift Valley Railways in Kenya and Uganda, says that not having to stop at the border would make his life easier. “You get used to the inefficiencies.”

Non-tariff barriers are not only an African problem. Product standards and rules of origin are used by America to block Mexican goods under NAFTA. But evidence cited by UNCTAD suggests that the reduction of tariffs in Africa has led to an increase in the use of other obstacles. In SADC such protectionism has resulted in more imports from non-SADC countries. Clothes, for example, are required to be both manufactured and sourced in SADC countries to qualify for preferences. Since few textiles are produced in the region, the rules have stifled trade in garments.

Bureaucracy is expensive to overcome. According to research by Nick Charalambides of Imani Development, a consultancy, Shoprite, a South African retailer, spent $5.8m dealing with red tape in 2009 in order to gain $13.6m in duty savings under SADC. Others avoid the hassle of customs: informal trade is thought to provide income to over 40% of Africa’s population.



Why countries are so keen to agree new trade deals

Some think Africa needs to approach trade differently. “The first question that should be asked is: what can we trade with each other?” says Bineswaree Bolaky of UNCTAD. Often the answer is: not much. Most African countries produce a narrow range of goods and have export sectors geared towards supplying rich countries. Few have significant manufacturing bases and, unlike in developing Asian countries, there is little trade in inputs or services that might lead to African chains of production.

The volume of intra-African trade is so small that fixing these problems, and upgrading the continent’s infrastructure, may not seem worth the expense to some countries. So UNCTAD recommends creating an integration fund, financed by relatively rich African states, to pave new roads and build export capacity in poorer countries. The African Development Bank handed out over $1 billion in the past two years with the explicit aim of boosting intra-African trade. But that risks becoming an objective in and of itself. “You still need to be flogging stuff to big countries,” says Alan Winters of the University of Sussex.

In their zeal to integrate, African leaders may also be using the wrong model. Broad and shallow agreements are the norm, but the continent’s most successful economic bloc consists of just five countries. EAC members keep good data, and a public scorecard holds them accountable for non-tariff barriers. “There you have a small group of countries that is taking it seriously and making some progress,” says Jaime de Melo of the University of Geneva. Talk of a common currency in East Africa and even a political federation do not seem far-fetched. It is a stretch to think that the TFTA will lead to anything similar.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/21693562-africas-internal-trade-deals-look-good-paper-pity-they-are-rarely/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Ethiopia’s drought

On the edge of disaster

The government’s achievements appear increasingly precarious

Feb 27th 2016 | ADIGRAT | From the print edition

A good system, but overwhelmed

“THE animals die first” is a common refrain from many Ethiopians living in Tigray and Afar, two northern states, as the country experiences its worst drought in decades. Crop production in these regions has dropped by 50% or more in some areas, and failed completely in others. Hundreds of thousands of domestic animals are reckoned to have perished.

The rapidly changing skylines of Ethiopia’s modernising cities notwithstanding, about 80% of its population still live off the land. Yet despite the drought there are not yet scenes reminiscent of the famine of 1983-84 when as many as 1m people died.

That reprieve may not last. Those working for NGOs, which are now scrabbling to raise funds for relief, point out that in previous dry spells, hunger intensified from April onwards because by then people have eaten through their last food stocks or what little was harvestable. “The present situation here keeps me awake at night,” says John Graham, the country director for Save the Children, a charity.

Unlike in 1983, when brutal government policies increased the number of deaths, Ethiopia’s present rulers have done much to mitigate the impact. Their Productive Safety Net Programme provides jobs for about 7m people who work on public-infrastructure projects in return for food or cash. There are also a national food reserve and early warning systems throughout the woredas, local-government districts. Ethiopia even managed to accelerate the building of a new railway line—the country’s only one—to bring food supplies from Djibouti on the coast of the Horn of Africa.



But the country’s ability to help itself may soon reach its limit. Estimates of the number of people affected by drought doubled between June and October in 2015 to 8.2m, and are now pushing beyond 10m (of a population of about 100m). The government faces criticism for not acknowledging sooner that it needs help.

Ethiopians—both official and lay—are sensitive about their ancient, diverse country’s persistent association with misery and pestilence, while equally proud of its economic turnaround. There is also a sense that the government has not been found wanting with this drought; rather that it has simply encountered events beyond its control. The El Niño phenomenon is causing unusually heavy rains in some parts of the world and drought elsewhere.

Herein lies a challenge for Ethiopia: it is competing for international funds with other grave humanitarian crises, such as the wars in Syria and Yemen, and the international migrant emergency. Moreover, the international system’s cogs started turning late, after the government initially tried to go it alone. Ethiopia may also be up against donor fatigue. The estimated $1.4 billion needed to combat the drought’s impact remains less than half funded. Further concerns stem from the possibility that El Niño will also affect Ethiopia’s next rainy season. The UN reckons such a situation could result in more than 15m Ethiopians suffering food shortages, acute malnutrition or worse by mid-2016.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693624-governments-achievements-appear-increasingly-precarious-edge/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Syria

Russia calls the shots

The timing of a proposed truce locks in the regime’s military gains

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



PEACE in our time or a cynical diplomatic fudge? The best that can be said of the provisional agreement on a “cessation of hostilities” between at least some of the warring parties in Syria, hammered out (again) on February 22nd between John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, and Sergei Lavrov, his Russian opposite number, is that it appears to have slightly more solid foundations than a similar attempt earlier this month.

The agreement, which is due to come into force on February 27th, was endorsed by Vladimir Putin in a rare television address after he conferred by telephone with Barack Obama. As The Economist went to press, details of how it would be implemented were still being worked through. It looks likely that at least one of the requirements of the UN peace plan outlined by the UN Security Council late last year may be fulfilled: the lifting of sieges of rebel-held towns by government forces and the delivery of humanitarian aid to their starving populations. Some aid convoys began to roll from Damascus last week and more will follow. Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s president, has also promised to hold (meaningless) parliamentary elections on April 13th. Just about everything else remains unclear.

The Russians have given themselves and Mr Assad plenty of latitude in the way they wish to interpret the agreement. The Syrian regime refuses to describe it as a ceasefire, instead referring to a mere suspension of combat operations. In practice, it may not even amount to that.

Islamic State (IS) and Jabhat al-Nusra (JAN), al-Qaeda’s Syrian affiliate, are officially designated as terrorist groups by both Moscow and Washington, and are thus explicitly excluded from the agreement. But JAN, intermingled with other rebel groups, is active on almost every front in the civil war, from Daraa in the far south of the country to Aleppo in the north. JAN is also the leading player in a rebel alliance that includes Ahrar al-Sham, a powerful Salafist outfit, and other less extreme groups. It controls most of Idlib province to the west of Aleppo. Having largely completed the encirclement of Aleppo, the regime’s next priority is to cut off and squeeze Idlib. Fabrice Balanche of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy argues that if Russia continues air strikes against JAN, as the agreement entitles it to, it will be impossible for other groups fighting alongside it to respect the ceasefire.



An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts

Before the assault on Idlib can begin in earnest, regime forces will need to lock in the gains of the Russian-backed assault of the past few weeks. The offensive has retaken swathes of rebel-held territory and cut off supply lines to Aleppo from Turkey with the help of Syrian-Kurdish YPG fighters, whom the Americans regard as their principal ally on the ground against IS. Such has been its speed that Mr Assad’s forces are in need of a breather. The timing of the ceasefire will thus be very convenient if it allows them to construct defensive lines against possible counter-attacks and foments division between those of their enemies abiding by the agreement and those ignoring it.

Mr Putin’s willingness to use hard power, and the West’s fear of confronting him, are allowing him to call the shots. A ceasefire on his terms, at a moment of his choosing, looks uncomfortably like a version of the Minsk 2 agreement struck a year ago to bring an end to the fighting in eastern Ukraine. Soon after, the town of Debaltseve fell to Russian-backed separatists after a devastating artillery assault. Since then there have been thousands of ceasefire violations by pro-Russian forces. Around 1,000 Ukrainian soldiers have been killed.

As things stand, the ceasefire meets all of Mr Putin’s diplomatic and military requirements. It confirms the survival of Mr Assad’s regime, potentially divides the rebels, puts Turkey on the back foot and panders to Western concerns by promising a more concerted effort against IS and the possibility of a political settlement that helps staunch the flow of refugees into Europe. From the perspective of Moscow and Damascus, what’s not to like?



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693616-timing-proposed-truce-locks-regimes-military-gains-russia-calls/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Consanguineous marriage

Keeping it in the family

Marriage between close relatives is much too common

Feb 27th 2016 | AMMAN AND CAIRO | From the print edition

Cleopatra married her brothers

MAHA SAAD ZAKI, a professor of clinical genetics, ushers Ahmed, Fatima and their family into her room at Egypt’s National Research Centre. At least three of their six children have a rare neurological illness that manifests itself around age four, causing mental retardation, loss of the use of their limbs and, later, death. The couple’s nine-year-old daughter slumps, twitching. This congenital illness has appeared because, as well as being husband and wife, Ahmed and Fatima are also first cousins (their names have been changed).

Cases like these are all too common in the Middle East and north Africa. Marrying a close relative markedly increases the chance that both parents are carriers of dangerous recessive genes, which can then cause disease when a child inherits a copy of the gene from both parents, as will happen in 25% of cases. The gamut of such illnesses runs from known ones such as microcephaly (in which children have unusually small heads) cystic fibrosis and thalassaemia, a blood disorder, to wholly new disorders. “Ninety percent of the cases I see are caused by consanguineous marriages,” says Ms Zaki.

Statistics on the prevalence of marriages between close relatives today are scarce. Once common practice in Western societies, estimates suggest the Middle East, along with Africa, continue to have the highest levels in the world. In Egypt, around 40% of the population marry a cousin; the last survey in Jordan, admittedly way back in 1992, found that 32% were married to a first cousin; a further 17.3% were married to more distant relatives. Rates are thought to be even higher in tribal countries such as Iraq and the Gulf states of Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Kuwait.

Today the first reason men and women look to wed within the family is because they know a lot about their relatives: who they are, what they earn, any past blunders. And large families mean they have lots of them. “People are looking for ethics and manners,” says Atef al-Shitany of Egypt’s health ministry. Tying the knot within also ensures property remains in the family. In Upper Egypt, a rural farming area, rates are the highest in Egypt.

Unlike in the West, there is no social stigma; quite the opposite. A 38-year-old Egyptian woman, who has two sons with micro-syndrome (which causes cataracts, small genitalia and learning difficulties) due to her marriage to a cousin, says relatives nonetheless criticise her for allowing her 18-year-old daughter to get engaged to a “stranger”—the fiancé is not a relation.

Many wrongly think that maternal cousins are not blood relatives. Prevailing Islamic belief reinforces intermarriage, although it happens among Christians too. The Koran allows marriage to anyone but parents, siblings, aunts and uncles, nephews and nieces. Indeed, Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad, married her cousin, Ali Ibn Abi Talib, notes Ahmed Mamdouh of Al Azhar, an Egyptian university.

Many in the region, though, simply do not know of the risks of marrying a family member. A small survey in Saudi Arabia found that participants were 50% less likely to view marrying a cousin positively when warned of the problems. “We wouldn’t have married if we had known,” says Ahmed.

To reduce genetic disorders, some countries have made blood tests mandatory for fiancés, which have helped reduce incidence of diseases such as sickle cell anaemia. In Tunisia, the government mandates premarital counselling for all those betrothed to a relative.

In Egypt, where education is often rudimentary, there is much more work to be done. Couples that do know of the risks often believe—sometimes because their doctor tells them so—that basic blood tests rule out the risk of any genetic illness. “The only way to avoid the suffering is not to marry relatives,” says Ms Zaki. “But that will be impossible to achieve here.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693632-marriage-between-close-relatives-much-too-common-keeping-it-family/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Israeli politics

An Arab agenda

Critics say the prime minister is undermining democracy

Feb 27th 2016 | JERUSALEM | From the print edition



ON FEBRUARY 23rd, a committee of Israel’s parliament, the Knesset, began debating a new law which will allow it to suspend its own members for “expressing support for terrorism”. While the law is not specifically directed at any political faction, its thrust is clear. It was tabled by the government in response to a meeting three weeks ago between three Israeli-Arab Knesset members and the families of a number of Palestinians who had been killed while attacking Israelis.

The members of Balad, an Arab-nationalist party, also took part in a moment’s silence in memory of the young Palestinians. By calling them “martyrs”, the MPs enraged many Jews who regard the killers as terrorists; in one incident, assailants killed two Israelis on a bus. While the meeting was undoubtedly provocative, the move by the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, to adopt powers to banish the Arab MPs from parliament is seen by his critics as an assault on Israel’s democracy and an attempt to disenfranchise Israel’s Arab minority, who make up 20% of the population (excluding Palestinians in the territories occupied in 1967).

The law has been criticised by Israel’s president, Reuven Rivlin, a member of Mr Netanyahu’s right-wing Likud party, who made a rare intervention in the legislative procedure on February 15th, saying that the law “sins against the meaning of the Knesset…. it sins against the voting public.”

Mr Netanyahu is surely aware that the law is unlikely ever to pass all the necessary legislative stages of the Knesset; if it does, it is liable to be struck down by the Supreme Court; and even if it gets past the court it is unlikely ever to be used because it requires a three-quarters majority of the Knesset to agree to any suspension.

Yet it is part of a verbal campaign Mr Netanyahu stands accused of waging against Israel’s Arab minority since last year’s general election. In a message broadcast on election day, Mr Netanyahu warned right-wing voters that “Arab voters are flowing in droves to the polls.”

He later expressed regret over that message but recently he linked an attack in Tel Aviv, in which an Israeli Arab murdered three Israelis, to “lawlessness” in Arab towns. He also instructed two conservative ministers to draw up a list of tough conditions that Arab local councils must adhere to in order to get money from a $3.8 billion programme designed to improve conditions in the Arab sector.



The complete, complex and convoluted history of Israel's Knesset, in one graphic

Most Israelis take great pride in their democracy, which is committed to equal rights for Jews and non-Jews, and features the representation of Israeli Arabs in such bodies as the Supreme Court. Some argue that the suspension law undermines this; as does another law being proposed by the Netanyahu government, which will force NGOs that receive most of their funding from foreign governments to say so prominently in all their publications.

This, too, is ostensibly a community-blind law, but in reality targets human-rights and pro-Palestinian groups, as they tend to be the ones receiving such funding. Settlers’ groups are also often funded from outside Israel, by Jewish philanthropists and evangelical Christian movements; but the law will not affect them, as their money does not come from governments.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693494-critics-say-prime-minister-undermining-democracy-israels-proposed-new-law/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Iran’s election

Even hardliners want reform

A backlash is taking place against conservatism

Feb 27th 2016 | MASHHAD | From the print edition

Protest vote?

IRAN’S holiest city, and also its second-largest, has long been a conservative bastion. In parliamentary elections in 2012 Iran’s most right-wing party, the Paydari or Stability Front, won all of Mashhad’s five seats. In local elections the year after it won an outright majority and left the reformists with none. But after the nuclear deal and the lifting of sanctions, reformists backed by the city’s businessmen are attracting packed audiences to their hustings for elections due on 26th February. The conservatives may have expanded the complex around the shrine of Reza, Shia’s eighth imam, but only the reformists can attract the foreign investment the city needs to fill it.

Their demands include a new railway to halve the time of travelling the 900 kilometres (560 miles) from Mashhad west to Tehran, the capital; highways designed to turn the city into Central Asia’s conduit to the Middle East; and leisure centres to diversify a rigidly spiritual form of tourism. Some suggest promoting the city not just as Imam Reza’s burial place, but also Harun al-Rashid’s, the eighth century caliph who presided over the golden age of Sunni Islam. “We have to replace the anti-Westerners,” says a businessman who says the conservatives blocked his joint venture with an Italian company, worth €400m ($440m), for a theme park.

Economic demands often turn cultural. Several female candidates are campaigning for an end to the glass ceiling on senior government posts. “Stop sanctions on happiness,” cries a local economics professor and reformist candidate, vowing to fight a ban on concerts, upheld by Ayatollah Ahmad Alamolhoda, the city’s main preacher. One rally ends with a band with a female drummer performing renditions of Hafez, the most revered Persian poet, on stage. The more daring supporters don green veils or T-shirts (under jackets they can quickly zip up), harking back to the mass protests, or Green Revolution, that followed a rigged presidential election in 2009. Either as a reminder of or a precaution against a repeat of the violence, organisers distribute sticking-plasters which supporters wear on their index fingers.



In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal

The conservatives have struck back, casting doubt on the reformists’ patriotism and mocking the support they have received from the BBC’s Persian service. “Don’t vote for Britain,” read posters hanging from Mashhad’s lampposts, underlining the widely-held view that perfidious Albion continues to scheme. But in Paydari’s campaign office, the mood is more sombre. A campaign manager insists that, post-sanctions, hardliners also favour foreign investment. He fears the perception, even among the party’s traditional constituency, is that they are out of step with the times.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693637-backlash-taking-place-against-conservatism-even-hardliners-want-reform/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Kurdistan

Fin de renaissance

Once booming, the statelet is now in crisis

Feb 27th 2016 | ERBIL | From the print edition



AS RECENTLY as two years ago the Kurds of Iraq were riding high, at the peak of a well-deserved social and economic recovery following decades of hardship and isolation under Saddam Hussein. The region seemed an island of stability even as the rest of Iraq was convulsed by violence following the American invasion and overthrow of the Iraqi leader.

But the Kurdish miracle is dissipating. The Kurds have suffered a triple blow: the freezing in 2014 of their take of the federal budget, which constitutes 95% of the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG)’s overall budget; the emergence of Islamic State (IS) which took control of Mosul, just 85km (50 miles) from the capital, Erbil, making travel to Kurdistan’s oil facilities slower and more hazardous; and a steep drop in oil prices.

Today the skeletons of unfinished buildings and half-empty watering holes bear witness to those once-high hopes. The residents are increasingly unhappy. Although the 70% drop in oil prices or the war against IS could not have been predicted, the severity of the crisis could surely have been mitigated.

History has been harsh to the Kurds, scattered across several countries without their own state. In the 1980s Saddam used poison gas against them; in the 1990s, though they were protected by a Western no-fly zone, he was determined to cripple them financially. UN sanctions following his invasion of Kuwait had harmed the whole country; and a three-year civil war between Kurdish political factions left them drained. But in 2003, following the removal of Saddam, a Kurdish renaissance began and lasted a decade.

Even in Iraq’s darkest years, 2006 and 2007, when al-Qaeda battled the Americans in the Sunni heartlands, Kurdistan’s impressive 10% annual growth rate set it apart. Foreign and domestic investment rose. The oil industry and property boomed; tourism, though still small, picked up; and the number of expatriates rose. Foreign businesses flocked to Erbil. Yet during this time, opportunities were squandered. “They entered into the financial crisis with a regional economy that was structurally weak and overwhelmingly reliant on high oil prices,” says Patrick Osgood, Kurdistan bureau chief for Iraq Oil Report, a subscription news service.

Some 60% of Iraqi Kurdistan’s population is dependent on the public payroll, and most of them have not received their full salaries for months. Though Kurdish officials blamed Baghdad’s budget freeze (which has since been relaxed), the KRG’s inability to make up for it through increasing oil sales played a role. A feather-bedded public sector has also limited the development of a more vibrant private one. The relative security of working for the government has made it much less attractive for public employees to move to the private sector—a carefully crafted strategy, many reckon, by government parties keen to buy loyalty.

“No party pushed for private-sector development because it was not in their interest,” said Roger Guiu, a research fellow at MERI, a Kurdish think tank. “It’s not a matter of firing people from the public sector, it’s making employment in the private one more attractive.” Less reliance on the public jobs might have led to less dissatisfaction and ultimately prevented the social unrest now rippling through the region as the government has run out of money.

In the cities of Erbil and Sulaymaniyah, and in other smaller towns, residents have in recent weeks taken to the streets to rail against both government corruption and unpaid salaries. New austerity measures have angered many after the KRG announced in January that it would cut high wages by 75% and lower ones by 15%. Meanwhile official estimates report that the poverty rate has risen to 12%, up from 3% three years ago. A 30% increase in the population brought about by Syrian refugees and internally displaced Iraqis has also caused problems, including an unmanageable increase in demand for water and electricity.

The continuing war against IS means that despite the collapse of oil revenues and Baghdad’s freezing of the federal budget, military spending has increased, though officials refuse to give numbers. Peshmerga soldiers on the front lines have been exempt from the austerity measures and still supposedly get their full salary. But even Kurdish soldiers have suffered from salary delays—with predictable results. Some fighters are exchanging the front line for boats from Turkey to Greece, in striking evidence of just how depleted the West’s strongest ally in Iraq has become. Deserting soldiers are just some of the 37,000 Kurds who have left Iraq for Europe since 2014. Most of them cite government corruption and financial hardship as their reason for migrating.

As the battle against IS nears its third year, exasperation is increasing and expatriates are trickling away. The government is offering no reforms that look likely to revive the economy. It does not help that the region is also in constitutional crisis: the president of the KRG, Masoud Barzani, served two terms that came to an end in 2013, and was then granted a two-year extension by the Kurdish parliament. That prolongation expired last August, and yet he remains in office—in the 11th year of an eight-year term.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21693615-once-booming-statelet-now-crisis-fin-de-renaissance/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




Refugees in Greece: No way out

German right-wingers: Radikale Rechte

Organised crime: China nostra

Happiness in Europe: Hell is other people, for Swedes

Charlemagne: Ever farther union





Articles Sections Next

Refugees in Greece

No way out

Greece starts to fill up as its neighbours restrict the flow of migrants to Germany

Feb 27th 2016 | ATHENS | From the print edition



HIS sleeping bag around his shoulders, Khaled, a 28-year-old truck driver, sits in a corner of Victoria Square, a gathering point for migrants in central Athens. He is waiting for a smuggler to help him cross Greece’s northern border with Macedonia, closed since February 21st to Afghan migrants like him. Across the square, Mahmud, a restaurant manager who has come from Aleppo with his wife and three children, fears that the route to Germany may soon close for Syrians too. “We mustn’t get stuck in Greece,” he says firmly.

That may be hard to avoid. Last week Austria restricted arrivals to 3,200 per day, of whom 80 may apply for asylum. Macedonia, Serbia and Croatia are clamping down too. By February 23rd a backlog of 4,000 migrants had gathered at the Greek-Macedonian frontier; Greek police turned back dozens of buses carrying new arrivals. On February 24th ten countries along the migration route met in Vienna to discuss further steps. Greece was not invited. At the port of Piraeus, where ferries bring the migrants who arrive in Greece’s Aegean islands, aid workers urged Afghans to remain in government-run reception facilities rather than attempt the journey north.

For months experts have warned that if northern Europe restricts refugee flows without an overall plan for handling migration, Greece faces disaster. The United Nations predicts 1m arrivals this year. Alexis Tsipras, the prime minister, worries that Greece will become “a black box” for migrants. As razor wire goes up across the Balkans, his fears may be about to come true.

The crisis could hardly have come at worse moment for Mr Tsipras. His left-wing Syriza government faces a revolt by lawyers, doctors and farmers against reforms demanded by Greece’s international creditors. Farmers angry at moves to raise their income taxes to the same level as other Greeks blocked highways with their tractors, closing border crossings with Bulgaria and Turkey. A meeting on February 22nd with Mr Tsipras proved fruitless. Two days later the supreme court prosecutor threatened to investigate protest leaders; the blockades were quickly removed.

While the farmers’ rebellion may have been crushed, lawyers are on strike over a new pension scheme, which they say would force them to pay more than 30% of their income in employee contributions. George Katrougalos, the labour minister, wants to raise employers’ contributions instead, claiming that pensions are among the last income sources for Greek families hit by the country’s long recession. But Greece’s creditors from the EU and International Monetary Fund say the pension system is on the verge of bankruptcy. They want an across-the-board benefits cut of at least 10% before releasing the next tranche of funding from the €86 billion ($95 billion) bail-out Greece concluded last year.

That leaves the Greek government on the edge of insolvency as the migrant crisis is about to explode. Two decades ago Greece comfortably absorbed almost 1m economic migrants from the Balkans. This time, after six years of recession, the unemployment rate is above 25%. Mr Tsipras’s inexperienced government has struggled to take care of migrants in transit, let alone provide facilities for those who stay longer than a few days. It took a threat of immediate expulsion from the EU’s passport-free Schengen zone before Greece fulfilled its obligation to provide “hotspots” on five islands where migrants could be processed according to EU regulations. With local mayors raising “not-in-my-backyard” objections, nothing happened until the defence ministry took over; army contractors built the facilities in less than a month.

Greece has already agreed to host up to 60,000 asylum-seekers who enter an official programme to relocate them to other EU countries. So far most have ignored the offer and pressed on with the journey. In any case, according to current plans, EU countries would take in only 13,000 migrants from Greece in the next six months. Some in Syriza used to argue that providing poor facilities for migrants would encourage them to move along. But thousands of Tunisians, Moroccans and Pakistanis blocked at the Macedonian border earlier this month are now settling in. Greece cannot afford to deport them.



One priority, says a Syriza official, is to keep migrants as far as possible from tourist resorts. In Kos, an Aegean island popular with German holidaymakers, summer bookings have collapsed because of fears it will be overrun. Sports facilities and disused military camps on the mainland are being refurbished as temporary refugee camps. But the country’s total capacity is no more than 70,000 (see chart), and more than 2,000 migrants are arriving daily in Piraeus. The numbers will rise as the weather improves. If the northern border closes, Greece will fill very quickly.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693630-greece-starts-fill-up-its-neighbours-restrict-flow-migrants-germany-no-way-out/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

German right-wingers

Radikale Rechte

Feb 27th 2016 | BERLIN | From the print edition

Willkommen this

ANTI-MIGRANT violence in Germany has become so severe over the past year that it is a miracle that no refugee has yet been killed. In one case, inebriated thugs threw a Molotov cocktail through a window into a room where an 11-year-old refugee would have been sleeping, had he not crept into bed with his mother in another room. Another xenophobe fired a gun into a refugee home and hit a Syrian man in the leg. Elsewhere, someone lobbed a hand grenade into a processing centre for asylum seekers. It did not go off.

There were 13,846 “right-extremist” crimes in Germany in 2015, according to preliminary estimates, about 30% more than in 2014. Of those, 921 were violent. This year the pace has accelerated, especially in the former East Germany. On February 18th about 100 people in Clausnitz, in the eastern state of Saxony, tried to block a bus carrying 20 refugees, including children. In another Saxon city a cheering crowd interfered with firefighters dousing flames in a building being converted into an asylum home. One police chief warns of a “pogrom atmosphere”.

Fears of a xenophobic backlash in otherwise-tolerant societies have been rising since the refugee crisis began, and not only in Germany. Right-wing populism is also growing in the Netherlands, as well as in Sweden, which like Germany entered the crisis with liberal asylum policies that are now being tightened. But Germany has taken by far the most refugees, with 1.1m arriving last year alone. And because of its history, Germany is extra-vigilant about extremism on the far right. The supreme court will soon consider an attempt by the 16 federal states to ban the NPD, a party that looks and smells like a neo-Nazi party. Germany also has a small subculture of violent, explicitly neo-Nazi networks.

When it comes to less extreme populism on the right, however, Germany is an exception in the European Union: it has no far-right party as firmly established as France’s National Front or Austria’s Freedom Party. Germany’s political mainstream long seemed to have been inoculated by the Nazi past. As recently as 2014, a biannual survey of right-wing attitudes in Germany found that xenophobia, chauvinism, anti-Semitism and authoritarian longings were declining. Rightist worldviews were held by just 2.4% of the population, down from almost 10% in 2002. Yet even at the time, Andreas Zick of the University of Bielefeld, a co-author of the study, said the middle was fragile: xenophobia could increase again in a crisis.

It probably started growing in 2014, even before refugee numbers surged, when the “Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamisation of the Occident” movement, or Pegida, began weekly marches through Dresden. After waning last spring, it has waxed again with the refugee crisis. Meanwhile the populist Alternative for Germany (AfD) party, founded in 2013 to oppose euro-crisis bail-outs, has veered to the xenophobic right.

Pegida and the AfD have similar supporters. Pegida marchers tend to be older middle-class men anxious about social decline and cultural alienation, says Hans Vorländer, co-author of a new book on the movement. Pegida and the AfD have not merged, he says, only because their leaders loathe each other. But the AfD has ridden the anti-refugee backlash to score more than 10% in national polls. It is likely to do well in three regional elections on March 13th and to enter the federal parliament in 2017. Mr Zick thinks it has a potential voter share of 20%. Germany seems at last to be like the rest of Europe in having an entrenched populist party on the right.

Worse, the data Mr Zick is collecting for his next study, due in May, suggest that the middle of society is becoming radicalised. This is most evident in the rise of verbal aggression. A leader of the AfD recently suggested that border guards should “make use of their firearms” to keep refugees out. Facebook and Twitter are abuzz with hate speech. This “radicalisation of rhetoric blurs the boundaries between physical and verbal violence,” says Mr Vorländer.

Heiko Maas, Germany’s justice minister, is worried. He has invited his counterparts in the 16 states to a summit on March 10th to think up strategies against extremism. But as refugees continue to arrive, Germany’s tolerance and moderation are being tested as never before in its post-war history. The firewall it has built between respectable conservatism and the extreme right may be breaking down.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693636-radikale-rechte/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Organised crime

China nostra

In Italy and Spain, Chinese banks are implicated in money-laundering

Feb 27th 2016 | ROME | From the print edition



WHEN Liu Wang, the European head of the Industrial & Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), opened its branch in Madrid in 2011, he probably did not imagine that he would one day return to the city as a prisoner. Yet on February 19th Mr Wang was arrested and jailed without bail. He is one of six of the bank’s executives accused of funnelling dubious cash deposited by Chinese expatriates back to China. Some of the money allegedly came from smuggling and illegal exploitation of workers. ICBC said it always respected the law, and threatened to sue “malicious slanderers”.

The case has parallels with one in Italy involving the Bank of China, which also denies any wrongdoing. Judges in Florence are due to decide next month whether to indict almost 300 people alleged to have illegally sent more than €4.5 billion ($4.9 billion) to China between 2007 and 2010. Much of the money came from businesses in Prato, a textile city in Tuscany, which has a population of around 40,000 Chinese. Many are in Italy illegally and work in semi-clandestine sweatshops.

Because so many Chinese enter Europe irregularly, guided by traffickers known as “snakeheads”, it is hard to estimate their numbers. A study three years ago concluded that Italy and Spain had the European Union’s third- and fourth-biggest Chinese communities, at 330,000 and 170,000 respectively. Each had grown almost five-fold since the late 1990s.

Most Chinese in southern Europe work above-board. But others are caught up in a cycle of systematic illegality. At its origin is the importation or smuggling of cheap, often counterfeit goods from the Far East. These are then sold without VAT at prices local firms cannot match. Prato’s sweatshops turn imported cloth into cheap garments with “Made in Italy” labels, easy to sell throughout the EU. The bulk of the proceeds are dispatched to China in defiance of anti-money-laundering controls.

Not only Chinese are involved. Police in Italy have investigated locals who help supply premises and transfer profits. In Spain police allegedly took gifts from Chinese suspects. The profits are immense: in 2012 police broke up an operation in Fuenlabrada near Madrid, Spain’s best-known Chinatown, claimed to have laundered profits of €200m-300m a year.

That sort of money inevitably attracts other types of criminal organisations. Already, in 2003, American researchers found evidence of Chinese gangs in southern Europe involved in extortion, prostitution, document forgery, cigarette smuggling and illegal gambling. The same report said Chinese criminals in Naples appeared to have a deal with the local mafia, the Camorra. But later investigations, surprisingly, have uncovered few proven links to Italian organised crime. And how much of a role Chinese mobsters still play is unclear.

“Western law-enforcement agencies face immense linguistic and cultural barriers when they try to investigate crime committed by Chinese,” notes Wang Peng, an expert on China’s mafias at the University of Hong Kong. Detectives investigating a spate of murders in Prato’s Chinatown in 2010 complained of a total lack of co-operation from the Chinese community.

A sweatshop fire in 2013 that killed seven Chinese workers may have marked a turning point. Since then several Chinese have reported their employers to the police, and on February 6th around 2,000 staged an unprecedented demonstration in Prato against lawlessness. Bearing torches and carrying Chinese flags alongside Italian tricolori, the protesters were implicitly demanding protection from their own compatriots.

Yet the biggest threat to Chinese living abroad who skirt the rules may come from China itself. Officials are starting to enforce a rule that expatriates must pay tax on their entire overseas earnings. It may still be lucrative for Chinese to engage in shady moneymaking schemes in Europe. But sending the gains back to the homeland is becoming trickier.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693633-italy-and-spain-chinese-banks-are-implicated-money-laundering-china-nostra/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Happiness in Europe

Hell is other people, for Swedes

What makes Europeans happy? It depends on where they live

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



EUROPEANS can sometimes seem like a miserable bunch. The continent has produced downbeat writers such as Jean-Paul Sartre (“hell is other people”) and philosophers such as Slavoj Zizek (“What does love feel like? Like a great misfortune”). But although there are many reasons for Europeans to feel gloomy at present—from a migration crisis stretching from Greece to Germany to the possibility that Britain, one of the fastest-growing economies in Europe, may leave the European Union—many, instead, seem to be becoming ever cheerier.

Most Europeans are, on average, at their happiest since the financial crisis. In 2008 76% of EU citizens said they were satisfied with their lives. That number is now 80%, according to the Eurobarometer survey, which has tracked self-reported happiness for over four decades. Those in northern European countries, such as Denmark and Sweden, are consistently the most content. But some countries have bucked the trend. According to Ruut Veenhoven, a professor at Erasmus University in Rotterdam who has been analysing data on happiness for decades, people in Greece and Portgual have become gloomier over the past three decades (although they have started to perk up over the past few years).

Some general themes stand out. According to Eurostat, the EU’s statistical office, the only metric consistently correlated with European happiness is relative income. Moving one step up the income ladder increases happiness in every country in the EU; the difference in happiness between the bottom quintile and the second quintile is the largest. European men tend to be slightly happier than women, though not in Britain or Denmark. Those who go to university tend to be happier (not controlling for income).



But some big differences also emerge. Europeans are generally happier when they are younger. However, richer countries see an uptick of joyfulness in old age: Germans are happier when they are over 75 years old than when they are between 25 and 34, and the Swiss are happier when they are over 75 than when they are teenagers. (Britons, Swedes and Danes are happiest when they are between 65 and 74.) The Portuguese seem to have the worst mid-life crises, whereas Greeks, Bulgarians, Romanians and Slovenians all become glummer as they get older.

Where and how Europeans live also determines their happiness. In all countries, people are least happy if they live on their own. By the same token, in most countries those with children tend to be happier, with the exception of Britain, Denmark, Ireland and Switzerland, where people tend to be happier when childless. Overall, Europeans tend to be most content if they live in towns or suburbs as opposed to cities or rural areas. Northern Europeans tend to be cheerier the farther they are from cities (and hence from other people). In most parts of southern and eastern Europe, however, the opposite is true.

What makes city-dwellers happier varies from one city to the next. According to the most recent data from Eurobarometer, most city-dwellers have become slightly happier (see map). The highest correlation with life satisfaction in cities is a feeling of safety. But in Stockholm, Amsterdam and Vienna it is those who think foreigners are well integrated who tend to be happiest. Parisians and Berliners who rate their cities’ cleanliness highly are the most content. In Reykjavik, curiously, the telltale sign of happiness is being satisfied with the public transport system.

Those places which are happiest appear to have good governance. This may suggest a lesson to politicians: reducing unemployment and boosting wages will undoubtedly increase happiness. But clean pavements are important, too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693638-what-makes-europeans-happy-it-depends-where-they-live-hell-other-people-swedes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

Ever farther union

The principle of “ever-closer union” died long before Britain demanded an exemption

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



OLD habits die hard. So it proved with David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, after his mini-victory at last week’s European Union summit in Brussels. Bounding energetically to the press-conference lectern after two gruelling days of talks over the terms of Britain’s EU membership, Mr Cameron opened his post-summit remarks not by trumpeting the emergency brake on euro-zone integration he had just secured, nor by crowing over his success in denying benefits to EU migrant workers. Instead, he highlighted the carve-out he had won for Britain from the EU treaty commitment to “ever-closer union”, a golden oldie that has infuriated British Eurosceptics for decades.

Like a vestigial piece of junk DNA in the genome, this phrase has survived every change to the EU treaties, exerting no influence on its host today but providing a window to its past. The ambition of fostering “ever-closer union among the peoples of Europe,” inserted into the preamble of the 1957 Treaty of Rome, the EU’s founding document, speaks to the post-war need for reconciliation in a scarred continent. Its deliberate ambiguity—defining a journey, not a destination—is well suited to a club that prefers debating the scope of its power to exercising it. Defending the phrase is the last test of the classical Euro-federalist.

Chief among this dwindling crowd is Belgium, which has long seen a federal Europe as an antidote to its own national and linguistic divisions. Charles Michel, the Belgian prime minister, feared that a British exemption to ever-closer union could kill the idea for the rest, and vowed to defend it to the hilt. Messrs Cameron and Michel therefore disagreed on whether ever-closer union was a good thing, but very much agreed that it mattered. (Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, joked that Mr Michel would be better off pursuing an “ever-closer Belgium”).

That their theological struggle was quickly solved shows how Europe has changed. Once, Britain would have joined an almighty battle against the perfidious federalisers, as several of Mr Cameron’s predecessors did. Today he is happy for the rest to get on with the job, so long as Britain is left out; indeed, Mr Cameron acknowledges that the euro zone must integrate further to guarantee its survival. Thus did Mr Michel win his tweaks to the text and Mr Cameron his special dispensation for Britain (and a promise that the exception would be inserted into a future EU treaty).

Some old-timers wrung their hands to see a founding European principle jettisoned so easily, if only for one troublesome member. But the debate left other European leaders confused, and rightly so. “Ever-closer union” has never been more than the weathervane of the European project, whipped about by the prevailing political winds. The grand projects of integration, such as the single currency or the passport-free Schengen area, have sprung from the ambitions of leaders and the mood of the times, not from any mystical force of treaty language.

If lofty phrases have never driven Europe’s integration, they can scarcely slow its unravelling. The migrant crisis has tugged at European unity like nothing before, and the treaty provides little protection against unilateral border closures or the failure of some European countries to accept refugees from others. It is this, rather than a trio of fine words in an increasingly threadbare document, that should trouble the federalists. Instead, we are left with two peculiar phenomena. The Belgians cling to the comforting maxims of yesteryear just as events render them obsolete. And Mr Cameron brags, as he did to the House of Commons this week, that thanks to his deal Britain will never become part of a “European superstate” that no one is trying to build.

Back in the real world, the migrant crisis has exposed differences between European countries that will linger long after the immediate danger has passed. The bonds of trust that hold together projects like Schengen have frayed. Governments no longer merely disagree; some seem unable even to understand each other. That could jeopardise the traditional instruments of solidarity inside the EU, such as transfers from rich countries to poor.

Retreat to the core



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

All is not lost, say optimists. There is an old maxim in Brussels that the European project advances only in times of crisis. And such is the despair that the German notion of Kerneuropa, or “core Europe”, is resurfacing, in which those countries willing to forge ahead should not be hamstrung by the reluctance of others. “It has become impossible to work together at 28 [member states],” says one EU diplomat. “Perhaps we have to think about smaller groups.” The foreign ministers of the six original signatories to the Treaty of Rome met recently for a discussion on Europe’s future, and further such gatherings are planned. Some think a departure of the foot-dragging Brits could hasten a process of tighter but smaller integration—although a Brexit seems at least as likely to embolden Eurosceptics elsewhere.

In any case, the appetite for big steps seems diminished. The euro zone is an obvious candidate for integration. Worries over wobbly lenders, especially in Italy, highlight the need to complete the half-built banking union (although there remain big differences over a common European deposit-insurance fund). There are plenty of other ideas, from a tougher central fiscal authority to common debt instruments. But many are incompatible with one another, and creditor countries like Germany have no desire to increase their liabilities. The migrant crisis, which has made a mockery of borders, looks tailor-made for a common European approach on interior as well as foreign policy. No one wants Schengen to die. But for now those countries affected by the flows are unable to co-ordinate their response and those that are not see no reason to trouble themselves.

So crises may present opportunities for Europhiles, but they are still crises. Instead of the hoped-for integration and stability, the EU’s troubles might just lead to exhaustion and collapse.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693620-principle-ever-closer-union-died-long-britain-demanded-exemption-ever-farther/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




The justice system: Law in a time of austerity

Tories and the EU referendum: Blue on blue

Nuclear energy: What’s the (Hinkley) point?

Schools and careers: Posh professions

European migrants: Tunnels and channels

Pig farming: Fearing the wurst

Foreign property-buyers: Mountains and molehills





Articles Sections Next

The justice system

Law in a time of austerity

The justice secretary pleases lawyers by overturning his predecessor’s harshest policies—but they may be less happy when he pursues reforms

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



MINISTERS frequently reverse decisions taken by their predecessors, sometimes wisely, often not. But it usually happens after an election has produced a change of government. What is remarkable about the justice ministry since last May is that the new Tory Lord Chancellor, Michael Gove, has been systematically undoing many signature policies of his Tory predecessor, Chris Grayling.

The two are now allies in the campaign to leave the European Union (see article). But on matters of justice they seem to disagree on almost everything. The latest example was Mr Gove’s decision to scrap a second round of cuts in legal aid for criminal cases. Mr Grayling wanted to reduce the number of firms of solicitors paid to offer 24-hour help at police stations to suspects from 1,600 to just 527, and to trim legal-aid fees in criminal cases by a further 8.75%. Lawyers fearing a loss of business complained loudly and threatened to sue. Mr Gove has shelved both measures.

In December he scrapped a mandatory criminal-courts charge that Mr Grayling, arguing that criminals should help pay for the administration of justice, had imposed on guilty defendants. Over 50 magistrates quit, complaining that they were unable to waive the charge even when defendants were unable to pay. Worse, they claimed that in some cases defendants were encouraged to plead guilty even when they were innocent, to avoid the risk of incurring a higher court charge. The House of Commons justice committee condemned the charge for similar reasons.

Last autumn Mr Gove cancelled a £5.9m ($9m) contract for the justice ministry’s commercial arm to advise Saudi Arabia’s prison authorities. Indeed, he went further, scrapping the commercial operation set up by Mr Grayling, on the grounds that it was allowing prison and judicial systems in authoritarian countries to claim a British seal of approval. He also abandoned plans by Mr Grayling to build a new secure college for teenage prisoners. And he overturned a ban pettily introduced by his predecessor on books for prisoners.

What is going on? In part Mr Gove’s reversals may reflect some easing of the pressure for more public-spending cuts. But more important is that Mr Gove has taken a less confrontational attitude to the judiciary and the legal profession than did the hardline Mr Grayling, who was the first non-lawyer to be Lord Chancellor in over 400 years (Mr Gove himself is the second). Mr Grayling seemed to go out of his way to make himself unpopular. In contrast Mr Gove has been readier to listen to grumbling by judges and lawyers.

The changes over the past six years of Tory-led government have been substantial. Judges’ pay has been frozen and their pensions cut, prompting some to sue the government. In spite of Mr Gove’s relative leniency, the legal-aid budget has been slashed by over one-third in real (inflation-adjusted) terms, from over £2.2 billion in 2010 to £1.6 billion in 2015. In many areas, especially of civil and family law, legal aid is no longer available. One result has been a big rise in the numbers choosing to represent themselves, clogging up courts that are ill-designed for litigants in person. Meanwhile spending on the court system has been reduced, many have been closed and court fees have increased.

Not surprisingly, practitioners have squealed. Last year Justice, a lobby group, pronounced that “our justice system is in crisis”. In his annual report in January the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Thomas, declared bleakly that “our system of justice has become unaffordable to most”. He added that judges’ morale was low, their workload had hugely increased and they were concerned over the adverse effects on access to justice of the recent changes.

The justice ministry counters such pessimism by pointing out that the legal-aid system in England and Wales is still one of the world’s most generous. Other countries are said to consider the British system to be among the fairest and best of all. But Mr Gove also has an agenda, not of further spending cuts but of something that is more urgently needed: reform.

The ministry says it is spending over £700m to modernise the courts and tribunal services. As the Centre for Justice Innovation, a think-tank, has put it, “Walking into a court today, it can still feel like the communications revolution never happened.” There is belated talk of online courts to settle disputes, with a judge present but no lawyers. Relate, a charity, is launching an online divorce or separation model based on the pioneering Dutch Rechtwijzer system. Better technology could be used to allow more disputes to be resolved by mediation or arbitration, not in costly courts.

Although some lawyers resist change, many senior judges do not. Nobody expects a return to the days of more generous public funding. Lord Thomas is eager to make greater use of technology to settle cases. Lord Briggs has called for an online court to start work as a matter of urgency. And Lord Jackson wants the early introduction of a system of fixed costs for all civil claims worth up to £250,000.

Mr Gove has noted that the justice system divides the country, in effect, into two nations: a rich, international class who like to settle cases in London under the gold standard of British justice; and everyone else, left to put up with a creaking, outdated system. He has even floated the idea that highly paid solicitors in London’s “magic circle” firms might be required to pay a levy towards the cost of the judicial system from which they benefit.

His biggest challenge will come when he confronts restrictive practices that have long raised costs and diminished competition. At the top end of the market, prices for legal services in Britain are among the highest in the world. The number of qualified lawyers has increased in the past two decades, but outdated restrictions make it hard for new types of provider, including accounting firms, to enter the market. Bodies such as the Law Society and the Bar Council often act as much to protect their members’ interests as to regulate them.

Mr Gove has experience, as education secretary, in dealing with entrenched interest groups. Lawyers, heavily represented in Parliament, are an even more formidable lobby than teachers. Under Mr Grayling both solicitors and barristers staged walkouts. Mr Gove may have won plaudits for being readier for dialogue than his predecessor. But his popularity with the special interests within the justice system could yet prove short-lived.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693582-justice-secretary-pleases-lawyers-overturning-his-predecessors-harshest-policiesbut-they/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Tories and the EU referendum

Blue on blue

It’s off to the Khyber Pass for Tories who play dirty over the next four months

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Boris and Dave, needling each other

MUCH is at stake in Britain’s referendum on European Union membership on June 23rd, from the health of the economy to the future of the United Kingdom itself, as Scotland threatens to break away following Brexit. Now there are fears that one particularly old and venerable institution might not survive the referendum campaign: the Conservative Party.

Europe is the issue that has divided the Tories more bitterly than any other over the past 50 years. The referendum, promised by David Cameron in 2013, was supposed to be the safety valve that would stop the party exploding. A united Tory cabinet would allow a passionate debate, win, and move on. But the plan failed to survive first contact with the enemy—and even to anticipate who the enemy would be: one Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, Mr Cameron’s old chum from Eton and Oxford and the Tories’ most effective campaigner.

Even before Mr Johnson belatedly declared himself an “outer” on February 21st, there was surprise that fully half a dozen cabinet ministers were prepared to defy Mr Cameron and campaign to leave the EU. They include Michael Gove, the justice secretary, Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions minister (and a former party leader) and Chris Grayling, the leader of the Commons. The unscripted Mr Johnson will give the campaign some zest; bookies shortened the odds of Brexit on his declaration. Tory MPs campaigning to leave are delighted: “We are a lot closer than we thought we would be at this stage,” says Philip Hollobone, the MP for Kettering.

More worryingly for Mr Cameron, Mr Johnson will encourage other MPs and party members to defy the government. Some 130-150 of the 330 Tory MPs could join the campaign to leave. In local constituency associations, the bias towards leaving is more pronounced. Mr Hollobone, for instance, believes that about 85% of his own activists will vote to leave.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

This makes the party divided, with the grassroots pitched against the leadership. The Conservatives have a dismal record of splitting on such issues, going back to spats over free trade versus imperial preference in the late 19th century. The party was badly divided again in the 1990s, its own MPs bringing a traumatic end to Margaret Thatcher’s 11-year premiership and then wrangling over Europe throughout that of her successor. One consequence of that fratricidal warfare was to help Labour into Downing Street for the following 13 years.

This is the fear for Tories as they prepare for months of argument, their divisions highlighted by the relative unanimity of the other big parties in favour of remaining in the EU. Yet as Tim Bale, a historian of the party, points out, the split is now less stark than in the 1990s. Then, the argument within the Tories was between Eurosceptics and those, such as the then-chancellor, Kenneth Clarke, who were fiercely pro-European. Now it is between “hard Eurosceptics and soft Eurosceptics”, the latter arguing to stay on the grounds that they have detached Britain sufficiently from the EU to minimise the damage.

A Tory leadership contest is due before the next election, which should give both sides a chance to air their differences. Mr Johnson will be well positioned to run: he is the only one of Mr Cameron’s likely successors to be on the Leave side, meaning he may hoover up the votes of Eurosceptic MPs and party members.

But as John Barnes, a Tory councillor, warns, things could still go “very sour” if either side personalises the debate. The hatred that the Thatcherites reserved for those who conspired against her did much to poison the wells during the 1990s. The party is keen to avoid a repeat: Lord Hague, a former leader, has warned that any minister who criticises a colleague will be sent off as “the new special representative to warlords in the Khyber Pass”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693580-its-khyber-pass-tories-who-play-dirty-over-next-four-months-blue-blue/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Nuclear energy

What’s the (Hinkley) point?

It would be best if Britain’s French nuclear partner threw in the towel

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Forever the energy of the future

BRITAIN has been often criticised for the unpredictability of its energy policy. It should take a lesson from Paris. The national utility, Électricité de France (EDF), reliably puts off a final decision on whether to build Britain’s first nuclear-power station in a generation year after nail-biting year. On February 23rd its boss, Jean-Bernard Lévy, clarified that his latest promise to come up with a verdict “very soon” meant “this year”, four years after the initial deadline in 2012. It may now be best for Britain if EDF calls it quits—however improbable that is.

The stakes are high. The £18 billion ($25 billion) project, Hinkley Point C in Somerset, would be a huge engineering work, bigger than the London Olympic Park and on a par with Crossrail, a railway running under central London. It would provide about 7% of Britain’s electricity, and because nuclear energy generates little carbon dioxide, it is central to the government’s commitment to clean power.

It is also symbolic of a “nuclear renaissance” after the failure of a state-run industry that limped along from the 1950s to the 1980s, and equally fraught private ownership during the next two decades. It is meant to show how private investment, with a helpful state behind it, is the best model, giving a renewed lease of life to the nuclear industry, says a new book, “The Fall and Rise of Nuclear Power in Britain”, by Simon Taylor, of Cambridge University’s Judge Business School.

Yet as the book witheringly points out, the result would be “the most expensive power station in history”. The projected costs are comparable to those of the Three Gorges power station in China, which has about seven times the planned generating capacity—albeit non-nuclear. They may rise if EDF’s painful experience of building two of the same reactors in Finland and France is any guide. Both those European Pressurised Reactors are years behind schedule and three times over budget; there is even a possibility that the French one, Flamanville 3, will be dismantled.

To compensate EDF in case of spiralling construction costs, the government has pledged to pay it up to £92.5 per megawatt hour for 35 years once it starts producing—almost triple current wholesale prices. That, Mr Taylor writes, poses the politically sensitive problem of rewarding the firm with as much as £1 billion a year, funded by higher electricity bills, when all of its risks have been overcome. British taxpayers are also on the hook if things go wrong; the government has guaranteed billions of pounds worth of loans on the project.

Even more awkwardly, it puts a pillar of British energy security in the hands of firms mostly or wholly owned by foreign governments. EDF, backed by the French state, is a financial mess, with high debts and negative cashflow that this month forced it to cut its 2015 dividend. The strains could become more severe once it starts spending billions of pounds a year on Hinkley Point. The go-ahead also depends on a Chinese state-owned firm taking a one-third stake, amid uncertainty about the health of China’s economy.

For all its problems, Hinkley Point is not yet doomed. Politics may trump economics; Britain has committed to stringent climate goals, and France would discourage EDF from abandoning Hinkley Point because it would end the dream of a nuclear-export industry. If EDF does pull out, Dieter Helm of Oxford University says the British government has a fallback option: it could float “nuclear bonds” at low interest rates to pay for the project. That, he says, would be cheaper than the 10% annual return that the French would charge.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693602-it-would-be-best-if-britains-french-nuclear-partner-threw-towel-whats-hinkley-point/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schools and careers

Posh professions

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



“Education should not be about wealth,” boomed Tony Blair in 1996. Two decades later, it still is. Private schools teach 7% of Britain’s pupils, but account for half the country’s senior civil servants, cabinet ministers and leading journalists. Seven in ten generals and judges went to independent schools, according to the Sutton Trust, a charity. In some jobs the proportion has even increased. A decade ago, half Britain’s senior doctors were privately educated; today the figure is 61%. The share has risen in the law, too. Even pop stars are more likely than average to have a posh education. And what of the fat cats leading FTSE firms and the plutocrats in Parliament? They, it turns out, are among the least privileged of the lot: only one in three went private.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693592-posh-professions/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

European migrants

Tunnels and channels

The great migration from the east has entered a second, different phase

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



EUROPEANS—their footprints fossilised on Norfolk’s coast 800,000 years ago—might be Britain’s oldest immigrants. But, as Britons campaigning for their country to leave the European Union have noticed, they also account for many of its newest. In 2004 Europeans made up 26% of all Britain’s foreign-born incomers; in 2014 they accounted for 48%. And whereas many of the country’s other immigrants slip, inconspicuous, into large cities, the latest generation—largely English-speaking, ever a short plane ride from home—have gone just about everywhere.

The big recent increase comes from Europe’s east. Eastern Europeans were once scarce in Britain. But in 2004, when it lifted work restrictions on eight central and eastern European countries, Poles entered in large numbers: in 2007 they peaked at 22% of Britain’s foreign inflows, and now number some 850,000, making them Britain’s largest group of foreign citizens. In 2013 Britain granted the same rights to Romanians and Bulgarians, and many predicted a similar “surge”. It did not happen: so far only around 230,000 have come.

Poles, suddenly and uniquely, had spread themselves across the expanse of the country, settling in improbable market towns, surprising the Northern Irish—who see relatively few immigrants—and going some way to reversing Scotland’s shrinking population. London holds 37% of Britain’s foreign-born population, but only 185,000 Poles live there: fully 80% live elsewhere in Britain (23,000 live in Northern Ireland and 82,000 in Scotland). Half Britain’s Romanians and just under half its Bulgarians, meanwhile, live in London, mostly gathering in Barnet and Brent.



INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers

Poles had arrived at a time when their skills—mainly in agriculture and hospitality—and their willingness to toil for wages and in conditions that British workers spurned, matched the needs of rural employers. Recruiters often went to Poland to seek them out, teach them English and transport them over.

They settled with little regard for history: earlier generations of Polish migrants, who had come to Britain after the second world war, were at first unwelcoming to the newcomers (“Closed, closed, closed,” says Jakob Krupa, a correspondent for the Polish Press Agency in London). Many of the new bunch came from small towns themselves, so places like Boston in Lincolnshire, which is now home to a lively Polish community, did not feel too strange. In any case, travelling in companionable groups, and planning to stay only a few years, they were prepared to live just about anywhere.

Bulgarians and Romanians, meanwhile, work mainly in construction. The big cities, especially London, account for much of the industry’s demand, so that is where they have gone, settling in the outskirts where housing is cheaper (see map). The relaxation of employment rules in 2013 made little difference to their numbers, as self-employment, common in the construction industry, had been permitted since 2007, when the two countries joined the EU. (The number of Bulgarian-born in work actually fell in Britain in 2014.)



Unlike the Poles of 2004, who were forbidden from working in most other EU countries, Romanians and Bulgarians may work all over Europe. They also tend to plan to stay longer, says Stephen Drinkwater of the University of Roehampton, “so they are looking for a better fit from the start”. Trickling in ones and twos, people from Bulgaria and Romania have pooled close to their fellow countrymen.

Many Poles started in basic jobs, but within an average of 18 months, says Heather Rolfe at the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, they found something better. In towns like Wisbech, in Cambridgeshire, Polish businesses have transformed rundown high streets. Some, keen to fit in, diligently take tea (with lemon) at five. In 2004, according to the International Passenger Survey, one in ten intended to stay at least three years. In 2014, nearly half did.

Romanians and Bulgarians arrived in a country used to eastern Europeans, and face less prejudice. They are on average less educated than Poles. But 74% are in some sort of employment, almost the same rate as Polish migrants, 80% of whom are in work. And between 2013 and 2014 there was a sevenfold increase in national insurance numbers issued to Romanians, and a threefold increase in those given to Bulgarians—a sign they are shifting out of self-employment. Anecdotes of porters becoming managers within a year or two abound. And as Brexit campaigners worry European migrant flows are too high, Britain’s food and drink companies, big migrant-employers, fret they are too low.

Like migrants from western Europe, those from the east are more likely to be graduates than the British-born. Around three-quarters come for work, nearly half with jobs lined up before they arrive. A new deal limiting benefits for EU migrants is unlikely to make much difference to inflows: fewer will get in-work benefits, but this will be offset by a planned rise in the minimum wage; in any case Britain’s job market, more flexible than the rest of Europe, remains the main attraction.

Only limits on free movement from the continent would change things. That happened once before in Britain, as a result of rising sea levels more than 200,000 years ago. Now, as the country threatens to leave the EU, it may yet happen again.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693639-great-migration-east-has-entered-second-different-phase-tunnels-and-channels/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Pig farming

Fearing the wurst

Cheap European rivals are making mincemeat of the British pork industry

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

In a trough

SUCH was the pressure on pig farmers in the late 1980s, caused by low pork prices, that Cameron Naughton’s father had a nervous breakdown. The younger Mr Naughton took time off college to help his father and then took over the family business in the rolling Wiltshire hills. Thirty years on, he is facing another dive in prices. His own mental health is holding up (even if his knees are not), but the 49-year-old farmer says it has not been this bad since the late 1990s.

The most recent problem has been a Russian ban imposed in 2014 on EU food products in retaliation for Western sanctions over Ukraine. One-quarter of European pork used to go to Russia; there is now a glut. A year ago British pigs sold for £1.35 per kilo ($0.85 per pound). Today, they sell for £1.13. (EU producers charge, on average, £0.99.) Last week Mr Naughton told his ten employees there may have to be lay-offs.

The pork industry had problems long before this year. Foot-and-mouth disease hit hard in 2001. More rigorous animal-welfare standards introduced in 1999 raised farmers’ costs. A recent warning by the World Health Organisation that too much processed meat causes cancer has not helped, says Zoe Davies of the National Pig Association, a farmers’ lobby. In 1998 there were 800,000 sows in Britain. Now there are half that number.

Some people switched to eating pork after a scandal in 2013 when horsemeat was found in French beef. But the British are still not big ham fans: the average Briton eats 24kg of pork per year, less than half as much as the average German. Retail prices are holding up as producers take the hit, receiving only £0.32 of every £1 spent on pork, the lowest since 2002. (Beef producers get £0.50.)

Ms Davies says that, having legislated for better conditions for pigs, the government should encourage schools and hospitals to buy British meat. And she claims that large imports of cheap European meat increase the chance of another horsemeat-type scandal. British pig farmers squeal that some European rivals enjoy subsidies and have been slower to apply animal-welfare rules. Yet many in Europe are also more efficient, focused on higher productivity for export.

Farmers like Mr Naughton struggle on. He grows cereals to help when pork prices sink, and sells only to local butchers, who will pay a premium. He knows three pig farmers who have recently folded. As small farms go under, the industry is integrating, with specialist farms handling different stages of production. Mr Naughton thinks he will survive but he says his son, now 19, is unlikely to want to take on the farm when he retires.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693618-cheap-european-rivals-are-making-mincemeat-british-pork-industry-fearing-wurst/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Foreign property-buyers

Mountains and molehills

London’s would-be mayors blame foreigners for high prices. Don’t believe them

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Capital spending

IN THE four previous elections for London mayor, the main issue has been how to improve public transport. Ahead of the fifth, on May 5th, housing is at the top of the agenda. At a meeting on February 23rd with people from the construction industry, the candidates unsurprisingly promised to boost housebuilding if they were elected. But another solution to the capital’s housing crisis is floating around: clamping down on foreign investment. At the meeting Sadiq Khan, the Labour hopeful, promised to compel housebuilders to give Londoners “first dibs” on homes, ahead of overseas-based folk. Zac Goldsmith, his Conservative rival, proposed a similar policy.

The argument goes that foreign owners drive up prices, bringing down the rate of home-ownership among Londoners. Go to certain parts of the capital and you will be left in no doubt that overseas investment is a scourge. One Hyde Park, a block of plush flats in Knightsbridge, often looks deserted at night. On The Bishop’s Avenue, in Highgate, weeds have grown in empty mansions. Such properties are often owned by rich foreign residents fearful of political unrest or expropriation back home. A London bolthole is a good way of preserving capital. (In recent months demand has tailed off, though: depreciating currencies in countries like Ukraine, Russia and Kazakhstan have made London property more expensive for oligarchs.)

In 2014 foreigners bought one-third of “prime” homes sold in London (ie, those in the top 8-10% of the market), according to Savills, an estate agent. But this does not mean that the capital is being overrun by absentee investors living abroad. The definition of “foreign” is expansive, including Russian billionaires who never visit Britain, but also someone who has lived in London for years and uses her Canadian passport when buying. The high rate of “foreign” ownership is thus a function of the capital’s cosmopolitanism: about one in four Londoners is a foreign citizen.

Foreigners who do not live in Britain make up a smaller chunk of the market for London’s prime homes: perhaps 10%, says Lucian Cook of Savills. And outside the poshest neighbourhoods, non-residents are small beer: in 2013 the Bank of England suggested that they may account for just 3% of all property transactions in London.

The people who make up that 3% are still open to the charge that they push house prices up. If so, it is probably not because they buy properties and then leave them empty (so-called “buy to leave”). There is little evidence that foreigners are more likely than Britons to leave a property empty, suggests a report by the Greater London Authority (GLA). In the past decade the number of houses in the capital left vacant for more than six months has fallen by 50%, a much steeper decline than in the rest of England.

Most foreign investors instead look to make money. According to Adam Challis of JLL, a property company, 85-90% of Asian buyers living abroad plan to rent out their property. Their buying-to-let may push up house prices, but only marginally: the National Housing and Planning Advice Unit, a now-defunct public body, found that increased lending to landlords (both British and foreign) pushed up prices by 7% in 1996-2007, compared with an overall increase of 150% over the period. Buy-to-letters may reduce the cost of renting by boosting the supply of rooms to let, so in parts they may help housing affordability.

Other Asian buyers, according to a survey from JLL, want their children to use their British property while at university—no bad thing, since each year international students at London universities directly contribute about £3 billion ($4.2 billion) to the economy. Very few say their London pad will be a second home.

Foreign investment may even pep up housebuilding. Since the financial crisis of 2008, banks have been stingy. They often refuse to fund a proposed development unless housebuilders can demonstrate its viability by selling around one-third of the dwellings in advance (“off-plan”, in the jargon). Britons have typically shunned off-plan properties, thanks in part to how mortgages are structured: few banks are willing to accept a not-yet-built house as collateral. Overseas investors have no such qualms, however. A report commissioned for the GLA may surprise Messrs Khan and Goldsmith: it found that without foreign money “many London [housing] schemes simply would not commence construction”. In posh parts of London monied foreigners push up the price of property; but by spurring on the builders, in other parts of the capital they may pull it down.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21693634-londons-would-be-mayors-blame-foreigners-high-prices-dont-believe-them-mountains-and/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




Ending energy poverty: Power to the powerless





Articles Sections Next

Ending energy poverty

Power to the powerless

A new electricity system is emerging to bring light to the world’s poorest. The key is persuading customers to pay

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



IMAGINE a country the size of India without power. No electric lights, mobile phones, radios crackling with cricket or televisions blaring Bollywood hits. Its economy would be medieval: tailors without electric sewing machines; metalworkers without power lathes; farmers without water pumps. Everyone would rush to finish work by sundown. Nights would be lit only by the moon, cooking fires, candles and kerosene lamps.

This is reality for 1.1 billion people globally—not far short of the population of India. The biggest numbers are in rural southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa (see chart). According to the UN, 220m people gained electricity between 2010 and 2012. But most of them were in urban areas, particularly in India. In sub-Saharan Africa, a region that, excluding South Africa, uses less electricity than New York state, electrification barely kept pace with population growth. Some 600m of its people are without electricity; demography means that by 2030 the number could be even higher. What would it take to bring all these people into the modern world?



Much as mobile telephony has helped the poor leapfrog landlines and bricks-and-mortar banking services, a handful of tech-savvy entrepreneurs are seeking to provide widespread access to clean, cheap energy with local systems, metered and paid for by mobile phone. They hope to vault electricity grids, harvesting solar energy beamed down onto rooftops rather than using fossil fuels, and connecting it to batteries to store the energy until nightfall.

Their offerings are likely to be best-suited to private customers in rural areas, whose energy needs are low and who are expensive to connect to grids. But their evolving business models, and innovative marketing and payment methods, also hold lessons for grid firms seeking to provide power to businesses and urban households.

Beyond the pylons

Governments and utilities in poor countries are often too cash-strapped to extend their grids. Part of the problem is widespread reluctance among users to pay for electricity. Customers who do not pay their mobile-phone bills can have their connection taken away remotely; electricity is harder to cut off, and easier to steal. This creates a vicious circle in which utilities lose money, reducing the funds available for improving and expanding supply, and further sapping users’ willingness to pay. “The real threat to energy access is that energy is not treated as a private good, but as a right,” says Michael Greenstone, an energy specialist at the University of Chicago. “And the problem with a right is that no one wants to pay for it.”

Across the world efforts are under way to change such attitudes, using technology and attempts to tweak social norms. In parts of Delhi, a utility has encouraged women to persuade neighbours to pay their bills in order to secure better service for all. Mr Greenstone is part of a project, funded by the International Growth Centre, a global research network with headquarters in London, that is looking for ways to encourage people to pay for electricity in Bihar, where 64m people are without power—the highest share, at 64%, of any Indian state.

Bihar has plenty of generating capacity, Mr Greenstone says, but gets paid for little more than half the power it provides. The rest is pilfered, unmetered or unbilled. The state power company has promised to provide electricity to “feeder” areas of 2,000-3,000 households that pay at least 60% of their bills. In a few randomly selected areas, it will increase the supply of electricity in proportion to the share of bills that are paid. The aim is to make people more aware of the value of their electricity supply and to encourage payment.

Mr Greenstone thinks that the results of the trial, due later this year, will underscore the need for pre-paid electricity meters for households. These are similar to coin-fed meters in low-income housing in the developed world, but can be topped up by mobile phone, rather than cash. Uganda, where only 15% of the population is connected to the grid, is an early adopter. Selestino Babungi, the head of Umeme, the sole grid operator, says that half its 800,000 customers use pre-paid meters. Before 2005, when it won the distribution contract, theft was ubiquitous. About 38% of electricity was “lost” because of illegal hook-ups or non-payment; some big businesses went as far as flying in Indian engineers to rig their meters. By making payments easier for clients and installing an automated system that detects when a meter is tampered with, the firm has brought that share down to 18.5%.

Higher revenues will help the company reach its goal of tripling the size of its distribution network to absorb additional power soon to be generated in Uganda. Most will go to industry and agribusiness, says Mr Babungi, creating jobs that bring more people to the income level where they can afford to connect to the grid and buy household appliances that consume more power. Customers in such areas are likely to be better payers.

The power of progress

Though Uganda’s government promises that eventually electricity will be rolled out to everyone, starting with regions where jobs are likely to be created is an idea with a good pedigree. Vietnam launched its post-war electrification in the rice-growing regions of the Red river and Mekong river deltas, helping the country to become one of Asia’s biggest rice exporters. Then it moved on to less immediately profitable areas. Access, which was under 50% in the late 1980s, is now almost universal. Thailand and Costa Rica, which also quickly electrified rural regions, both prioritised areas where the potential for commercial development was higher.

Such rapid electrification, often using fossil fuels, may look like the cheapest way to bring power to everyone. And replacing fires and wood stoves improves air quality. But overall the environmental damage is severe, in terms both of adding smog to cities and accelerating climate change. Even the poorest countries are increasingly aware of the risks of pollution, says Anita Marangoly George of the World Bank. “Why lock them into choices that will turn Lagos and Nairobi into Delhi and Beijing?” she asks.

Hence donors prefer to fund power projects that are green as well as profitable. Some worry that this could saddle poor countries with pricey, intermittent energy. For instance a $24m utility-scale solar-energy project in Rwanda generates electricity at 24 cents per kilowatt hour. Industry executives say they could produce it at half the cost using natural gas.

Brightening the night

Others fret that solar energy is still not reliable enough to power economic development. On February 22nd Bill Gates, co-founder of Microsoft and now a philanthropist, published an open letter with his wife, Melinda, drawing attention to poor people’s lack of energy around the world, and poor women’s lack of time (in part because they lack powered labour-saving devices). He says that with current technology, solar power and batteries are insufficient to satisfy Africa’s energy needs. The good news, he adds, is that Africa has several other possible sources of fairly clean and reliable energy: geothermal in east Africa, hydro in Ethiopia and central Africa, and natural gas in several countries, including Mozambique and Tanzania. Unlike wind and solar power, these can be used for “baseload” power that operates constantly. “If you want to attract manufacturing jobs you can’t have intermittent energy,” says Mr Gates. “If you want energy at less than 10 cents per kilowatt hour that’s not some battery connected up to intermittent forces.”

Regional transmission networks are an important part of the solution, says MsMarangoly George, since they allow countries and regions to share power, thus making green energy more dependable. And she notes that in recent wholesale power auctions in South Africa, wind and solar power have been as cheap as other sources of energy. Soon auctions in Zambia and Senegal will show whether the cost of green technologies has fallen as fast in poorer countries.

Potentially the most promising approach to bringing light to the 1.1 billion divides the task between traditional utilities and smaller, more entrepreneurial firms. The former focus on cities and businesses, and the latter supply “off-grid” power to poorer households in rural areas, individually or via neighbourhood “mini-grids”.

M-KOPA, which operates in Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, and Off-Grid Electric, in Tanzania and Rwanda, offer packages of appliances, such as a few LED lights, a mobile-phone charger and a radio, all powered by a solar panel and a battery. Payments are made via mobile phone. An upfront cost of $150-500 would be prohibitive to most of their customers. So the firms charge in instalments, which are spread out enough to bring the monthly cost below that of buying kerosene for lamps. Default rates are negligible; if payments stop, the service is disconnected remotely by disabling the box that links the panel to the appliances. Once the loan is paid off, there are no further payments, until a customer invests in a bigger system with more appliances, such as a flat-screen TV. M-KOPA says it is introducing new customers to electricity at the rate of 500 a day.

The trick, executives say, is to convince clients that they are buying appliances rather than electricity—and to make the gadgets ever more sleek and efficient so that they can operate on the low voltage generated by rooftop solar panels. The next step is to provide low-energy fridges that could help customers open small restaurants or grocery stores. (Off-Grid Electric says it already powers hairdressers and sports bars.) Meanwhile they seek to convince conventional power providers that they are not in competition. “The main conversation we have with utilities is telling them: ‘We target your non-profitable customers,’” says Xavier Helgesen, the boss of Off-Grid Electric.

Lighting the way

Neither of these firms is anywhere near the millions of new subscribers a year needed to make a dent in the 1.1 billion. But they show that if payments are sliced small enough and made via mobile phone—and an army of sales staff is deployed to educate potential customers about the social and economic benefits—poor people will pay for small but life-changing amounts of power. These lessons could make grid-based electricity more accessible, too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21693581-new-electricity-system-emerging-bring-light-worlds-poorest-key/print





Articles Sections Next





Special report: Indonesia




Indonesia: Jokowi’s moment

Politics: Lone fighter

Corruption: The Setya show

Business and economics: Roll out the welcome mat

Infrastructure: The 13,466-island problem

Foreign policy: Less talk, more action

Forests: A world on fire

Looking ahead: The country of the future





Articles Sections Next

Indonesia

Jokowi’s moment

Joko Widodo was elected to shake up Indonesia’s politics and make his country richer. He needs to hurry up, says Jon Fasman

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



CROSSING THE QUAYSIDE road in Ambon, the capital of Indonesia’s remote Maluku province, requires care, speed and nerve. The pavement is taken up by a row of food carts, and the road is packed with a motley collection of lorries, minivans and cars. Motorbikes flit dangerously among the larger vehicles. The shortest path between two points may be a straight line, but the safest is usually a corkscrew dance of leaps, backtracks and tight squeezes.

On one side of the street lies the Banda Sea, which surrounds the scattered Maluku islands. On the other is a row of low commercial buildings, selling the sorts of basic household goods available from any street stall in Indonesia: little packets of coffee, tea, shampoo and Indomie instant noodles, SIM cards, cigarettes and fizzy drinks.

But from one doorway wafts the incongruous scent of Christmas. In a large concrete-floored warehouse sit waist-high pyramids of cloves, pallets of nutmeg and sacks filled with spices. Merchants weigh their wares on old-fashioned scales. The only concession to the 21st century is their smartphones.

Four centuries ago these spices were literally worth their weight in gold. Small wonder that the Netherlands, Britain, Spain and Portugal spent two centuries battling for control of the spice trade. The Dutch prevailed, and the Dutch East India Company (VOC)—whose territories would become first the Dutch East Indies and then modern Indonesia—prospered mightily thanks to its monopoly on the spice trade. But eventually the bottom fell out of the market as the VOC lost its monopoly.

As spices became less lucrative, Dutch colonists turned to other commodities. They mined tin and coal, developed oilfields and created massive plantations to grow tobacco, cocoa, coffee, rubber, tea, sugar and indigo. After gaining independence in 1945, Indonesia retained a commodity-based economy.

For its entire modern history, money grew on trees, bubbled up from beneath the sea and was dug out of mines. Today Indonesia is South-East Asia’s biggest country by both population (255m) and size of the economy. It produces most of the world’s palm oil, as well as large shares of its rubber, cocoa, coffee, gold and coal. Commodities make up around 60% of the value of its exports. When the world was buying, Indonesia prospered: its GDP, both overall and per person, grew steadily throughout the late 20th century (except during the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis) and well into the 21st, thanks largely to a ravenous China.

But in recent years, as China’s appetite has waned and the price of commodities plummeted, Indonesia has struggled. Between 2010 and 2014 its overall growth rate fell from 6.2% to 5%. As economic growth slowed, it became clear that the country had persistently failed to invest enough in infrastructure and education. Its political system remained narrow and patronage-ridden. Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital and largest city, boomed and Java grew richer, whereas millions of people in the far-flung east felt they lived, in the words of one Ambonese priest, in “forgotten Indonesia”. In 2004, with great fanfare, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono became Indonesia’s first directly elected president; in 2014 he practically slunk out of office.



His successor, Joko Widodo (known universally as Jokowi), is different from any previous Indonesian president. He does not hail from the Jakarta elite and has served neither in the army nor in parliament. The eldest son of a poor family from the Javanese city of Solo, he acquired a reputation for pragmatism and—most important to his popular appeal—clean governance, first as mayor of Solo and then as governor of Jakarta.

Ordinary Indonesians supported him because he was one of them and had shown himself willing and able to act on Indonesia’s endemic corruption. The local business community cheered his victory because he was also one of them: before entering politics he had been a furniture exporter, and thus understood what it was like to be mummified by Indonesia’s notorious red tape. Foreign investors were pleased that he welcomed them, and hoped he would make Indonesia less protectionist.

Jokowi vowed to return Indonesia to 7% growth and promised a cabinet staffed by technocrats rather than party hacks. He recognised that the era of commodity-driven growth was over. He said he wanted to attract high-value manufacturing and services, and realised that would require massive infrastructure investment and a better business climate. In the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business index, Indonesia ranks a woeful 109 of 189.

Jokowi got off to a strong start, trimming his country’s wasteful fuel subsidies after just three months in office. Since then, however, the enthusiasm that greeted his election has begun to curdle. He has promised far more than he has delivered so far. Not only has growth failed to pick up, it has continued to slow: preliminary figures show that GDP last year increased by just 4.8%, the lowest rate since 2009. For all the talk about infrastructure investment, too few shovels have hit dirt. Confused policy guidance and lost fights with his party have made him look weak. His foreign policy initially appeared prickly: he blew up neighbours’ fishing boats and executed foreign drug dealers. Fears of radicalisation and religious intolerance are growing. And after seven years of calm, terrorism returned to Jakarta in January: jihadists struck the centre of town, killing four civilians. Many wonder whether their pre-election confidence in Jokowi was misplaced.

This special report will argue that it was not. But in office Jokowi has struggled to find the sense of purpose that drove him as a candidate. His often diffident leadership style has caused needless confusion; economic liberalisation has been slow; and he has shown less appetite than expected for taking on vested interests. He promised voters he would change the sytem. The following articles will explain what he must do to fulfill that promise.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21693411-joko-widodo-was-elected-shake-up-indonesias-politics-and-make-his-country-richer-he/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Politics

Lone fighter

Jokowi’s independence is a double-edged sword

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



CAMPAIGN POSTERS AND rallies reveal much about what a politician wants voters to think of him. During Indonesia’s 2014 presidential campaign, two conservative candidates, Prabowo Subianto and Hatta Rajasa, wore buttoned-up white shirts and black songkok caps in many of their posters, recalling Sukarno, Indonesia’s strongly nationalist first president, who always wore a songkok in public. Mr Prabowo also wanted to project toughness; military themes figured heavily in his slogans and posters. As a general in Indonesia’s special forces under Suharto, the first elected president, he was accused of multiple human-rights violations, including the kidnapping, torture and “disappearance” of democracy activists.

By contrast, Jokowi usually appeared at rallies and on posters wearing a checked shirt, the garb of an ordinary Indonesian. His image, his background and, often, his words implicitly rejected traditional Indonesian politics. He promised to appoint a technocratic cabinet and oversee a “mental revolution” that would drive corruption from politics. As a first step he would strengthen the KPK, Indonesia’s anti-graft body. One short, simple slogan encapsulated his appeal: jujur, bersih, sederhana (honest, clean, humble).

Some of Jokowi’s supporters are now disappointed. As they see it, the candidate who promised to change the system has—in the words of Marcus Mietzner at Australian National University—“entered into arrangements with elite actors that resemble those made by his predecessor”. He has cut too many compromises and failed to confront Indonesia’s vested interests. But others insist that the president is simply picking his battles, and large-scale change inevitably takes time.

Both claims have some truth to them. Jokowi came into office already hobbled. First, the party he represents, the Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P), holds just 105 of 560 parliamentary seats (see chart, next page), forcing him into an awkward coalition with smaller parties, all of which demand concessions in return. Second, unlike almost every other post-Suharto president, he does not head his party. Though he had been widely expected to channel his immense popular support into forming his own party, he instead accepted the PDI-P’s nomination less than four months before the election. The party’s boss is Megawati Sukarnoputri, herself a former president and daughter of Sukarno. Both she and his running mate, Jusuf Kalla, are prime examples of the sort of elite Jakarta politicians Jokowi was widely expected to take on, not accommodate.

According to Mr Mietzner, Ms Megawati “expected absolute reverence” from Jokowi. In her speech at the 2015 party congress she said that the “president and vice-president naturally enforce a political party’s policy line”. The president was not even invited to speak. Since then, says Mr Mietzner, the two leaders have “settled into an uncomfortable and awkwardly polite truce”.

Jokowi’s supporters were also disappointed by his initial cabinet, which included more party appointees than many expected. In subsequent reshuffles some of these were swapped for technocrats. Many in the business community were especially happy to see the back of the trade minister, Rachmat Gobel, whose penchant for protectionism led some foreign businessmen to dub him “the minister of no trade”. He was replaced by Tom Lembong, a 44-year-old former investment banker who previously ran a private-equity fund that invested in Indonesia.

I say I say I say

The reformists and the traditionalists in Jokowi’s cabinet have often clashed, both with each other and with him. Last August, for instance, the home ministry said it was about to issue a regulation requiring foreign journalists to seek permission from local governments before doing any reporting. A day later Jokowi revoked the plan. The government also considered and then backed away from imposing road-toll taxes, requiring foreigners working in Indonesia to pass a language test and banning some popular ride-sharing apps. These flip-flops illustrate the central problem with Jokowi’s administration to date: the president has the right ideas, but his ministries do not know how to implement them or feel they can ignore orders from the top.

One reason for that may be Jokowi’s style: he is a poor orator and has proved reluctant to engage in the public arena. He is happiest when solving practical problems. That is an admirable quality in a mayor, but a president set on reforming Indonesia’s immense and powerful administration needs to be more strategic and has to rally his countrymen behind him.

As far as Jokowi is concerned, “bureaucracy must serve the business community and investors…we have to simplify it, [and] change the mindset of the bureaucrat.” The appointment of business-friendly ministers such as Mr Lembong signals the president’s serious intentions: the question is whether he can put them into effect.

In one crucial way he has already changed his country’s politics for the better, blazing a path to the presidency from outside the Jakarta elite that others could follow. His much-praised successor as governor of Jakarta, Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, known as Ahok, is the first Chinese Christian to run Indonesia’s biggest city. The mayor of Surabaya has made her city virtually litter-free. The regent of remote Banyuwangi in east Java has built much-needed roads. These jobs now look like viable launch pads for a national political career.

“Jokowi’s heart is in the right place,” says Andreas Harsono, head of Human Rights Watch in Indonesia. “But he is putting his political capital on the economy.” Taking on vested political interests will have to wait. For now, he will concentrate on improving the country’s infrastructure and business climate.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21693409-jokowis-independence-double-edged-sword-lone-fighter/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Corruption

The Setya show

The roots of corruption go deep and wide

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR SEVERAL WEEKS last December, Indonesians were glued to their televisions and smartphones to follow a series of ethics hearings convened by the House of Representatives, the larger of Indonesia’s two legislative bodies. Setya Novanto, the colourful House speaker, faced allegations of corruption. What happened subsequently shows the progress Jokowi has made in his fight for cleaner government. It also shows how much remains to be done.

That Indonesia has a longstanding corruption problem is all but undisputed. In the Corruption Perception Index published by Transparency International (TI), Indonesia ranked 88th out of 168 countries last year (see chart). According to TI’s Global Corruption Barometer, 86% of Indonesians thought that their political parties and their judiciary were corrupt.

The European Union has chastised Indonesia for its “widespread political corruption”, “corrupt judiciary” and “extensive bribery”. Donors providing money for political campaigns expect their generosity to be rewarded. Indonesians also complain about the innumerable “expediting fees” bureaucrats demand for service, and foreign businesses worry that Indonesia’s court system may not serve them well.

Other presidents before Jokowi have tried to crack down. The KPK, or anti-graft agency, was set up under Ms Megawati, in 2002. It is widely respected, though many complain that it is chronically underfunded and understaffed and brings too few cases. Mr Yudhoyono proclaimed a “zero tolerance” policy towards graft at the start of his presidency in 2004 and made some progress, but was beset by scandals within his own party.

Jokowi was the first president to take office with a strong anti-corruption record, having earned a reputation for clean governance when he was running Solo and Jakarta. As governor of Jakarta he posted regional budgets in public places to improve transparency. He also made it easier for some taxes to be paid online, which meant fewer opportunities for dishonest bureaucrats. Since he became president, he has overseen a push for online procurement, which he claims has saved his country billions of dollars.

Mr Setya is the consummate political insider. He has served as a member of parliament for Golkar, the party of Suharto, for 17 years. Last June he requested a private meeting with Maroef Sjamsoeddin, until recently the head of Freeport Indonesia, a local division of Freeport McMoran, an American mining firm. Freeport wants to invest $17 billion in its Grasberg facility in Papua, the world’s largest gold and third-largest copper mine, but only if its mining licence, due to expire in 2021, is extended until 2041. Jokowi has refused to open negotiations on an extension before 2019.

Mr Maroef secretly recorded a meeting with Mr Setya at which Muhammad Riza Chalid, an oil trader, was also reportedly present. Mr Setya allegedly offered Mr Maroef a deal: in return for a 20% stake in Freeport Indonesia, he would persuade Jokowi to extend the licence, claiming that the stake was not for him but for Jokowi and Mr Kalla, his vice-president. Mr Riza and Mr Setya allegedly boasted that they had bought off Darmawan Prasodjo, an assistant to the president’s chief of staff.

Jokowi, Mr Kalla and Mr Darmawan have all denied involvement in the plot, which came to light when Sudirman Said, Jokowi’s energy minister, delivered the recording to the House ethics council. When quizzed by the council, Mr Setya claimed he was “joking”. Questioned by the attorney-general, he denied asking for shares in Jokowi’s and Mr Kalla’s names. On December 16th he suddenly resigned the speakership.

Jokowi and Messrs Kalla and Darmawan are widely believed to be blameless. After all, it was Jokowi’s own energy minister who blew the whistle. And even Jokowi’s detractors have never suggested that he himself is corrupt—only that he has been too accommodating to vested interests. In some ways, his reputation has been enhanced by the affair. For the first time a case of large-scale corruption has been adjudicated in public. Many talk of Indonesia’s “Watergate moment”.

Even so, Mr Setya has filed a police report against Messrs Sudirman and Maroef for defamation and illegal recording. And not only does he retain his seat in parliament, he is considered a frontrunner in Golkar’s forthcoming leadership election.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21693410-roots-corruption-go-deep-and-wide-setya-show/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business and economics

Roll out the welcome mat

To secure the growth it needs, Indonesia must resist its protectionist urges

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



AS YOU DRIVE (or more likely, sit and stew in traffic) in any of Indonesia’s big cities, you may see dozens of cyclists in green helmets and jackets zooming past your car windows. They are clad in the uniform of Go-Jek, an Indonesian e-commerce firm. Its name is a play on ojek, the Indonesian word for the country’s omnipresent motorcycle taxis. Its app, launched in January, lets users call a driver for a ride or a delivery. Since then the company has seen, in the words of its young founder, Nadiem Makarim, “crazy growth”.

Indonesia is in the midst of an e-commerce startup boom, and no wonder. It is the world’s fourth-largest mobile-phone market, with more SIM cards in use than there are people. Two-fifths of its 255m population—half of whom are under 30—have a smartphone. But the very success of this boom hints at a broader failure. The e-commerce sector is vibrant in large part because the government has not yet worked out how to regulate it. Indonesia’s attitude towards business has in general been hostile. Its labour laws are rigid. To start a business takes an average of 47 days, compared with four in Malaysia and 2.5 in Singapore.

During the long global boom in commodities, firms were obliged to tolerate such red tape, but that no longer holds. Indonesia exports crude oil, natural gas, palm oil, rubber, gold and tin, and is especially rich in coal. Its main commodity exports tripled in value between 2000 and 2010, says Rodrigo Chaves, the World Bank’s country director for Indonesia. As exports boomed, so did the economy. But the value of commodity exports has fallen by more than half from their peak. Bambang Brodjonegoro, Indonesia’s finance minister, laments that coal—which accounts for 11% of exports—now fetches just $50 per tonne, against $150 in 2011.



In the decade to 2014 GDP grew by an annual average of 6%, but the commodity bust has slowed the economy. Last year it grew by just 4.8%, the slowest rate since 2009. This year is unlikely to be much better: the 2016 budget sets a GDP growth target of 5.3%. But compared with many other commodity exporters Indonesia is getting off lightly.

The value of the rupiah, Indonesia’s currency, against the dollar has fallen by a hefty 30% since mid-2013, but has been stable recently, and other emerging-market currencies have fallen even more steeply over that period. Despite the weak exchange rate, inflation has mostly remained within the central bank’s target range of 3-5%. The main impact of the rupiah’s fall has been to curb imports, helping limit Indonesia’s current-account deficit to around 2% of GDP last year in the face of weaker export earnings. A prudent fiscal policy during the boom years has allowed for a modest fiscal expansion to offset the effects of weak exports and investment. Public debt is just 26% of GDP.



The trouble is that GDP growth of around 5% is far below the 8% which the World Bank says Indonesia requires to create jobs for the 2.5m people entering the workforce each year. Indonesia must reform its economy to capitalise on the dividend from a young and growing workforce. As Mr Chaves cautions, “no country became rich after it became old.”

Indonesia will never function as seamlessly as Singapore; it is too big, diverse and fractious. But the size of its domestic market gives it an advantage over smaller countries in attracting foreign investment. Encouragingly, it has a track record of liberalising its policies in troubled times. When its “command socialism” collapsed in the 1960s, it opened resource sectors to foreign investment; when oil prices fell in the 1980s, it developed its capital markets and relaxed restrictions on foreign ownership; and after the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98 it abolished many import controls and tariffs.

To his credit, Jokowi realises that Indonesia cannot lift its long-term growth rate if the economy remains reliant on extractive industries; it needs a broader range of manufacturing and service industries. If new enterprise is to flourish, Indonesia must support local entrepreneurship and woo, rather than merely tolerate, foreign business.

Last April the president told an audience at a World Economic Forum conference in Jakarta that investing in Indonesia would bring “incredible profits”. On his maiden trip to Washington, DC, last October he brought along an entourage of entrepreneurs and businesspeople, and said he was interested in joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership—a free-trade agreement that would commit his country to significant economic liberalisation.

Tom Lembong, who took over as trade minister last August, has promised a more liberal approach to economic policy: a regulator’s job, he says, is to “ensure order and get out of the way”, and protection “is for children, the elderly and the vulnerable…not for adults, and certainly not for companies”. Such pronouncements mark a welcome shift. Hans Vriens, who runs a consultancy focusing on South-East Asian businesses, says Indonesian policymakers “have generally viewed foreign investment as a zero-sum game—if the foreigners have it, something is wrong and we have to take it back—instead of thinking, as Singapore does, about how we can thrive together. As a result, many investors have given Indonesia a miss, despite its size.”

Go-Jek, an Indonesian e-commerce firm offering rides and deliveries, has seen “crazy growth”

Jokowi has done his bit to improve the business climate. At the beginning of last year he launched a one-stop service for licensing businesses, which cuts out the need to spend days dashing from one ministry to another. And since last September he has unveiled a series of measures to help business, including easing some onerous regulations, cutting industrial energy tariffs, streamlining licensing procedures for firms on industrial estates and providing tax incentives to invest in special economic zones. Mr Bambang says that under Jokowi the average number of days needed to open a power plant has declined from 900 to 200 (“still short of international standards”, he concedes). The government recently revised its “negative investment list” of sectors in which foreign ownership is banned or restricted, fully opening up the rubber, film and restaurant sectors, among others.

The government’s spending plans have become more ambitious. Soon after taking office, Jokowi’s administration began rolling out programmes to provide poor Indonesians with government-funded health care, free schooling for 12 years and tertiary education for students accepted into university, as well as a scheme to provide each of Indonesia’s 15.5m poorest households with a cash transfer of 200,000 rupiah ($14.37) a month.

Jokowi says his administration’s health-care programme now covers 88m people, but it already faces a huge shortfall. The government has wisely used savings from cutting fuel subsidies to fund extra capital spending. But the budget deficit still widened to 2.8% of GDP, perilously close to the legal limit of 3%. If public spending is to increase further, the government will need to raise more revenue.

That will not be easy. Most workers and employers pay little or no tax. Mr Bambang estimates that only 27m of Indonesia’s 255m people are registered taxpayers, and in 2014 just 900,000 of them paid what they owed. Much of the fault lies with Indonesia’s Byzantine tax system. The country’s tax inspectors are poorly paid, which makes them easier to bribe. Last year Indonesia collected just 82% of its targeted tax revenue, leaving it with a tax-to-GDP ratio of around 10%, compared with around 13-15% for its ASEAN neighbours and near 40% in western Europe.

Government officials claim that they want to broaden the taxpayer base, but big companies say that they are being squeezed harder by the taxman because they are an easier target. A steady stream of new protectionist rules suggests that other business-bashing instincts still hold sway. A law requiring that by 2017, 30% of all parts for smartphones and tablets sold in Indonesia must be locally made took effect last summer. Last August limits on cattle imports sent beef prices soaring. Revisions to the negative investment list eased restrictions on 30 sectors but boosted them in 19 others. Indonesia’s bureaucracy, complains one foreign businessman, remains “oriented towards control rather than facilitation”.

Where there has been reform, it has not always been well implemented. The one-stop shop for licensing might save a bit of time, but many business folk say that the rules are confusing. Licences are still cumbersome and onerous. Shell, for instance, has around 80 service stations in Indonesia, mostly around Jakarta, for which it needs around 1,500 permits—for safety, water, fire protection, site use and so forth—that must be renewed annually. That takes dozens of people to manage.

Investors often complain that the welcome message from the president has not reached his ministries or local governments, or has arrived too late to prevent confusing about-turns. Go-Jek got a fright in December when the transport ministry declared that “services that demand payment using a private vehicle are not legal.” A day later Jokowi publicly chastised his transport minister and rescinded the ban. Other sectors have seen similar flip-flops, giving the impression of a chaotic administration with no clear policy direction.

Yet this has already begun to change following several cabinet reshuffles, and may improve further as the government settles in. And in one important regard, Indonesia has taken a giant step forward. Whereas past governments failed to invest adequately in infrastructure, particularly outside Java, Jokowi has made the biggest push of his young presidency in this field.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21693405-secure-growth-it-needs-indonesia-must-resist-its-protectionist-urges-roll-out/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Infrastructure

The 13,466-island problem

After decades of underinvestment, infrastructure spending is picking up at last

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

A wealth of coastline

AS THE LOGISTICS manager walks from his firm’s office trailer to the dockside at Tanjung Priok, Jakarta’s port, he rails against inefficiency. The port’s equipment is outdated, the workers are slow and practices slipshod. Shipping companies want to make a quick buck while stopping their competitors from doing the same, leading to permanent gridlock.

A few small victories have been won. Shippers at other terminals must slip stevedores and crane operators a few thousand rupiah to get their containers off the ship and onto lorries, but not here. He has trained his workers to “do it now, not five minutes from now”, so they are on track to hit their target of moving 28 containers per crane-hour. But he cannot control what happens outside his terminal. Stevedoring associations, shipping companies and greedy bureaucrats profit from the inefficiency of Indonesia’s ports, block reforms and fiercely guard their own interests, he claims (hence his wish to remain anonymous).

Too few roads, berths and systems; too many ships, cars and grasping hands, leading to high costs and lost time: that is Indonesia’s infrastructure problem in a nutshell. Jokowi has staked his presidency on solving it, reasoning that improved infrastructure will help bring foreign investment and good jobs to Indonesia as well as helping residents of the poor, far-flung east get their products out.

His ambition has been widely cheered. In the short term infrastructure spending puts people to work and boosts demand for raw materials; in the longer term his plans offer the chance to make up for decades of neglect and underinvestment. In the mid-1990s Indonesia invested around 8% of its GDP in infrastructure every year. After the Asian financial crisis that share fell to around 3%, then started rising again slowly. But in 2014, at 6.4%, it was still below the steady 7% which China, Thailand and Vietnam had been maintaining.

That underinvestment has sent Indonesia’s logistics costs soaring. Between 2004 and 2011 they averaged 27% of GDP, compared with 25% in Vietnam, 20% in Thailand, 13% in Malaysia and 8% in Singapore. Logistics bottlenecks force companies either to stock up on supplies, driving up inventory costs, or suffer large price fluctuations, particularly at times of heavy travel.

In Tanjung Priok in May last year it took an average of 6.4 days for containers to leave the port after being unloaded. Improved systems have brought the time down to just over four days, says Jokowi, but according to the World Bank that is still around four times as long as in Singapore—and this is Indonesia’s busiest and most advanced port. Many of the country’s 1,700 other ports are not even containerised. Such backlogs drive up the cost of basic goods. And once lorries move the goods out of port, they are in the twisted, narrow streets of Jakarta, which has some of the world’s worst traffic. In all, the World Bank estimates that underinvestment in infrastructure cost Indonesia at least one percentage point of GDP growth annually from 2004 to 2014.

Jokowi plans to increase infrastructure spending throughout his first term, peaking at around 7.7% of GDP by 2017. Indonesia intends to build 24 new seaports and 15 new airports by 2019. Its energy demand could triple by 2030 as it urbanises and its middle class expands, so over the next five years it wants to add 35GW of power, doubling total installed capacity in a decade.

It also has plans for 65 dams, 16 of which are already under construction. In March last year work started on the Keureuto dam, designed to boost agricultural productivity in Aceh. Last September fields were flooded for the massive Jatigede dam in West Java, after 20 years of delays. Once complete, the dam will irrigate 90,000 hectares of rice paddy, giving farmers two harvests a year instead of one.

Last April, also after many delays, construction began on the Trans-Sumatra toll road, a $23.1 billion highway that will connect Aceh and Lampung, on the northern and southern tips of Indonesia’s largest island. The Trans-Java toll road, running from east to west across Indonesia’s most populous island, is scheduled for completion in 2017, but some sections are already finished and have cut travel times dramatically. Driving from Jakarta to the town of Subang in west Java, for instance, used to take around six hours, but on the new highway connecting Jakarta and Cikampek it takes less than two.

It has not been a straightforward job. This particular section of the Trans-Java toll road runs through five regencies, each of which had its own team working on the project. That called for a further team to co-ordinate all the others. It took nine years to build 73 kilometres of highway.

Jokowi complains that local governments are sitting on trillions of rupiah in unused infrastructure money from the central government, which can neither spend the money on their behalf nor tell them what to do with it. All he can do, he says, is cajole and hector them.

Ocean view

His biggest bet, though, is on maritime infrastructure. In his inaugural speech he laid out his ambitions: “We have turned our back on the seas, oceans, straits and bays for too long…[They] are the future of our civilisation…We have to work as hard as possible to turn Indonesia into a maritime nation once again.”

That makes sense: Indonesia, after all, is the world’s biggest archipelago, with 13,466 islands spanning some 5,000 kilometres. It has the world’s second-longest coastline after Canada, an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles and around 93,000 square kilometres of inland waters. Yet with all those resources it exports just $4.2 billion-worth of fish annually, compared with $5.7 billion for Vietnam and $7.2 billion for Thailand, both of which have smaller coastlines and less territorial water.

Indonesia claims that this is partly because other countries’ vessels are plundering its territorial waters. Last year the government estimated that 90% of the boats in Indonesian waters were fishing illegally, costing the country around $20 billion annually in lost revenue. Shortly after being sworn in as fisheries minister, Susi Pudjiastuti—a tattooed, chain-smoking divorcee who founded a large charter airline and had never before held political office—seized and blew up (having first removed the crews) around 40 vessels from neighbouring countries found fishing in its waters without permission. Since then dozens more have been sunk. This has proved popular with Indonesians and, according to Ms Susi’s ministry, effective, causing a marked decline in the number of vessels fishing illegally.

Apart from repelling outsiders, Indonesia also hopes to wring more value from its waters. The government has banned bottom trawling, selling undersized crustaceans and fishing in tuna breeding grounds to keep its fisheries sustainable. It also plans to build salt-harvesting and seaweed-processing facilities, as well as cold-storage units to keep catches fresh longer. These investments will help further another of Jokowi’s goals: spreading prosperity eastwards, to Indonesia’s most far-flung islands.

Most of Indonesia’s people, wealth and economic activity are concentrated on densely populated Java; the rest of the country, above all the islands past Bali, just east of Java, has felt neglected. GDP per person per year in Jakarta is roughly 41.2m rupiah ($2,890); in Papua, Indonesia’s easternmost province, it is 12.3m, and in Maluku just 2.8m. The hope is that better infrastructure will help bring down the cost of basic goods in the east, generate better jobs—particularly in processing local raw materials—and make it cheaper to get goods out.

Many Indonesia-watchers turned sceptical in the first half of 2015 after lots of projects had been announced, tendered, and contracts handed out, but little money had been disbursed. But in the second half of last year infrastucture spending picked up. Under Jokowi’s master plan, 30% of infrastructure spending will need to come from the private sector; PwC, a consulting firm, thinks that the private sector’s share may need to rise to as much as 50%. In the current fiscal year the World Bank has approved $800m in infrastructure loans to Indonesia, with another $950m pending. The Asian Development Bank has committed itself to lending $2 billion. In December Japan’s development agency lent Indonesia around $535m for two power stations.

But ground-breaking has so far been painfully slow, and even if Jokowi can get all the funding he wants, it still may prove inadequate. McKinsey, another consulting firm, estimates that Indonesia will have to spend at least $600 billion over the next decade to meet its infrastructure needs. And much of Indonesia’s bureaucracy has stubbornly resisted Jokowi’s calls for speed, transparency and efficiency. Land-acquisition laws are tortuous, and everything takes an inordinate amount of time.

Planning for the Jakarta-Cikampek section of the Trans-Java highway, for instance, began in 1997; the concession was signed in 2006; land acquisition began in 2009; construction did begin in 2013; and even now the highway operator and numerous landowners are still fighting each other in court. An amended law passed last year streamlines the acquisition process and opens it up to foreigners, but any improvement will start from a low base. As with everything else, the question is not so much what Jokowi wants to do as what he will be able to do, and how soon.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21693404-after-decades-underinvestment-infrastructure-spending-picking-up-last/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Foreign policy

Less talk, more action

Indonesia’s stance towards the rest of the world has become more assertive

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



IN 2009 SUSILO BAMBANG YUDHOYONO, in his second inaugural speech as president, boasted that Indonesia could “exercise its foreign policy freely in all directions, having a million friends and zero enemies.” Its foreign-policy goals, he said, were “advancing multilateralism through the United Nations and creating harmony among countries”. That may have been a little glowing. Mr Yudhoyono did take a more active role in climate-change talks and within the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), and he founded the Bali Democracy Forum, an annual talking-shop for Asian democracies. Yet he seemed to favour multilateralism not as a means of furthering Indonesia’s interests but as an end in itself, and as a way to avoid making difficult decisions.

His successor has adopted a markedly different stance. Jokowi’s inaugural speech laid out a vision of an “independent and active foreign policy dedicated to the national interest”, an implicit rebuke to his predecessor. And after returning from his first foreign trip as president, to an AsiaPacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) summit, Jokowi asked: “What’s the point of having many friends but we get only the disadvantages?”

Some saw this remark as evidence of Jokowi’s lack of sophistication: Jokowi had no previous foreign-policy experience and the subject played no part in his presidential campaign, though his foreign minister, Retno Marsudi, has been in the diplomatic service for her entire career. People close to Jokowi say he has little patience for formal summits with their protocols, glad-handing and anodyne statements, preferring focused, practical one-on-one meetings with other leaders.

Jokowi asked: “What’s the point of having many friends but we get only the disadvantages?”

The world got a taste of Indonesia’s new assertiveness less than three months after Jokowi took office when he approved the executions of five foreign drug traffickers, despite pleas from their governments. Seven months later Indonesia executed another seven foreign traffickers, including two Australians (members of the infamous Bali Nine trafficking ring). Mr Yudhoyono, who had introduced a partial moratorium on executions, was criticised at home at the time; many felt he was giving in to foreign pressure. Jokowi’s decision to execute the two Australians enjoyed widespread public support in Indonesia. Abroad the move triggered diplomatic protests, but seems to have done little damage to Indonesia’s international relations.

Ms Retno, the foreign minister, says Jokowi is pursuing a “more concrete” foreign policy, and outlines four priorities. The first is to safeguard Indonesia’s territorial integrity. That could lead to confrontation: for example, Indonesia has at least ten outstanding land-border disputes with Malaysia.

More pressingly, China’s claims in the South China Sea overlap with waters claimed by Indonesia around the Natuna islands, off the northern coast of Borneo, which are rich in natural-gas deposits. Ms Retno insists the islands “belong to Indonesia. Done. If there is a competing claim, come talk to us.” She says Indonesia wants to develop the regional gasfields. China recognises Indonesian sovereignty over the Natunas themselves but claims the waters around them. Last September the Indonesian defence minister announced plans to upgrade the Natunas’ port and runway to accommodate warships and fighter jets.

A second foreign-policy priority is to protect Indonesians abroad, including thousands of women working as domestics and men as manual labourers in Malaysia and the Gulf States. Third, Ms Retno makes it clear that its ambassadors are expected to promote Indonesian exports and inward investment.

The last item on Ms Retno’s list is “international involvement”. That was Mr Yudhoyono’s top priority, but the current government prefers to concentrate on specific instances—notably counter-terrorism, and the risk posed by Islamic State (IS) to the world’s most populous Muslim country. Indonesia is roughly 88% Muslim, mainly Sunni but with some Shias and Ahmadis; the other five officially recognised Indonesian religious groups are Catholics, Protestants, Hindus, Buddhists and Confucians (see chart). By tradition, Indonesians practise a syncretic, tolerant form of Islam, and the country respects religious differences.

Some complain that this is starting to change. Shias and Ahmadis say they are increasingly being targeted and harassed. Ms Retno insists that Indonesia’s two biggest civil Muslim groups, Nahdlatul Ulama and Muhammadiyah, offer “a counterscript to eliminate terrorism [and] sell the virtues of tolerance and moderation”. Even so, terrorists have recently struck: on January 14th an IS-inspired attack on Western and police targets in central Jakarta killed eight and wounded at least 23.

Sidney Jones, an expert on South-East Asian security who heads the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict, a think-tank, estimates that 250 Indonesian men are currently fighting with IS in Syria. Some 2,000 Indonesians have publicly proclaimed allegiance to the organisation. Jemaah Islamiyah, a militant Islamist terrorist group active in South-East Asia, bombed several Western targets in Indonesia between 2001 and 2009, but in recent years its sporadic attacks have focused on the police and the armed forces.

Given the size of Indonesia’s population, the number of people involved in terrorism is tiny. For all the country’s flaws, it remains a largely stable, open, tolerant society without a seething reservoir of frustrated, underemployed young men open to radicalisation. If Jokowi’s foreign policy can keep it that way, it may do more to ensure peace at home and in the region than any number of well-meaning summits.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21693407-indonesias-stance-towards-rest-world-has-become-more-assertive-less-talk-more/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Forests

A world on fire

Until politicians call a halt, Indonesia’s forests will keep burning

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS ONE of the most important trips of his young presidency. Last October Jokowi and a bevy of advisers and businesspeople went to Washington, DC, to meet Barack Obama. They were due to go on to Silicon Valley to show off Indonesia’s burgeoning startups. But as his team flew west, Jokowi flew east, summoned home by a crisis: Kalimantan and Sumatra were blanketed by the haze of hundreds of thousands of fires.

Such fires rage every year, but in 2015 a dry spell caused by the El Niño weather pattern made them especially severe. Smoke settled over Singapore for months and even reached Cambodia, Vietnam and the Philippines. At least 2m hectares of forest were burned. Dozens of people were killed and hundreds of thousands sickened. For much of last October greenhouse gases released by those fires exceeded the emissions of the entire American economy. The losses over five months of fires amounted to around 2% of the country’s GDP.

Last year was worse than usual, but only in degree, not in kind. Between 2001 and 2014 the country lost 18.5m hectares of tree cover—an area more than twice the size of Ireland. In 2014 Indonesia overtook Brazil to become the world’s biggest deforester.

One of the reasons for those forest fires is economic. The country produces well over half the world’s palm oil, a commodity used in cooking and cosmetics, as a food additive and as a biofuel. It accounts for around 4.5% of Indonesia’s GDP, and demand is still rising. To meet it, Indonesian farmers set fires to clear forest and make way for new plantations. Often these forests grow on peatlands, which store carbon from decayed organic matter; in tropical regions these hold up to ten times as much carbon as surface soil. Draining peatlands releases all of that carbon. The peat also becomes a fuel, so it is not just felled trees that are burning but the ground itself.



But politics also plays a part. The government’s response to last autumn’s haze was no better than it had been under Jokowi’s predecessors. The president declared a moratorium on peatland-development licences and called for peat forests to be restored, even as his agriculture minister pointed out that burned peatland can be used for corn and soyabean planting. Neither set of comments made any discernible difference on the ground in Sumatra and Kalimantan. To cap it all, Jusuf Kalla, the vice-president, came up with a creative response to Singapore’s complaints about the air pollution: “For 11 months our neighbours enjoyed nice air from Indonesia and they never thanked us.” Fortunately for Indonesia (and the planet) the rainy season put an end to the mayhem in late October.

Why it won’t stop

Yet the reasons for the fires have not gone away. Slash-and-burn land preparation is cheap. Indonesia’s land-use laws are complex and have been inconsistently interpreted and applied. There is no agreed map showing all plantations and (often competing) claims of ownership. Responsibility for developing and approving plans for forest use is spread among at least three ministries, along with the national parliament, as well as provincial governors and district heads, local parliaments and forestry officials. These groups rarely co-ordinate their plans, and their interests often clash. The president and national ministers may understand the benefits of conservation, but local officials have little interest in curbing their revenues for a nebulous goal such as “sustainability”.

Directives from the top often go unheeded at the bottom, thanks to corruption and lack of political will. Back in 2010 Norway pledged $1 billion in conditional aid to Mr Yudhoyono to help Indonesia stop deforestation, but the conditions were not met and not much has been paid out.

Civil-society groups have had some success. At least 188 Indonesian palm-oil companies have made some sort of sustainability pledge, including five large multinational firms that in 2014 signed the Indonesian Palm Oil Pledge (IPOP), which commits them to avoiding deforestation and planting oil palms on peatland. Together those five firms account for 80% of Indonesia’s palm-oil exports.

All the same, deforestation continues. Perversely, it may even have increased temporarily, as companies cleared as much land as they could before the agreement took effect. Besides, opaque supply chains allow companies to buy palm oil from suppliers not bound by IPOP.

Glenn Hurowitz at the Centre for International Policy says that when big palm-oil companies are shown evidence of deforesting, they respond. But that kind of monitoring is done only on an ad-hoc basis. It is no substitute for clearer land-use laws, better local governance and more enforcement on the ground. And for those things to materialise, Jokowi will need to give a strong lead and make sure others follow.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21693412-until-politicians-call-halt-indonesias-forests-will-keep-burning-world-fire/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Looking ahead

The country of the future

It will take ruthless determination, as well as luck, to realise Indonesia’s potential

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Hurry, time is short

NINETEEN YEARS AGO the Asian financial crisis left Indonesia in dire straits. Between July 1997 and January 1998 the rupiah lost 80% of its value against the dollar. Shares plunged, banks were nationalised, inflation and unemployment soared. It seemed like a disaster, but in retrospect many Indonesians see it as a blessing. In the wake of the crisis, Indonesia introduced a host of overdue reforms.

Today there is no crisis, but the country is being held back by a set of interrelated problems that prevent it from doing as well as it might, above all low commodity prices, slow global trade and limp demand from China. Fortunately, Indonesia is in a better position than many other commodity exporters to weather the storm. The World Bank expects its growth to be above 5% both this year and next.

Rising wages in China are offering Indonesia the chance to pick up some labour-intensive manufacturing for export. But Indonesia’s neighbours also want that business, so Indonesia will have to compete on policy and merit. To prosper in this new environment, it must act faster and more boldly to seize the opportunities on offer.

Jokowi, to his credit, understands this: “Now is the era of competition,” he says. “Good quality, on-time delivery and competitive prices are all important.” Asked which country’s development models he most admires, he mentions Singapore, the UAE and Vietnam.

But Indonesia is a different sort of place: huge, diverse and increasingly unwieldy. Residents of Jakarta send out more tweets than those of any other city on earth, yet around one-fifth of the population does not even have access to electricity. In her book “Indonesia Etc”, Elizabeth Pisani writes: “Indonesia’s diversity is not just geographic and cultural; different groups are essentially living at different points in human history, all at the same time.” Travelling from Jakarta to the Maluku islands can seem like going back in time.

Indonesians have enthusiastically embraced democracy; in each five-year cycle they vote in a dizzying array of separate presidential, parliamentary and local elections. When Suharto resigned, Indonesia had 26 provinces and around 300 regencies and cities; it now has 34 and 514, respectively, and each regency or city has its own parliament or city council.

Jokowi’s supporters point to the admirable progress he has made in his short time in office: ending fuel subsidies, making it easier and quicker for private buyers to acquire land, opening sectors previously closed to foreign investors and, perhaps most important, setting an example of graft-free leadership for others to follow. Infrastructure spending has recently accelerated and the outlook for growth is positive.

But not everyone is convinced. Mr Yudhoyono, the doubters say, also showed great promise at the beginning of his decade in office, but it ended in disappointment. They point to the gap between targets and results so far in infrastructure, tax collection and growth rates. “Indonesia is the country of the future,” says one disillusioned foreign businessman, “and it always will be.” That is too cynical. Still, the crucial question is not so much what Jokowi wants to do but what he can deliver. Two main scenarios are emerging.

Way to go

In the first, infrastructure investment continues to accelerate. By 2019 Indonesia has highways spanning Java and Sumatra and ports dotted across the east. Messrs Lembong and Bambang press on with deregulation and Jokowi holds out against protectionist measures from parliament, keeps control of his more recalcitrant ministries and maintains his onslaught against corruption. Manufacturing once again becomes the biggest contributor to Indonesia’s GDP. He returns Indonesia to 7% growth, and appreciative voters re-elect him in 2019, endorsing economic liberalism for the first time in the country’s history.

In a second scenario, things on all these fronts go much less well. Jokowi is unable to push through his reforms and by 2019 growth is below 5%. He loses the election to a candidate favoured by the old guard and Indonesia is back to business as usual—except that nobody even calls it the country of the future any more.

In real life the outcome will no doubt fall somewhere in the middle. Jokowi has made a career of defying expectations, and he is playing a long game. But raising growth to 7% through export-led manufacturing will be a challenge. Geography puts Indonesia at a logistical disadvantage, and other South-East Asian countries such as Vietnam and Thailand do better on deregulation and infrastructure. By the time of the next election, Indonesia’s demographic dividend will have a scant decade to run. Jokowi has much to do, and little time to get it done.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21693406-it-will-take-ruthless-determination-well-luck-realise-indonesias-potential/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Industry in China: The march of the zombies

The India-China trade gap: Arrive full, leave empty

The film business: Fading stars

Hollywood: Silver-screen playbook

Natural resources: Flare-up

German industry: Town and company

Schumpeter: On the stump





Articles Sections Next

Industry in China

The march of the zombies

China’s excess industrial capacity harms its economy and riles its trading partners

Feb 27th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition



“OVERSUPPLY is a global problem and a global problem requires collaborative efforts by all countries.” Those defiant words were uttered by Gao Hucheng, China’s minister of commerce, at a press conference held on February 23rd in Beijing. Mr Gao was responding to the worldwide backlash against the rising tide of Chinese industrial exports, by suggesting that everyone is to blame.

Oversupply is indeed a global problem, but not quite in the way Mr Gao implies. China’s huge exports of industrial goods are flooding markets everywhere, contributing to deflationary pressures and threatening producers worldwide. If this oversupply were broadly the result of capacity gluts in many countries, then Mr Gao would be right that China should not be singled out. But this is not the case.

China’s surplus capacity in steelmaking, for example, is bigger than the entire steel production of Japan, America and Germany combined. Rhodium Group, a consulting firm, calculates that global steel production rose by 57% in the decade to 2014, with Chinese mills making up 91% of this increase. In industry after industry, from paper to ships to glass, the picture is the same: China now has far too much supply in the face of shrinking internal demand. Yet still the expansion continues: China’s aluminium-smelting capacity is set to rise by another tenth this year. According to Ying Wang of Fitch, a credit-rating agency, around two billion tonnes of gross new capacity in coal mining will open in China in the next two years.



A detailed report released this week by the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China reveals that industrial overcapacity has surged since 2008 (see charts). China’s central bank recently surveyed 696 industrial firms in Jiangsu, a coastal province full of factories, and found that capacity utilisation had “decreased remarkably”. Louis Kuijs of Oxford Economics, a research outfit, calculates that the “output gap”—between production and capacity—for Chinese industry as a whole was zero in 2007; by 2015, it was 13.1% for industry overall, and much higher for heavy industry.

Scarier than ghosts

Much has been made of China’s property bubble in recent years, with shrill exposés of “ghost cities”. There has been excessive investment in property in places, but many of the supposedly empty cities do eventually fill up. China’s grotesque overinvestment in industrial goods is a far bigger problem. Analysis by Janet Hao of the Conference Board, a research group, shows that investment growth in the manufacture of mining equipment and other industrial kit far outpaced that in property from 2000 to 2014. This binge has left many state-owned firms vulnerable to slowdown, turning them into profitless zombies.

Chinese industrial firms last year posted their first annual decline in aggregate profits since 2000. Deutsche Bank estimates that a third of the companies that are taking on more debt to cover existing loan repayments are in industries with overcapacity. Returns on assets of state firms, which dominate heavy industry, are a third those seen at private firms, and half those of foreign-owned firms in China.

The roots of this mess lie in China’s response to the financial crisis in 2008. Officials shovelled money indiscriminately at state firms in infrastructure and heavy industry. The resulting overcapacity creates even bigger headaches for China than for the rest of the world. The overhang is helping to push producer prices remorselessly downward: January saw their 47th consecutive month of declines. Falling output prices add to the pressure on debt-laden state firms.

The good news is that the Chinese have publicly recognised there is a problem. The ruling State Council recently declared dealing with overcapacity to be a national priority. On February 25th the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, which oversees big firms owned by the central government, and several other official bodies said they would soon push ahead with various trial reforms of state enterprises. The bad news is that three of the tacks they are trying only make things worse.

One option is for China’s zombies to export their overcapacity. But even if the Chinese keep their promises not to devalue the yuan further, the flood of cheap goods onto foreign markets has already exacerbated trade frictions. The American government has imposed countervailing duties and tariffs on a variety of Chinese imports. India is alarmed at its rising trade gap with China (see article). Protesters against Chinese imports clogged the streets of Brussels in February. There is also pressure for the European Union to deny China the status of “market economy”, which its government says it is entitled to after 15 years as a World Trade Organisation member, and which would make it harder to pursue claims of Chinese dumping.

Another approach is to keep stimulating domestic demand with credit. In January the government’s broadest measure of credit grew at its fastest rate in nearly a year: Chinese banks extended $385 billion of new loans, a record. But borrowing more as profits dive will only worsen the eventual reckoning for zombie firms.

A third policy is to encourage consolidation among state firms. Some mergers have happened—in areas such as shipping and rail equipment. But there is little evidence of capacity being taken out as a result. Chinese leaders are dancing around the obvious solutions—stopping the flow of cheap credit and subsidised water and energy to state firms; making them pay proper dividends rather than using any spare cash to expand further; and, above all, closing down unviable firms.

That outcome is opposed by provincial officials, who control most of the country’s 150,000 or so publicly owned firms. Local governments are funded in part by company taxes, so party officials are reluctant to shut down local firms no matter how inefficient or unprofitable. They are also afraid of the risk of social unrest arising from mass sackings.

China’s 33 province-level administrations are at least as fractious as the European Union’s 28 member states, jokes Jörg Wuttke, head of the EU Chamber: “On this issue, increasingly Beijing feels like it’s Brussels.” So Mr Gao’s claim that the problem is not entirely his government’s fault may be true in a sense. But in the 1990s China’s leaders did manage bold state-enterprise reforms involving bankruptcies and capacity cuts, that overcame such vested interests. To meet today’s concerns, the central government could provide more generous funding to local governments to offset the loss of tax revenues arising from bankruptcies, and also strengthen unemployment benefits for affected workers.

If China’s current leaders have the courage to implement such policies, there may even be a silver lining. Stephen Shih of Bain, another consulting firm, argues that much quiet modernisation “has been masked in many industries by overcapacity”. For example, little of the fertiliser industry’s capacity used advanced technologies in 2011; most of the new capacity added since then has been the modern sort that is 40% cheaper to operate.

Baosteel Group, a giant state-owned firm, has been forced by Shanghai’s local authorities to shut down dirty old mills in the gleaming city. So its bosses have built a gargantuan new complex in Guangdong province with nearly 9m tonnes of capacity. This highly efficient facility has cutting-edge green technologies that greatly reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, recycle waste gas from blast furnaces and reuse almost all wastewater. “When the older capacity in China is shut down, we’ll have a much more modern industrial sector,” Mr Shih says. “The question is, how long will this take?”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693573-chinas-excess-industrial-capacity-harms-its-economy-and-riles-its-trading-partners-march/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The India-China trade gap

Arrive full, leave empty

India seeks to boost its manufacturing industry and cut the trade deficit

Feb 27th 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition



SHIPS leaving Nhava Sheva port, across the harbour from Mumbai, tend to ride higher on the water than when they arrive. India’s trading statistics explain why: steel and other industrial goods from China weigh down the ships as they come in, to be replaced on the way out by fluffy cotton bales, pills and—given India’s perennial trade deficit in goods—empty containers.

India’s economy grew by 7.5% last year, cruising past China’s 6.9% growth. Yet the deficit in goods trade with China continues to widen (see chart), to over 2% of GDP last year. For Indian policymakers this is an irksome reminder of the weakness of the country’s manufacturers. Halving the trade shortfall with China would be enough to eliminate India’s overall current-account deficit, and thus the need for external financing.



The government’s ideas for shrinking the shortfall have been sadly predictable. The minimum import prices it imposed earlier this month on various grades of Chinese steel, which it claims are being “dumped” below cost, come on top of other anti-dumping levies and taxes on steel and myriad other products, from raw silk to melamine dinner sets. No country has used such measures as energetically as India over the past 20 years, according to the World Trade Organisation.

The commerce minister, Nirmala Sitharaman, has called for a devaluation of the rupee to curb imports and boost exports. Yet the rupee has been falling against the yuan for years, with little effect on trade. And a weakening currency could revive inflation, which falling oil prices and sound monetary policy have helped tame.

The government looks longingly at manufacturing’s 32% share of China’s GDP, roughly double the Indian figure. It sees factories as the ideal way to soak up the million-odd young workers who join the labour force every month. So it is showering sops on various industries. It is handing out subsidised loans to small-scale and labour-intensive industries such as ceramics and bicycle parts. Lightly-taxed “special economic zones”, many of which are set up to benefit a single company, are in line for further handouts.

A “Make in India” jamboree in Mumbai earlier this month sought to present an image of openness to foreign investment, eliciting promises of multi-billion-dollar plants from firms keen to cosy up to policymakers. But India is trying to emulate China’s export-led manufacturing growth in a global economy that is now drowning in China’s industrial surpluses. It hopes to fill the vacuum left by its larger neighbour as Chinese wages rise, to double those of Indians, and its economy rebalances from exports to consumption. Yet so far it has struggled to seize that opportunity.

Indian firms grumble, with some justification, about their products being shut out of the Chinese market. Agricultural products, of which India is a net exporter, are largely excluded from China through various phytosanitary rules. Indian pharmaceutical firms complain that China’s growing aid to other developing countries often includes the provision of medicines—Chinese-made ones, of course—which means that the recipient countries buy fewer Indian-made drugs than they used to.



Why countries are so keen to agree new trade deals

India runs a global surplus in services, mainly by selling them to rich countries. But they are a small component of Indo-Chinese trade. China gets the best of tourist exchanges between the two countries: 181,000 Chinese tourists came to India in 2014, against 730,000 Indians who visited China. All this tortures Indians, for whom China is the biggest source of imports and third-biggest export market, but barely troubles China, for whom India is a second-tier trade partner. Indian policymakers are reflexively sceptical, for example, of China’s plan to build a road linking the countries, worrying it will only widen the trade imbalance.

If China’s consumers won’t buy Indian goods, perhaps its businesses could build factories in India instead? Some big projects have recently been announced, notably a $10 billion industrial park to be developed by Dalian Wanda, a Chinese property group; and a $5 billion plant proposed by Foxconn, a Taiwanese electronics outfit which mainly manufactures in China. Foxconn said last July that it might employ up to 1m Indians in 10-12 plants by 2020, despite suffering labour strife when it closed an existing factory last year. However, foreign investors’ projects often fall quietly by the wayside when bureaucratic obstacles prove insurmountable. Foxconn is already said to be rolling back its ambitions.

After years in the doldrums, India is enjoying its moment as the world’s fastest-growing large economy. That in itself will be enough to pique the interest of multinationals: Apple, for example, thinks a sales push in India can help make up for sluggish Chinese demand. Even so, it will be a while before its devices (whose assembly it outsources to Foxconn) are made in India. Instead, they will further weigh down the ships entering its ports.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693583-india-seeks-boost-its-manufacturing-industry-and-cut-trade-deficit-arrive-full-leave/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The film business

Fading stars

Hollywood studios can no longer bank on the pulling-power of famous actors

Feb 27th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



“DEADPOOL”, which so far has taken more than $500m in cinemas worldwide, is an atypical blockbuster, a foul-mouthed anti-hero film with a mature “R” audience rating. But in one important respect it is typical of many of Hollywood’s most successful movies: it does not rely on a world-famous star to sell it.

In contrast, two recent “star vehicle” films struggled to attract audiences despite heavy promotion and high-profile openings on Christmas Day in America. “Joy”, with Jennifer Lawrence, and “Concussion”, with Will Smith, both failed to earn back their production budgets at the domestic box office and also fared poorly overseas. What happened? Ms Lawrence is by the reckoning of some the biggest star in Hollywood’s firmament; Mr Smith held that unofficial title for years. Have film stars lost some of their lustre?

Overall, the cinema business’s health seems as rude as ever. Revenue from the American box office grew by 6.3% in 2015, to a record high of $11 billion. Thanks to droves of new filmgoers in China, where the market grew by 49% last year, global revenues increased by 4% to $38 billion. The industry has held up well against increased competition from streaming services that give people plenty of options to watch films at home. The stars with the biggest global profiles, such as Tom Cruise and Leonardo DiCaprio, are instantly recognisable in lucrative overseas markets.

But much of the industry’s recent success, at home and abroad, comes from the rise of the big special-effects event film: franchises like “Fast and Furious”, “Avengers”, “The Hunger Games”, “Jurassic Park”, James Bond and “Star Wars” led a group of 14 films with more than $500m each in worldwide box-office takings last year, up from just five such films in 2006.

Such productions are more likely to make stars than to be made by them. “You really don’t want to have a movie star” in certain big franchises, says a senior studio executive: the films will be hits either way, so why pay more? Jennifer Lawrence was not “Jennifer Lawrence, biggest female movie star in the world” until she made the first “Hunger Games” film.

An analysis by The Economist of two decades of box-office results in America and Canada does not refute Ms Lawrence’s status as one of the biggest box-office draws (see article). But it is hard statistically to disentangle her singular appeal from the massive success of the franchise films she has been in. By the same token, she should perhaps not be blamed for the poor performance of “Joy”—“without Jennifer Lawrence in it, it would have been a flop, a total flop,” says the executive.



Hollywood executives still want to believe in stars’ power to get bums on seats, so they will bet again on a headliner even after a few flops. There is some risk-aversion in this: if they make a flop with a big name in it, they are less likely to have to defend their decision to green-light the film.

This conservatism tends to favour the white male actors that have already attained superstar status over the selection of new and diverse talent (as does the fact that the decision-makers are predominantly white males too). The controversy over the lack of any black actor (among other omissions) in the nominees for this year’s Oscars ceremony, on February 28th, is in part the fruit of that mindset.

Academic studies in recent decades have generally failed to find any conclusive evidence to support studio bosses’ faith in stars’ pulling power. Our own analysis suggests only that a few of them do add a bit to box-office receipts. Number-crunchers at Epagogix, a company in London, use an algorithm to project box-office takings of films based on their story elements—including the use of special effects, a surprise ending or a cool location. And they reckon that as long as the stars look good and can act, they make scant difference, with at best a very few exceptions. It helps to have a damsel in distress, but it does not really matter which damsel.

Among the few stars who do, by common consent among studio bosses, producers and agents, seem to be guarantors of success are the biggest comedy actors—names such as Kevin Hart and Melissa McCarthy. This is in part because they signal to the audience precisely what kind of entertainment is on offer, and are good at delivering. Our analysis backs this, with a bunch of leading comedy actors strongly outperforming industry averages. But the trajectories of star careers leave a lot of room for guesswork. Bruce Willis was paid $5m to make “Die Hard” in 1988; some in Hollywood were aghast, but the movie was a huge hit. Then Mr Willis made more flops than hits (excepting the “Die Hard” sequels) before hitting it big again with “The Sixth Sense”. But this time, was it the star or the story?

Prominent among the stars who keep getting hired despite repeated flops is Nicole Kidman, though an algorithm might have predicted that the films she has chosen would fare poorly anyway. “Secret in Their Eyes”, with Ms Kidman and Julia Roberts, once an even bigger star, was the latest example. The film grossed just $20m at American cinemas, the same amount as its modest production budget. STX Entertainment, the studio which released the film, believes that star vehicles can work if the actors’ paydays are lower than the astronomical sums of years past.

Expensive star showcases, where the featured actor could earn salaries of $20m or more and participate in gross receipts, are now rare. In part that is because fans can get their fill of their favourite actors in so many other, cheaper ways than going to the cinema—through social media, on-demand cable and Netflix.

Yet there is one arena where stars are as relevant as ever: the international market. Foreign cinemas like to exhibit films with known names in the lead roles. Some old-school stars are still big draws—the likes of Mr Cruise or even, apparently, Arnold Schwarzenegger. The latter’s 2015 film, “Terminator: Genisys”, a flop in America with $90m in takings on a $155m production budget, was a blockbuster overseas, earning $351m, including $113m in China. Even if big names like these have lost some of their lustre at home, abroad they can be “sort of like supernovas”, the studio executive says. “They have flamed out a long time ago but the light shines on past their death.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693591-hollywood-studios-can-no-longer-bank-pulling-power-famous-actors-fading-stars/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Hollywood

Silver-screen playbook

How to make a hit film

Feb 27th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



IN 1983 William Goldman, a screenwriter, coined the famous saying that in Hollywood, “Nobody knows anything” when it comes to predicting which films will succeed at the box office. To find out how true that remains, we have analysed the performance of more than 2,000 films with a budget of more than $10m, released in America and Canada since 1995, to see which factors help make a movie a hit.

Crunching information from The Numbers, a website that collects data on film releases, and Rotten Tomatoes, an aggregator of critics’ and punters’ reviews, we found that the strongest predictor of absolute box-office receipts is a film’s budget. Even if it got no boost from its cast, from favourable reviews or other factors, a movie would generate an average of 80 cents at American and Canadian cinemas for every dollar a studio promises to spend on it. A film’s budget is announced while it is in production, to create a buzz and signal its quality—though in practice its true cost may vary from the announced figure.

The more a studio commits to producing a film, the more it is likely to spend on advertising it. The budget also helps determine how widely a film is shown. Films with a budget of $10m-40m open, on average, in 1,600 of the 6,000-odd cinemas in America and Canada; those with budgets of over $100m open in 3,500.



Sequels and franchise films are another way for studios to limit their risks. Nearly one in five of the films Hollywood pumps out nowadays is a sequel, up from one in 12 a couple of decades ago. All other things being equal, sequels earn $35m more than non-sequels at the box office. Franchise films increasingly depend on superhero characters. Hollywood made just eight superhero films between 1996 and 2000, but 19 in the past five years. A $200m-budget superhero film will earn $58m more at the box-office than a non-superhero film of the same budget. Superhero films (“Deadpool” excepted) tend to be child-friendly, for good reason: films that receive an “R” (restricted) certificate typically earn $16m less in cinemas.

How a star’s previous films did helps a bit in predicting their next one’s success. Each $1 earned by a leading actor’s previous, non-sequel films in the past five years adds 2 cents to their current one’s takings. The very brightest stars, such as Jennifer Lawrence and Leonardo Di Caprio, whose films have earned more than $500m at the box office in recent years, would add around $10m to ticket sales for a film.

Do critics play a role in the success of films? Not as much as they would like to think. Between 1996 and 2006 an extra ten percentage points on the aggregate critics’ score on Rotten Tomatoes was associated with just $4m in extra box-office takings. Now it is worth just $1m. The wisdom of crowds matters more these days: the same increase in positive audience reviews on Rotten Tomatoes is associated with an $11.5m increase in box-office revenues.

Taken together, these factors explain about 60% of the variation in box-office revenues. Adding an estimate of marketing costs increases our model’s accuracy by another 20 percentage points. That leaves about one-fifth down to factors not explained by the model. “John Carter”, a $275m science-fiction extravaganza that was one of the biggest turkeys in Hollywood history, should have earned $235m according to our model. It made just $73m when it was released in 2012. Clearly, no one yet knows everything.

However, our analysis suggests a formula that maximises the chances of packing them in. First, create a child-friendly superhero film with plenty of action and scope for turning it into a franchise. Set your budget at an impressive but not reckless $85m. Convince a major studio to distribute it on wide release in the summer (when releases earn an average of $15m more than at other times). Lastly, cast two lead actors with a solid but unspectacular box-office history, who are thus not too expensive. With reasonable reviews from critics and the audience alike, your film would make about $125m at the American box office. But do it for the money, not the plaudits: such a film would have just a one-in-500 chance of carrying off an Oscar for Best Picture.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693594-how-make-hit-film-silver-screen-playbook/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Natural resources

Flare-up

Tensions run high at an international transparency initiative

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



THE Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) was launched in 2003 as a would-be global standard for managing natural resources, promoting openness in transactions between governments and companies to curb the corruption that was rampant in some places. It has since grown to include 51 countries. But its “multi-stakeholder” model—which gives equal board representation to its three constituencies: governments, companies and civil society—ensures regular bust-ups. As the EITI itself has put it, the process is “by definition loud, difficult and argumentative”.

The atmosphere was particularly poisonous this week, as the clans gathered in Lima for the EITI’s Global Conference. Most of the NGOs boycotted a meeting on board nominations. They had been spreading “serious and untrue allegations”, wrote Clare Short, the EITI’s outgoing chairman, in a circular to members. Some muttered that the whole enterprise faced a “governance crisis”.

NGOs were livid that someone they considered to be a rogue candidate for a civil-society board seat—backed by a pugnacious former British politician, Eric Joyce—had been allowed on the ballot. By not moving to strike him from the list, they huffed, the secretariat had broken the rules, written or otherwise, thereby undermining the civil-society contingent’s right to select its own candidates.

The secretariat denies this charge of interfering by not intervening. It is “always a punch-ball” when tensions rise, says an official. It circulated a legal opinion to counter its critics; the NGOs issued one of their own. Recriminations continued to fly as The Economist went to press (though the offending candidate’s name was eventually withdrawn).

The civil-society brigade has its critics, too. Some think its latest fit of pique is less a principled stand than an attempt by a clique of powerful NGOs, led by Publish What You Pay, to maintain a tight grip on who speaks for the sandal-wearers. The campaigners “often seem happier yelling than seeking compromise”, says a board member who represents companies.

The NGOs are not alone in raising concerns over the running of the EITI, however. In December several country and company representatives signed a letter questioning the secretariat’s impartiality and the “very flawed” process for electing the chairman—which, awkwardly for a transparency initiative, they viewed as lacking transparency. (A committee later rejected these complaints.)

This infighting is an unfortunate distraction from some genuine achievements. Thanks to the EITI, governments in Africa and other corruption-plagued places now disclose a lot more about their dealings in oil, gas and mining. No one doubts that its members, however querulous, have delivered more together than they could have done apart.

But the ruffling of feathers makes it harder to move forward. The task of smoothing them will now fall to the incoming chairman, Fredrik Reinfeldt. As a former Swedish prime minister and president of the European Council, he might just have the required diplomatic skills. He certainly has his work cut out.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693596-tensions-run-high-international-transparency-initiative-flare-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

German industry

Town and company

Company towns are thriving, for now, in western Germany

Feb 27th 2016 | WALLDORF AND WOLFSBURG | From the print edition



WOLFSBURG has no cathedral, but two glass towers loom over the city. Inside them, robots whisk new Volkswagens into storage racks, an entertaining ceremony akin to a votive offering. The towers also dominate the Autostadt, a sprawling, car-themed entertainment park and VW marketing wheeze, more popular than any other tourist site in Lower Saxony, a big German state.

Since 2000, 33m car pilgrims have paid homage there; last year brought a record 2.42m visitors. (Even more devotees flock to BMW World, a rival in Munich). Those who tire of gawping at vehicles can refuel with VW–made sausages or ice cream. Many drive home in a new VW. Last year 168,000 cars, 28% of all the firm delivered in Germany, drove through the doors of the Autostadt’s showroom.

“People in Germany love cars,” says a VW employee. But public trust in VW is being tested by a scandal involving software to cheat emissions tests, installed on 11m cars sold worldwide. Though most other carmakers are reporting buoyant sales, VW’s were down by 9% year on year in January in Germany, and have fallen in other countries. Its shares are down by two-fifths since the scandal broke in September. Its tin-eared bosses have bungled their explanations and apologies.

The threat to VW goes beyond possible big fines in America—the firm has set aside more than $7 billion for those. Having to come clean about its cars’ true emissions will make it harder to meet ever-stricter curbs being imposed in many countries (though pliant European officials recently eased theirs). VW looks like a reluctant innovator, especially in electric vehicles, of which Germany’s government wants to see 5m on the country’s roads by 2030.

Wolfsburg’s citizens are not pleased. One describes a recent trip to Japan where his hosts jeered at his home as “the city of liars”. It certainly lacks charm. Founded in 1938 by the Nazis and their industrial friends as “City of the KdF Car” (a reference to the Nazis’ leisure club), its purpose was to house labour, including wartime slaves, for the factory built to produce what became the VW Beetle. “It’s really one of the worst, most artificial, ugliest cities,” says a newish resident, pointing to the grim architecture on Porschestrasse, the main drag.

But Wolfsburg, renamed by the British after the second world war, is at least prosperous and debt-free, thanks to VW. The firm does not directly provide housing or public services, unlike in some company towns in other countries, but it is pervasive. Its cars crowd the roads—only here could driving a Volvo be deemed rebellious. Estate agents spurn calls not from VW staff. A theatre, galleries, sports teams and small businesses all depend, ultimately, on VW as sponsor, customer, taxpayer or dominant employer.

There are intimate ties between local politicians, managers and union leaders, as in much of Germany. The last big scandal at VW reflected that: a former personnel chief was convicted in 2007 over a bribery scheme, involving sex parties and prostitutes for leaders of works councils. VW eventually shrugged that off, and may be hoping to do the same again.

The mayor, Klaus Mohrs, whose office sports a large painting with VW symbols, says politicians enjoy “close co-operation” with car bosses, but rejects any talk of crony capitalism: “35 years ago” he might have thought relations too close, he says, “but we lead a good life this way.” VW employs 60,000 in a town whose working-age population is around 77,000. Firms pay a “municipal-trade tax”, or Gewerbesteuer, at typical rates of 14-18% of profits. That tax, the lion’s share of which is paid by VW, provided 59% of Wolfsburg’s revenue in 2014. The Economist’s analysis of the dependency of some German towns on their principal employers shows that Wolfsburg is extreme, but not unique (see table).



Such reliance on a single employer would once have been familiar outside Germany, too. “Company Towns”, a 2012 book by Marcelo Borges, notes how America had 2m people living in them in the 1930s. George Pullman, pioneer of the luxury rail car, founded a planned community near Chicago, and named it after himself, to house his workers. William Hesketh Lever, the founder of what is now Unilever, created Port Sunlight in the north-west of England, to “socialise and Christianise” workers in his soap factory.

Such places are still to be found in developing countries: for example, Jamshedpur in India was named for Jamsetji Tata, the founder of Tata Steel, which still dominates the town and provides many public services. In the West, however, many such places have diversified or died. It is in western Germany in particular that towns dominated by a single firm, Arbeitersiedlungen, continue to bloom.

Henri de Castries, the boss of Axa, a French insurer, lauds how “family-owned global firms keep their roots in small towns” in Germany, spreading wealth more evenly than in his centralised home country. Bill McDermott, the American who runs SAP, a giant software firm, says “I deeply respect all things that Walldorf is,” referring to its home town among the asparagus fields of the upper Rhine valley.

Walldorf, like Wolfsburg, relies on a firm that has vastly outgrown its nest. For firms, that usually spells a lower rate of municipal-trade tax, but also means they may struggle to lure talented staff to work in semi-rural obscurity. Bertelsmann, a publisher with 112,000 global staff, is based (with about a tenth of its workers) in Gütersloh. BASF, a chemicals giant, has 35,000 in similarly modest Ludwigshafen.

Such towns also run the risk of their corporate champions stumbling. Residents of Metzingen, a town of 22,000, will have shivered this week when a warning of weak sales by Hugo Boss, the fashion firm that dominates it, sent the company’s shares plunging. Back in Wolfsburg, Mr Mohrs has so far cut this year’s investment budget for the city by one-third, to €120m ($132m). An official at VfL Wolfsburg, a high-flying football club, says locals are anxious—70% of fans in his stadium work in VW’s plant. The club has put off building a youth academy to save a few million euros. Cultural events funded by VW have been scratched. Kevin Nobs, a local journalist, says small businesses expect a tough year, fretting that VW staff will not get their usual bonuses.

A sausage-making count to the rescue

Residents recall worse times. In the cold war, Wolfsburg, on the frontier with East Germany, felt like “the end of the world”, says a businessman. Carmaking slumped in the 1990s, sending the local unemployment rate to 18%. The city and VW responded with Wolfsburg AG, a joint venture to encourage startups. Its boss, Julius von Ingelheim, says 600 local firms resulted, notably in health care and IT. “Today the region is much stronger than one company,” he claims. He also lauds Count von der Schulenburg, the former lord of Wolfsburg’s castle, who runs a boarding-house, a music festival and a sausage business.

In reality, VW crowds out much else. High wages for designers, researchers and financial experts at its headquarters make it hard for others to attract staff, or for anyone else to afford housing. Olaf Lies, economy minister for Lower Saxony, which owns one-fifth of VW, says the entire state is bound to the firm. He worries about the 120,000 VW employees in the state and as many more workers in supply firms. VW also employs 10,000 in Emden, a town of around 33,000 working-age residents.

But ask Wolfsburgers to imagine a future without VW and you get only glowers. Historians there say no one dares criticise VW, and recall hosting an exhibition in 2014 that urged visitors to “learn from Detroit”, suggesting that the city’s reliance on VW was a “ticking time-bomb”. Locals shunned it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693604-company-towns-are-thriving-now-western-germany-town-and-company/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

On the stump

Why tech bosses are playing at being statesmen

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



HE HAS been on-message for months, sharing his tweet-worthy opinions on stage and playing on media interest. On February 16th, after consulting with his cabinet of close advisers, he made a vigorous statement on privacy rights that attacked the government, every politician’s favourite punchbag these days. He vowed to fight government “overreach” and help “people around the country to understand what is at stake”.

This is not a populist presidential contender, but Tim Cook, Apple’s boss. His views have put him at odds with American law enforcers, who need his company’s help to unlock an iPhone used by a terrorist. The government has dismissed Mr Cook’s letter as a stunt to bolster Apple’s sales. But this charge underestimates the man’s ambition. His campaign is aimed at shaping public policy, not just to favour his firm’s immediate interests but to nurture its global base of technophile supporters.

Mr Cook is among the latest incarnations of the “CEO-statesman”, a type whose origins stretch back at least to the days when Henry Ford campaigned for world peace and Andrew Carnegie for universal education. The CEO-statesman is not content with just accepting a job in the government; nor does he simply lobby behind the scenes. He is an evangelist, out to persuade the world of the righteousness of his chosen causes.

Ford and Carnegie were CEO-statesmen by choice. Today’s equivalents often seem to feel it is no longer enough to have admired products and solid financial results. A chief executive needs to have values, and preach them. From Starbucks’ Howard Schultz to Unilever’s Paul Polman, bosses in diverse industries have taken positions on controversies including race relations, climate change and gay marriage. But none has higher profiles than the CEO-statesmen of the technology industry.

Microsoft’s bruising antitrust case with the Department of Justice, settled in 2001, was the dawning of a realisation by tech bosses that they could not disdain politics, and needed to invest in lobbying. This has evolved into a wider mission to shape public opinion. Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s boss, is on a drive to bring internet access to the world’s poor. He speaks of it as a human right, along with education and nutrition (though it would also, conveniently, add Facebook users). Sheryl Sandberg, one of his lieutenants, who has worked in government, travels the world to talk about equality for women. Google’s Sundar Pichai is in Brussels on a “state visit” to meet European Union officials and press his views on data security, privacy and competition.

One reason for the tech industry’s statesmanship strategy is necessity. By their nature, tech firms are more likely than others to be operating in areas—such as the on-demand economy—in which regulation is dated or inchoate. Another is that, with their huge constituencies, some have started to look less like businesses and more like countries. Facebook has 1.6 billion users, more than the population of China. Apple has sold more than 1 billion devices. Last year it had revenues of $234 billion, which is more than those of most governments.

Many people feel a closer relationship with tech firms than with their governments; tweaks to their interfaces and algorithms can have an instant impact on users’ lives. People now trust businesses more than their governments, according to surveys by Edelman, a PR agency. Firms like Google and Facebook have taken over the role of disseminators of information that governments once claimed.

In the 1980s and 1990s the “CEO-celebrity” was more prominent: typified by Jack Welch of GE, such figures penned books on their management philosophies and posed for magazine covers. The CEO-statesman is different, because he is after more than publicity. He wants to craft a legacy, as politicians do in their final terms. Leaving behind a healthy business may not be enough to secure a page in the history books. The Reputation Institute, a think-tank, reckons that perhaps a third of a CEO’s legacy is attributed to financial performance, with the rest being influenced by factors such as perceived leadership and corporate citizenship.

Being a statesman means trying to control the message, and thus the media. Like the American president, tech bosses are pursued by a press corps which dissects their every move. They scheme like politicians, feeding titbits to friendly journalists and snubbing ones who write unhelpful truths. Or they appeal to the public directly: Mr Cook and Mr Zuckerberg often publish their views in blog posts rather than give interviews, the digital equivalent of reading off of a teleprompter and taking no questions.

Picking the right pedestal

The statesmanship strategy—taking lofty stances that enhance their standing among their constituents and trying to house-train the press—carries risks. Public campaigns work best when they are core to a firm’s mission. Last year Mr Schultz discovered the dangers of wading into advocacy unrelated to the coffee-shop business. He was ridiculed over his plan to have Starbucks’ baristas strike up conversations about race relations with customers who just want a quick, no-controversy latte. Corporate statesmanship can also backfire if bosses appear too blatantly self-interested. Recently Mr Zuckerberg suffered a defeat in India, where his plan to bring free internet to the poor was dismissed as a colonialist attempt to impose a corporate agenda.

It is easy for bosses to miscalculate the public mood and face a backlash. This has partly been true for Mr Cook. He may have won the loyalty of tech progressives, but many Americans are sympathetic to the government and think he should back down and unlock the iPhone used by the terrorist. “Tim Cook has climbed up on a pedestal, but the pedestal is in the corner,” says Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a professor at Yale University’s School of Management. As any politician knows, and many CEOs are learning, being a statesman is not easy.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21693574-why-tech-bosses-are-playing-being-statesmen-stump/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Share trading: Complicate, then prevaricate

Exchange mergers: Stocks exchanged

Banks and money-laundering: Whoops apocalypse

Buttonwood: Donald ducks the big questions

China’s stockmarket: Fail to the chief

Reshaping banking: Shake your money makers

BBVA: Digital addition

India’s budget: Leap of faith

Free exchange: Gotham on Thames

Free exchange: Correction:“Chop, chop”, January 30th





Articles Sections Next

Share trading

Complicate, then prevaricate

Discontent is rife at the very heart of capitalism: the trading of shares

Feb 27th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



THE brokers who traded shares in the Tontine coffee house in 18th-century New York often resorted to stronger drink, leaving them “a little addled”, according to one contemporary account. The technology involved in share-trading has changed a bit since then, and at least some of the participants have sobered up. But more than 200 years later, investors in American equities still wonder whether they are really receiving decent service.



On the face of things, they have little to complain about. The cost of trading has declined sharply over the years (see chart). Explicit commissions, which were once levied in percentage points (0.25% in 1792), have largely disappeared. This is thanks mainly to competition. Whereas the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) dominated the trading of shares listed on it for most of the 20th century, there are now lots of places where they can be bought and sold.

The impetus for the fragmentation was “Regulation NMS”, adopted in 2005 by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Wall Street’s main regulator. This required share-trading orders to be funnelled to the exchange offering the best price. The intention was to boost competition to NYSE and NASDAQ, which had a near-duopoly in share-trading at the time. It succeeded in that: both now have less than a fifth of the market. (In response, firms running exchanges have branched into other markets—see next article.)

American shares are traded on a dozen exchanges; at least six other exchanges cater to investors in derivatives linked to shares. Shares also change hands on another 40 or so “alternative trading systems”, as well as a number of “single-dealer platforms”. Finally, many trades are now “internalised” by big banks and asset-managers, meaning that they pair up buyers and sellers within their sprawling empires rather than use an outside trading venue.

Yet investors worry that, in many cases, competition has brought down the visible price of trading by adding hidden costs. Two anxieties stand out. One is the worry that the current set-up of the markets allows high-speed traders to anticipate big orders and “front-run” them, moving prices in an unfavourable direction before an order can be executed. The other is the question of how robust the system is, with regulators still unable fully to explain events like the “flash crash” of 2010, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged by 9% in minutes before rebounding.

Start with fears of front-running. Many institutional investors complain that ultra-fast traders spot big orders entering the market, and race ahead of them to adjust their prices accordingly. Attempts to hide from the speedsters can go awry. In January Credit Suisse and Barclays, two big banks, agreed to pay $154m in fines for misleading clients about the workings of their “dark pools”, where offers to sell and bids to buy are not published. In theory, that protects investors from front-running; in practice, several of the firms running such venues had concealed the central role that high-frequency traders played on them. (Credit Suisse didn’t admit or deny wrongdoing in the settlement.)

There is another, less-often-told side to the story. Speed is necessary to knit together a dispersed set of exchanges, so that investors are immediately routed towards the best price available and so that their orders are the first to get filled. And plenty of high-frequency traders are market-makers; it is their job to adjust prices in response to new information. Nonetheless, the idea that markets are rigged is widespread, not least thanks to the publication of “Flash Boys”, a book by Michael Lewis on the evils of high-speed trading.

One proferred solution is to level the field by slowing things down deliberately. IEX, whose founder is the hero of Mr Lewis’s book, is a trading platform that has applied to the SEC to become an exchange. It uses miles of coiled cable to create a “speed bump” that delays trades to the advantage of institutional investors. The SEC has received more than 400 letters in support of its application, but there is a vigorous debate about whether IEX’s system complies with the requirements of Regulation NMS. Some think that the better solution would be to get rid of Rule 611, which in effect requires orders to be sent to the exchange showing the best price, even though such quotes can sometimes be unobtainable in practice. The SEC will vote on IEX’s application by March 21st.

Front-running is not the only concern about America’s market structure. The other is the risk of sudden spasms like the flash crash. Glitches are common. In 2012 two public offerings, for Facebook and BATS (“Better Alternative Trading System”, a firm that runs exchanges and other trading venues, ironically enough), suffered disruption. Later that year faulty software toppled Knight Capital Group, a big trading firm, by vomiting orders to exchanges without tracking those that were filled. In 2013 the primary electronic market and the back-up system both failed at NASDAQ thanks to a software bug, and so on.

Andrew Lo, a professor of finance at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), argues that investigations into such events tend to focus on the venue most affected. How they reverberate through the broader system is very little studied or understood. Sometimes, the existence of other venues may help: in July the NYSE briefly went offline and traders barely noticed as other exchanges filled the gap. On other occasions, they may amplify volatility. In August lurches in the future and equities markets caused the value of exchange-traded funds to deviate from the value of the underlying shares they owned.

Mr Lo proposes a simple reform: the creation of a commission that can subpoena witnesses and evidence to look into the causes of crashes, just as the National Transportation Safety Board investigates air disasters. The commission would look as widely as it liked at what went wrong and then publish its findings.

The SEC acknowledges that the rules governing share-trading need amending. Mary Jo White, the chair of the SEC, has mused, for example, about monitoring the controls firms use to prevent their algorithms running amok. Another idea is to provide the SEC with the power to curtail otherwise legal trading when the market is convulsing. The risk is that in addressing market complexity, the regulators only add to it. A single SEC proposal, on a facet of a facet of the overall system, is now up for public comment. It runs to 581 pages.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693607-discontent-rife-very-heart-capitalism-trading/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Exchange mergers

Stocks exchanged

Frankfurt’s bourse tries to merge with London’s, again

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

EVEN as the business of trading splinters across ever more platforms, the firms that run exchanges continue to consolidate. Last year NASDAQ agreed to buy Chi-X Canada, Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) purchased Interactive Data and Deutsche Börse snapped up 360T. The past decade of dealmaking in the industry has given rise to five powerhouses: the London Stock Exchange Group (LSE), Deutsche Börse, CME Group, ICE and HKEX. This week it emerged that, not for the first time, LSE and Deutsche Börse are talking about a merger.

Organisations like the LSE once made all their money by charging fees to those who traded or listed shares. But as regulators allowed rival trading platforms to encroach on the established exchanges’ turf, those fees came down, pushing them into other lines of business. LSE and others bought up derivatives exchanges, data providers, index compilers and clearing houses. The intention was to serve customers throughout the process of buying a security, from research to clearing and settlement. Only a tenth of LSE’s and Deutsche Börse’s revenues now come from the trading of equities. This strategy has worked well. LSE’s shares have outperformed the FTSE 100 by more than 200% over the past five years.

The groups have developed slightly different models, though. The German exchange adopted a “vertical silo”, in which customers for one of its products must also use others. Trading on the group’s Eurex derivatives exchange meant using its clearing house, for example. Running a vertical silo made expanding into other areas attractive, as new customers could be steered towards the rest of the group’s offerings. LSE, in contrast, offered open access to its exchanges and its clearing house.

The EU is now obliging exchanges to open up their silos and let clients mix and match execution and clearing. That leaves Deutsche Börse more exposed. What is more, LSE’s strengths in shares and indices complement Deutsche Börse’s in derivatives. Putting Eurex Clearing and LCH.Clearnet under the same roof would also allow customers of both to clear trades with less collateral.

Previous attempts to combine London’s bourse and Frankfurt’s failed in 2000 and 2005. The European Commission, which in 2012 blocked a tie-up between Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext, could kick up a fuss. Should it happen, Brexit would also complicate matters. But the incentives for exchange groups to join up are not going away.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693611-frankfurts-bourse-tries-merge-londons-again-stocks-exchanged/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banks and money-laundering

Whoops apocalypse

American regulators wield a big stick, but not always fairly

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



LIKE politicians, financial regulators know that late on a Friday is a good time to slip out bad news. The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), part of America’s Treasury, chose February 19th to announce it had rescinded a devastating finding against a European bank suspected of facilitating money-laundering. The withdrawal, less than a year after the designation, looks like a climbdown.

In March 2015 FinCEN branded Banca Privada d’Andorra (BPA) as a “primary money-laundering concern”, saying its top managers had moved cash for criminal groups. This so-called “311” measure (after the relevant section of the Patriot Act of 2001) is usually crippling for the bank concerned, because in effect it cuts it off from the American financial system and any banks that participate in it. BPA was no exception: the government of Andorra, a mountainous financial haven nestled between France and Spain, ended up taking over the bank despite objections from its majority shareholders, the Cierco family; its Madrid-based wealth-management arm was liquidated. The Ciercos, insisting there was no legal basis for FinCEN’s move, sued in the American courts.

FinCEN’s explanation for its reversal was that Andorra had taken steps to protect BPA from money-laundering risks, and the bank therefore no longer poses a threat. The Ciercos are having none of this. They argue that it was instead a “blatant effort to avoid judicial scrutiny” of the 311 measure. They point to the timing: the court was to hear a motion to dismiss the case next month. That would have required much more detailed evidence to be aired in support of the 311 action.

The Americans wanted to avoid this because their case was flimsy, critics say. The Ciercos have argued from the start that it was based on cases of suspected money-laundering which the bank itself had reported to Andorran regulators and had brought in KPMG, an accounting firm, to investigate.

If BPA was already cleaning up its act, why go after it at all? Some suspect the bank was a pawn in a tussle between governments: miffed that Andorra was slow to adopt American-style anti-money-laundering rules, including limits on cash transactions, America decided to show who was boss by selecting a bank to pick on. There is some evidence to support this sacrificial-lamb theory. In unscripted comments last year, for instance, an American diplomat suggested that America chose to “use the hammer” on BPA as a way of resolving wider concerns about Andorra. (FinCEN referred questions from The Economist to the Department of Justice, which declined to comment on the ground that lawsuits are under way.)

The Treasury has been challenged in another 311-designation case. FBME Bank of Tanzania sued it after being accused of servicing all manner of bad guys. Last autumn an American court issued an injunction blocking the government’s action until the bank received more information about why it was deemed a threat to the financial system. The case continues. Meanwhile, FBME’s operations have been severely disrupted: it has sought an injunction to stop the authorities closing an important subsidiary in Cyprus.

These cases highlight two problems with FinCEN’s money-laundering cudgel. The first is double-standards. It tends to go after only small banks in strategically unimportant countries; its use of 311 has been likened to using a sledgehammer to crack nuts. The second is its lack of openness. It faces no requirement to make detailed evidence public, or even available to a court, at the time of action. By the time any challenge is heard, it may be too late for the bank in question.

BPA is not dead, but it is seriously wounded. Much of the value may have already vanished from a bank that was worth €600m ($680m) before the debacle—though there are substantial assets left thanks to a freezing order. The Ciercos want the Andorran authorities to halt the disposal of its assets and enter into “remedial negotiations”. They have hailed FinCEN’s about-face as a “momentous victory”. But will it be a hollow one?



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693603-american-regulators-wield-big-stick-not-always-fairly-whoops-apocalypse/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

Donald ducks the big questions

Donald Trump’s proposals require implausible spending cuts or 10% growth

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



VICTORY this week in the Nevada caucuses, on top of recent triumphs in New Hampshire and South Carolina, make Donald Trump the clear favourite to be the Republican nominee in America’s presidential election. Users of Predictit, a gambling website, collectively rate his chances at about 70%. Although many people think that Mr Trump cannot triumph in November, it is worth remembering that Hillary Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, is hampered by several nagging scandals that could conceivably deepen.

So investors need to start thinking about what the economy might look like under a President Trump. This is far from easy, because the candidate gives a good impression of making up policy as he goes along. How seriously is one to take his policy on Chinese trade (declaring the country a currency manipulator and eliminating its “illegal” export subsidies)? Is the plan for a border wall contingent on his improbable promise of getting the Mexicans to pay for it?

And it is not clear whether Mr Trump’s policies would be approved by Congress. A Republican House and Senate would normally follow the lead of their party’s standard-bearer. But Mr Trump has departed a long way from party orthodoxy in some respects, such as declaring the Iraq war a “terrible mistake”.

On taxes, at least, Mr Trump is not so different from other Republicans, arguing for sweeping cuts. He wants a higher standard income-tax deduction, along with lower bands of 10%, 20% and 25%. Dividends and capital gains would be taxed at 20% at most. The alternative minimum, estate and gift taxes would all be abolished. The corporate-tax rate would be cut from 35% to 15%. The cost of these cuts would be partly offset by limits on certain deductions, and by taxing companies’ global profits, whether repatriated or not.



Part of Mr Trump’s “man of the people” appeal is his apparent divergence from Republicans on some tax breaks for the rich. One example is his promise to end the tax break on “carried interest”, which allows private-equity fund managers to cut their bills substantially. But the Tax Policy Centre (TPC), a think-tank that has analysed Mr Trump’s proposals, points out that although his plan does indeed reclassify carried interest, it would still cause the effective tax rate on it to fall from 23.8% to 15%. The billionaire need not worry about losing the private-equity vote.

How will all this be paid for? Lower taxes could stimulate economic growth, although the size of the improvement is debatable and it could be offset by higher debt-servicing costs. The TPC estimates the tax cuts would reduce revenues by $9.5 trillion over ten years. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (CRFB), a fiscal watchdog, puts the total cost at $12 trillion-15 trillion. Debt could rise as high as 140% of GDP by 2026.

Perhaps Mr Trump is a secret admirer of Paul Krugman, a liberal economist, and plans a big Keynesian stimulus? Not so: he has called for a balanced budget. That would mean huge spending cuts, but he has not outlined many. He wants to beef up the armed forces, and to spend more on veterans and immigration controls. He has also promised to protect Social Security (the national pension scheme).

Mr Trump says he will save $300 billion from Medicare (the government health-care scheme for the elderly) by buying drugs more cheaply. Alas, total Medicare spending on drugs is likely to average $111 billion annually over the next decade. Aggregate American spending on drugs (public and private) is around $300 billion a year, says the CRFB. Perhaps Mr Trump thinks he can persuade the pharmaceutical companies to give their product away: the “art of the deal” in action.

As the chart shows, the more departments that are protected, the bigger the cuts needed elsewhere. Funding his tax cuts would require spending reductions of 61-78% in the unprotected areas; balancing the budget would be impossible, according to the CRFB, as there is not enough spending left to cut. For those counting on economic growth to eliminate the deficit, the annual increase in GDP required would be more than 10%.

All politicians promise too much, of course, but Mr Trump’s plans differ in the sheer scale of their implausibility. If investors also factor in the candidate’s unpredictability, the wildness of his foreign-policy rhetoric and a potentially fractious relationship with Congress, it all adds up to considerable uncertainty, something that markets traditionally dislike. If Mr Trump does become the Republican nominee, prepare for a volatile autumn.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-economics/21693538-trumps-proposals-require-implausible-spending-cuts-or-10-growth-donald-ducks/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

China’s stockmarket

Fail to the chief

A rare episode of accountability after an almighty crash

Feb 27th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition

Hair today…

AS LONG as they stay on the right side of political battles, officials who reach the exalted heights of Chinese government can generally count on job security. Firing them in the middle of their term for poor performance is almost unheard of. The removal last week of Xiao Gang, China’s securities regulator (pictured), more than two years before the end of his term, was thus remarkable.

It was bad enough that a stockmarket bubble had swollen and burst on Mr Xiao’s watch. He became chief of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) in early 2013; the stockmarket rally began in mid-2014 and turned into a mania before collapsing in mid-2015, wiping out some $5 trillion in wealth. Worse, his fingerprints were all over the market’s excesses, when it soared and when it fell.

On the way up, he was an energetic cheerleader. In the months before the crash, when prices were already unsustainably high, Mr Xiao described the rally as a “reform bull”—that is, a fair response to the government’s economic-reform plans, however vague and incremental they actually were. He also missed the dangers in the market, arguing that leveraged buying of shares was under control, when in fact it had reached unprecedented levels. On the way down, he was the guiding force behind the adoption of a circuit-breaker mechanism intended to slow losses. This ended up exacerbating panic-selling and had to be scrapped.

For months, rumours spread that senior leaders had lost faith in Mr Xiao. Investors took to referring to him as Xiao Rectum, which sounds very similar to his actual name. Reuters reported on January 18th that he had offered to resign. Yet the final decision to remove him from the CSRC is still a risky one for Li Keqiang, the premier. Until now, the bumbling Mr Xiao stood as a buffer between the stockmarket and Mr Li. In the event of more market mayhem, blame will now filter upstairs.

…gone tomorrow

Mr Xiao’s successor is Liu Shiyu, who most recently was chairman of Agricultural Bank of China, a big state-owned bank, and previously was a deputy governor of the central bank. He is doubtless hoping that the worst is past: the CSI-300 index of blue-chip shares has shed more than 40% of its value since last June’s peak. Yet even after the sell-off, small-cap shares still trade at nearly 90 times last year’s earnings, which suggests that the correction may have further to run (a multiple of 40 or so would be more reasonable).



Daily dispatches: China's market mess

What’s more, Mr Liu has the unenviable task of changing the way that initial public offerings (IPOs) are conducted. For years the authorities have mulled shifting from a system in which these are individually authorised to one in which eligible firms simply register their intention to list. Under the former, regulators control which companies get to list, when and roughly at what price. In the latter, these decisions are given over to the market (in effect, to underwriters, firms and investors).

The authorisation system is prone to corruption because it gives regulators undue power. But in a volatile market with scant legal protection for investors, the fear is that registration will be abused by unscrupulous firms and so could be even more damaging. Mr Xiao handled this dilemma by dragging his feet. Mr Liu will be under pressure to move more boldly.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693608-rare-episode-accountability-after-almighty-crash-fail-chief/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Reshaping banking

Shake your money makers

The Swiss government rejects the nationalisation of money creation

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

CHILDREN are sometimes reassured that new siblings arrive via friendly storks. The reality is messier. Money creation is much the same. The “stork” in this case is the central bank; many think it transfers money to private banks, which act as intermediaries, pushing the money around the economy. In reality, most money is created by private banks. They generate deposits every time they make a loan, a process central banks can influence but not control. That alarms some, who worry that banks use this power heedlessly, thereby stoking disruptive booms and busts.

Campaigners in many rich countries want to strip private banks of the power to create money. In Switzerland members of the “Vollgeld Initiative” presented the government with enough signatures in December to trigger a national referendum on the subject. Bank deposits, they point out, make up some 87% of the readily available money in Switzerland, vastly exceeding notes and coins. Since money creation is the main fuel of both inflation and growth, they argue, it should not be in private hands, let alone entrusted to institutions that are prone to binge and purge.

Under the existing system deposits sit on private banks’ balance-sheets. Under the proposed alternative (a variation on “narrow banking”), accounts would be transformed into something much closer to the safe-deposit boxes nestled in Swiss vaults. Customers would pay the banks a charge for storing their cash. Any loans banks make would have to be funded by shareholders or by borrowing of their own, not by deposits.

The central bank, meanwhile, would survey the economy and judge how much cash was required to maintain stable inflation. Rather than tweaking interest rates to influence private banks’ lending, it would simply hand out (or siphon away) the necessary cash itself, to the government, the public, or as loans to private banks.

The system would be safer for depositors, since banks could not lend out and lose their money. That would allow governments to withdraw the implicit protection banks currently enjoy as the guardian of voters’ deposits. Even big banks could be allowed to fail, since the losses would not reverberate through the system so much. That possibility would nudge lenders into behaving more prudently.

The Swiss government responds officially to every issue to be put to a referendum. On February 24th it released its verdict on the Vollgeld Initiative (the actual vote will not take place until next year at the earliest). It is not a fan. As the central bank issued more money, the government points out, its liabilities (cash) would rise without any increase in its assets. This, the government fears, would undermine confidence in the value of money.

Those hoping for a simpler, more streamlined system would probably be disappointed. There would need to be heavy-handed rules to make sure that banks did not create “money-like” instruments. The government also worries that the change would hobble Swiss banks, including multinational giants such as UBS and Credit Suisse, which would face mammoth restructuring costs. Finance, a huge part of the Swiss economy, would be turned inside-out, with unpredictable but probably expensive consequences.

The government also points out that the initiative only guards against one particular form of financial instability. Even once the new system is in place, a bank could still become insolvent or suffer a liquidity squeeze, with potentially disastrous results for those that had backed it and the economy as a whole. Even though it did not accept retail deposits, Lehman Brothers still collapsed, and nearly brought down the global financial system as it did so. Given the limited benefits, the costs the reform would involve look prohibitive, opponents argue.

Besides, “there are less radical means to achieve financial stability,” according to Serge Gaillard, director of Switzerland’s Federal Finance Administration. Rules on lending, reserves and capital have all been tightened since the crisis. Now that these reforms have been implemented, the government says, such a fundamental overhaul of the system is unnecessary, if not downright dangerous.

Safe-deposit boxes may be popular in Switzerland, but the public will probably side with the government, disappointing radical economists hoping for a trailblazer to prove that the model can work. The Swiss authorities believe they have recommended the safer option. Campaigners will think them narrow-minded.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693614-swiss-government-rejects-nationalisation-money-creation-shake-your-money/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

BBVA

Digital addition

A big Spanish bank’s tech drive prompts some scepticism

Feb 27th 2016 | MADRID | From the print edition



BANKS love to talk up their tech credentials, but few go as far as BBVA, Spain’s second-biggest. In a surprise move last year, it promoted its head of digital banking, Carlos Torres, to second-in-command despite his lack of experience in retail banking. Digital transformation, the bank said, was its top strategic priority. To that end, it has spent around $200m over the past three years investing in fintech startups such as Atom, a British digital bank, and Simple, an American one. It has also invested in a data-crunching firm, a Bitcoin-trading outfit and a digital-design company, among others.

The shopping spree is not over yet. In mid-February BBVA injected an extra $150m into its $100m venture-capital arm and transferred it to a new subsidiary called Propel Venture Partners. This outfit, based in San Francisco and London, will operate independently of the rest of the bank, in an attempt to appeal to startups wary of working with a dinosaur.

BBVA is also trying to turn its existing operations into something resembling a tech firm. Some 600 employees at its headquarters near Madrid now work in small “scrums” incorporating people from IT, marketing, design and other divisions. They take on small projects with short deadlines, gathering daily in front of whiteboards dotted with fluorescent Post-It notes to chart their progress. The aim is to improve apps constantly, based on feedback from customers, including the direct telephone conversations with a personal account manager enabled by the app. BBVA calls it “the revolution of small things” and points to higher customer-satisfaction ratings as evidence of its success.

Investors are not quite as satisfied. BBVA’s emphasis on technology has not yet translated into any big benefit to the business, says Rohith Chandra, an analyst at Barclays, a British bank. Two years after the purchase of Simple, for example, it remains independently managed and in the red. Its most appealing features, such as clever budgeting software for customers, have not yet been adopted by other units.

Moreover, most big banks are investing heavily in technology and offering more services via fancy apps as custom at branches dwindles. BBVA’s digital offerings do not seem dramatically different from those of Santander or Caixabank, say, its biggest Spanish rivals. Caixabank recently launched ImaginBank, accessible only through mobile apps and social networks. Many big banks, including Barclays, Citigroup, HSBC, Santander and UBS, have invested in fintech startups. BBVA’s investments are so disparate that they seem driven chiefly by FOMO, as millennials might say, or fear of missing out.

Teppo Paavola, head of BBVA’s New Digital Business unit and a former executive at PayPal, makes no apologies for that. “Being paranoid is the way to go,” he says. BBVA can afford a digital flutter or two: it earned €2.6 billion ($2.9 billion) last year. Many of its 66m customers are in emerging markets, where few people have ingrained banking habits; that might allow more rapid technological change. Just under 30% of consumer loans at BBVA’s Mexican unit are issued digitally, up from 2% a year ago. If mobile banking can be made appealing enough that it allows BBVA to attract customers in such countries without building lots of expensive branches, then it could make a difference to the bottom line, Mr Chandra speculates.

For now, however, bricks and mortar are still an integral part of BBVA’s business model. It has no plans to close a big chunk of its 3,800 branches in Spain anytime soon. Transforming the bank is a gradual process which will take a very long time, the bank’s chairman recently said. That, at least, is not the sort of talk you would hear at a tech firm.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693617-big-spanish-banks-tech-drive-prompts-some-scepticism-digital-addition/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

India’s budget

Leap of faith

Despite benign economic conditions, India faces tricky budget decisions

Feb 27th 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition

Economic stimulus and fiscal godsend

LEAP years are a plus for finance ministers: the extra day bolsters annual output by a sliver and so flatters their record. Arun Jaitley, India’s finance minister, should be especially grateful for any boost to GDP on “leap day”, when he unveils his third budget. Although the Indian economy continues to outpace both richer and poorer rivals, the government’s fiscal options are narrowing.

Given jittery markets and total public debt of around 65% of GDP, a high figure for an emerging market, the question isn’t whether the government should cut its budget deficit but by how much. It is projected to be 3.9% in the fiscal year that ends on March 31st. The government has pledged to reduce the shortfall to 3.5% in the coming year and 3% the following one. But these targets are already less ambitious than ones Mr Jaitley had set previously, and ministers seem to be preparing the ground to push them back further—to bond markets’ consternation.

As always, politicians can craft a compelling case for another “one-off” delay in budget-trimming. Civil servants are expecting a mammoth pay bump as a result of a once-a-decade wage negotiation; there is also a boost to military pensions that will cost around 1.1 trillion rupees ($16 billion), or 0.8% of GDP. Fresh funds will have to be found to recapitalise 29 state-owned banks, most of which have books infested with dud loans and so are making heavy losses. State governments, which add a further 2.3% of GDP to the central government’s deficit, are being leant on to bail out bankrupt power-distribution companies.

There is an economic case for deferring cuts, too, given febrile global conditions. Private investment is at a nadir, due to firms’ heavy debt and weak earnings. Two disappointing rainy seasons in a row have depressed incomes in rural regions, where most Indians live. And though India’s growth, at 7.5% last year, looks buoyant by global standards, it is below the 9-10% the government aspires to. (Many, including some government officials, in any case question the accuracy of the data.)

There is some debate among economists about whether further public spending is warranted in such circumstances. Unfortunately for Mr Jaitley, one of the most vocal critics is Raghuram Rajan, the central-bank governor. He has compared India’s economy to Brazil’s, which is similarly indebted and shrinking fast—a humiliating rebuke to the government.

Mr Rajan has argued that there are few investments the government can make that are likely to deliver high enough returns to compensate for adding to India’s debt pile. More public spending risks crowding out the private sort, he thinks. The implicit threat from Mr Rajan is that he will not reduce interest rates from their current 6.75% if the deficit does not shrink.

After all, India has already received a hearty stimulus, albeit not one of Mr Jaitley’s doing. No other country has benefited quite so much from the tumbling price of commodities, particularly oil, of which it is a huge net importer. When Narendra Modi came to power in May 2014, with crude at nearly $110 a barrel, whatever tax the government levied on petrol and other oil products was largely spent on fuel subsidies for the poor. The subsidy bill has since atrophied, while the government has pocketed much of the benefit of falling prices by raising the tax on petrol. It has received unexpected revenue of 1.5% of GDP, even as consumers’ spending power has risen.

For a country whose tax receipts total around 11% of GDP, that is a sizeable boon. Economists point out that the oil price, currently hovering near $30, cannot tumble another $80 next year. Worse, it might go up, which could prompt a reversal of the tax increases. If so, a $10 increase in the oil price would cost the government 0.35% of GDP, according to Morgan Stanley, a bank, more or less doubling the cuts needed to meet its current fiscal targets.



Modest rises in other taxes have been mooted, and may be necessary if Mr Jaitley sees public investment or rural handouts as a political necessity. But there is another obvious way of raising money: selling down the government’s stakes in hundreds of Indian companies. Targets for privatisation have been missed in nine of the past ten years (see chart).

Although many of the government’s holdings have little strategic value—it owns stakes in cigarette-makers, engineering firms and hotels, for instance—it has resisted a sell-off. The reticence should end, argues Sajjid Chinoy of JPMorgan Chase, a bank, who advises government to think of divestments not as asset sales but as asset swaps, trading stakes in companies for the money to build new roads and railways.

A selling spree would allow Mr Jaitley to stick to his 3.5% target. Yet if anything, he is expected to trim projected revenue from privatisation. The disappointment of bond markets will be blunted by a rule that obliges banks to keep 21.5% of their assets in government bonds. But the price of profligacy is mounting: of the 13.7 trillion rupees the government expects in revenue in the coming year, over a third of it, or 5.1 trillion rupees, will go on interest payments.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693625-despite-benign-economic-conditions-india-faces-tricky-budget-decisions-leap/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

Gotham on Thames

Many Britons think London too big, but it is really too small

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



LONDON may be Europe’s commercial capital, but not all Britons are thrilled about that. In a poll conducted in 2014, two-thirds of non-Londoners reckoned that London had a positive impact on the British economy as a whole, but fewer than a third thought London’s strength was good for their city. London lures skilled workers and productive companies away from other parts of Britain. It also lures workers and firms from across Europe—something that makes many Britons, both in London and beyond, bristle. Indeed, London’s mop-topped mayor, Boris Johnson, this week joined the campaign to persuade Britons to withdraw from the European Union.

London dominates Britain, accounting for 23% of its population and about a third of its economic output. The city grew to enormous size in the 19th and early-20th century, when it served as the political and economic hub of a global empire. The post-war decline in its population, a result both of the loss of empire and of policies intended to curb its growth, ended in the 1980s, when the globalisation of finance rejuvenated the city’s main industry. Greater London is the fifth-largest metropolitan economy in the world, according to the Brookings Institution, a think-tank. It is the EU’s largest city, by both population and output.

Yet London should arguably be bigger than it is. It is Europe’s most important financial centre, and one of its biggest hubs for information industries and professional services—the European analogue to New York city. But London accounts for just 4.5% of the EU’s output, after adjusting for variation in the cost of living, and just 2.9% of its population, whereas New York accounts for 8.1% of America’s GDP and 6.3% of its population (see chart). Were European integration ever to yield something like a United States of Europe (and Britain ever to be part of such an enterprise), London would probably swell in size and importance.

Why should that be the case? Economists have touted the benefits of cities since 1826, when a German one named Johann Heinrich von Thünen tried to explain why farmers gather in villages rather than living by their fields. Paul Krugman, in a paper published in 1991, homed in on the role of “increasing returns to scale” in driving the growth of cities. Because it is expensive to move people and goods, customers want to be where producers are and vice versa. As cities grow, increasing returns kick in: the more people who live in a particular place, the more attractive that place becomes to others. Mr Krugman focused on clustering in manufacturing. Two trading regions with a slight imbalance in population would naturally evolve into a developed core and an underpopulated periphery, he argued. In the paper, which the Nobel committee cited when awarding him the prize for economics, Mr Krugman pointed as an example to Europe, where industrial activity is concentrated in the north-west.

Manufacturing no longer drives urbanisation in the rich world. In 2009 Edward Glaeser and Joshua Gottlieb of Harvard University surveyed recent research in order to distil the nature and causes of the “wealth of cities”. Although manufacturing firms have grown less likely to concentrate together in dense areas, thanks to the falling cost and hassle of shipping, firms in knowledge-based industries like technology and finance have become more prone to clustering. In cities with lots of skilled workers, productivity tends to rise with population density. The authors reckon that it is now the advantage of associating with other clever people, and the intellectual stimulation and exchange that results, that gives the biggest cities their magnetism.

City sticker

Congestion slows cities’ breakneck growth: housing and transport infrastructure seldom keep pace with demand. As a result, rather than a single metropolitan goliath, economies tend to develop a series of cities distributed by size according to “Zipf’s law” (named after George Zipf, an American linguist). The largest city tends to be twice the size of the second-largest, three times the size of the third-largest, and so on. American cities roughly follow this pattern. In the less-integrated EU, however, there is instead a jumble of big cities and a dearth of medium-sized ones.

Deeper integration would push Europe toward a more American distribution. London would probably be the main beneficiary, given its particular strengths. Europe’s financial markets remain highly fragmented. Its stockmarkets are about half the size of America’s, despite the similar size of the two economies; European corporate-bond markets are about a third of the size. Few Italian firms, for instance, turn to their country’s relatively small equity or bond markets for funding. Instead, they simply borrow from Italian banks, which tend to have their headquarters in Milan. The EU is currently trying to rectify that by making it easier to borrow, lend and invest across its internal borders, in the hope of reducing funding costs for European firms. If such efforts bear fruit and Britain remains a part of the union, firms based in London would help more foreign companies issue shares or bonds there, at the expense of other European financial centres. Easing the cross-border provision of services, another thing on the EU’s long-term agenda, would likewise prove a boon for London.

That prospect would naturally discomfit continentals. Just as New York rose head and shoulders above Philadelphia and Boston as the American economy grew and integrated, Paris, Frankfurt and Milan could all expect to cede ground to London in a close-knit EU. But London’s boosters might also blanch at the growth deeper integration might bring. It would mean more building, for starters. Greater London added 23,000 new housing units in the year to September, less than a third of the new units approved in New York last year. Were London to follow the example of New York, its GDP and population could eventually eclipse that of the rest of Britain, lengthening the political and cultural shadows cast across the rest of the country. Mr Johnson is angling for a promotion to prime minister; ironically, a vote to remain could make his current job one of the most desirable in Europe.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693610-many-britons-think-london-too-big-it-really-too-small-gotham-thames/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Correction:“Chop, chop”, January 30th

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Correction: In a recent article on the restructuring of big banks (“Chop, chop”, January 30th), we said Barclays planned to “shut up shop” in Asia. In fact, it is only closing its share-trading business there. Sorry.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21693612-correctionchop-chop-january-30th/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Cryptography: Taking a bite at the Apple

Cancer: A run a day keeps the tumour at bay

Trachoma: Now is the time to say “goodbye”

Sexual reproduction: Plucking rubies from the rubbish

Cuckoldry and song: Fidelio





Articles Sections Next

Cryptography

Taking a bite at the Apple

The FBI’s legal battle with the maker of iPhones is an escalation of a long-simmering conflict about encryption and security

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



“WE FEEL we must speak up in the face of what we see as an overreach by the US government.” With those words Tim Cook, head of Apple, the world’s biggest information-technology (IT) company, explained on February 16th why he felt his firm should refuse to comply with an FBI request to break into an iPhone used by Syed Farook, a dead terrorist. Farook and his wife Tashfeen Malik, who were sympathisers with Islamic State, shot and killed 14 people in California in December, before both were themselves killed by police. The FBI’s request, Mr Cook said, was “chilling”.

Ever since 2013, when Edward Snowden’s leaks pushed privacy and data security into the public eye, America’s IT firms have been locked in battle with their own government. The issue at stake is as old as mass communication: how much power should the authorities have to subvert the means citizens and companies use to keep their private business private?

For Mr Cook to choose the Farook case as the line he will not cross seems, on the face of things, baffling. The phone is government property (Farook was a public employee). The FBI wants help unlocking it because it may contain information on the motives or contacts of a dead terrorist. What could be more reasonable? But for Apple, and those security advocates who think the firm is right to defy the government, it is not reasonable at all. Far from being a one-off, they suspect the FBI’s case has been chosen carefully, in order to set a legal precedent that would let policemen and spies break into computers much more easily—and would do so in a way that undermines everyone’s security.

Cryptoporticus

The files on Farook’s phone, as on all iPhones, are encrypted. Unless the correct code is entered to unlock the phone, they are meaningless gibberish. By itself such a code provides little security. It is, by default, a mere four digits long, which makes it easy to memorise but means there are only 10,000 possible combinations. This makes it simple to try every combination until by chance the right one is hit, a process called “brute-forcing”.

Other features, though, are designed to make brute-forcing harder. After six wrong guesses a user has to wait a minute before trying a seventh. That delay rises rapidly to an hour. On average, therefore, brute-forcing a four-digit iPhone passcode will take 5,000 hours—nearly seven months. Yet even that might be a surmountable obstacle, were it not for the fact that iPhones can also be set to wipe themselves clean after ten failed attempts to log in.

Crucially, both restrictions—the time between attempts, and the wipe after ten failed tries—can, unlike the encryption itself, be circumvented. That is because they are enforced by the phone’s operating system, iOS, and operating systems can be changed. Apple does so regularly, issuing updates that add features and fix bugs. The FBI is, in essence, asking for just such an update, bespoke to the phone in question, that would remove the extra security features so that they can brute-force it quickly.

In theory the bureau could write such an update itself. But it could not use it without Apple’s help because, precisely to stop such attacks, iPhones will accept an update only if they can be convinced, via a special, cryptographically signed certificate, that it comes from Apple. Only Apple possesses the long, randomly generated number used as the key to that process.

The FBI has insisted its request is a one-off, and that once the software has done its job Apple can delete it. But many security experts are sceptical: they do not believe that looking inside Farook’s phone is the bureau’s only motive. “They almost certainly won’t find anything of interest on the phone,” opines Nicholas Weaver, a computer-security researcher at the University of California, Berkeley. He points out that Farook and his wife took the trouble to destroy two other phones and a laptop, while leaving the iPhone—which belonged to Farook’s employer—intact. (On the other hand, Farook did disable the phone’s online backup feature, data from which the FBI would have access to—a few weeks before his rampage.)

Dr Weaver and people like him think the FBI has pushed the case specifically because it is hard, from a public-relations point of view, for Apple to be seen to be refusing to co-operate. They worry that if Apple agrees to build such a system once, it will find similar requests impossible to refuse in future—an argument that was bolstered when it emerged that the Justice Department was demanding Apple’s help in at least nine similar cases (in seven of those, the firm is resisting). Some fret that the FBI might even require the firm to start sending subverted code to specific suspects over the air, using the technology it employs to distribute legitimate updates.

Viewed narrowly, that might be no bad thing. The FBI has argued many times that encryption can thwart legitimate investigations, leaving vital clues undiscovered. But security researchers point out that what works for the good guys works for the bad guys, too. If a subverted operating system managed to escape into the “wild” even once, then the security of every iPhone would be put at risk. The trade-off, says Kenneth White, a director of the Open Crypto Audit Project, an American charity, is not security versus privacy, but security for everyone versus the police’s ability to investigate specific crimes. And the risk of a leak would rise with every extra person who had access to the nobbled code: defence lawyers demanding to see it; court-appointed experts given the job of checking it works as intended; and so on.

A second argument against collaboration points out that Apple has governments besides America’s that it must answer to. Deliberately compromising its security for the Americans, says Mr White, will encourage other countries to make similar, perhaps even broader, demands for access. Having conceded the point once, Apple will find it hard to resist in future. In countries less concerned with civil liberties and the rule of law, that could have serious consequences.

Key decisions

All these arguments are set to be rehearsed when Apple and the FBI meet in court, on March 22nd. But however the decision goes, it is unlikely to be the last word. Most observers expect appeals to carry on all the way to the Supreme Court. In the meantime IT firms, Apple included, are taking steps to lock themselves out of their own customers’ devices, deliberately making it harder to fulfil official requests for access.

New versions of the iPhone feature something called the Secure Enclave. This is a separate computer within the phone, whose job is to police access to the rest of the device. Cracking it would require an extra piece of customised software aimed at neutering the Enclave itself. That is doable, for Apple has retained the ability to alter the Enclave so that it can issue updates and fix bugs. But things need not stay this way. The firm has pondered removing its ability to modify the Enclave, which would frustrate official requests for access.

Even then, a determined policeman has options. It is possible, with expensive equipment and a good deal of skill, to recover cryptographic keys from hardware by poking around physically in the transistors and wiring of the chip itself. Decapping, as this process is known (the first step is to remove the chip’s protective plastic cap) is the stuff of intelligence agencies and a few dedicated laboratories, and carries a risk of destroying the chip for no gain. But, if access were thought crucial, and there were no other options, it is possible to do it.

Even so, ensuring that phones themselves can be unlocked will not solve all of the authorities’ problems. There are plenty of encrypted messaging apps available for smartphones, many written outside the United States and thus beyond the reach of its government. The most advanced feature a technique called forward secrecy, which uses disposable, one-time encryption keys to ensure that old messages stay scrambled even if those looking manage to get hold of the conversers’ permanent keys. (One such app, called Telegram, which was developed by Pavel Durov, a nomadic Russian, announced on February 24th that it had reached 100m users.)

All this may sound like an arms race. It is. Silicon Valley has roots in the counterculture of the 1960s, and a potent streak of civil libertarianism. There is a sense there that Mr Snowden’s revelations proved the American government cannot be trusted not to abuse its powers of surveillance. And there are commercial factors, too. Apple has made privacy and security important selling points for its products.

Cybersecurity types, meanwhile, feel aggrieved that policemen and politicians do not seem to grasp what they view as a fundamental point: weakening security for the police’s benefit inevitably weakens it for everyone. “They keep asking for a ‘Manhattan Project’ to figure this out,” says Mr White. “But that’s like asking for a Manhattan Project to figure out how to divide by zero.” (Attempting to dividing by zero is, by definition, a mathematical folly.)

It will be left to the courts to decide the right approach in this particular case. But the fight between Apple and the FBI raises very big questions. To answer them will ultimately require the intervention of elected politicians.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693564-fbis-legal-battle-maker-iphones-escalation/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Cancer

A run a day keeps the tumour at bay

Exercise protects against cancer. Researchers now understand why

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



AMPLE evidence shows that exercising regularly reduces the risk of cancer. Similarly, those who have survived the disease are less likely to see it return if they engage in lots of physical activity after treatment. All this suggests that such activity triggers a reaction in the body which somehow thwarts cancer cells, but the details of the process have remained murky. Now, a team led by Pernille Hojman at Copenhagen University Hospital, in Denmark, has reported in Cell Metabolism that the key to the mystery is adrenalin.

Dr Hojman began her work by verifying that exercise truly does have beneficial anti-tumour effects. She and her colleagues gave some of the mice in their laboratory activity wheels, which the animals could run around inside as much as they liked. Other mice, meanwhile, were given no opportunity to exercise beyond moving about inside their cages. The researchers then induced mice of both sorts to develop one of three types of cancer. Some, they injected with a substance called diethylnitrosamine, which causes liver cancer. Others, they injected below the skin with melanoma cells, which then set up shop where they had been injected. Others still had their tails inoculated with melanoma cells. In mice, previous experience has shown, this leads to melanomas forming in the lungs.

The results were instructive. While all mice injected under the skin with melanoma cells developed that cancer, the tumours in animals which had had access to a running wheel were 61% smaller after six weeks than were those in mice that had been unable to exercise. A similar reduction in size (58%) pertained to lung tumours. And, of the mice injected with diethylnitrosamine, only 31% of those with wheels in their enclosures developed tumours at all—in contrast to a 75% tumour-development rate in mice lacking access to a wheel.

To try to understand why exercise does this, Dr Hojman and her team put under a microscope some of the tumours they had induced. They found that those from well-exercised mice contained more immune cells than equivalent tumours from inactive animals. Specifically, the former had double the number of cytotoxic T-cells, which kill off body cells that are damaged, malfunctioning or infected with viruses. They also had five times more natural killer cells, a type that sounds the alarm and attracts other immune cells.

In light of these discoveries Dr Hojman repeated the experiment, this time on mice that had been engineered to lack cytotoxic T-cells. Again, she found that mice with access to wheels had smaller tumours. This suggested that the natural killer cells, not the T-cells, were the responsible agents. A third experiment confirmed this. She sabotaged natural killer cells by giving mice an antibody that eliminated these cells while leaving the rest of the immune system intact. With the natural killer cells gone, the tumours of all the mice, regardless of whether or not they could run in a wheel, grew to the same size.

Dr Hojman knew from past work that epinephrine, a hormone also commonly known as adrenalin, has the potential to mobilise natural killer cells. She knew, too, that this hormone’s levels in the blood rise during periods of physical exertion. That led her to wonder if it is epinephrine which is behind the cancer-thwarting effects of exercise.

To find out, she ran a fourth experiment, in which mice induced to have cancer were injected either with epinephrine or with saline. The hormone performed well, reducing the growth of tumours by 61% in mice that had no access to a wheel. However, this was not as impressive as the reduction of 74% which the team saw in control mice that got regular exercise. There was, they concluded, something else involved. And they found it in the form of interleukin-6.

Levels of this molecule also spike during exercise—and it, too, helps immune cells home in on tumours. When Dr Hojman and her colleagues exposed sedentary mice both to epinephrine and to interleukin-6, the rodents’ immune systems attacked the tumours in their bodies as effectively as if those animals had engaged in regular wheel-runs.

Dr Hojman’s findings, then, suggest that epinephrine and interleukin-6 could be used as anti-tumour drugs. She is not proposing that they should be a substitute for exercise in those who are merely lazy—not least because exercise brings benefits beyond curbing oncogenesis. But people who are too old or too ill to be active might thus gain exercise’s anticancer benefits without the need to get sweaty.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693419-active-life-protects-against-cancer-researchers-now-understand-why-run-day/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trachoma

Now is the time to say “goodbye”

A disease that has robbed 1m people of their sight is under systematic attack

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



TRICHIASIS, the last stage of an infection called trachoma, rarely hits the headlines. That is because it does not kill. It does, however, blind. More than 2m people suffer, half of whom have lost their vision. The condition, caused by certain strains of Chlamydia trachomatis, a bacterium, makes the eyelid turn inward. That causes the sufferer’s eyelashes to scratch his cornea when he blinks. People blink 15-20 times a minute, so the pain is relentless, and eventually the scarring caused by the scratching results in sightlessness.

Trachoma is preventable (by regular face washing and general cleanliness) and treatable (by an antibiotic called Zithromax and by surgery to correct deformed eyelids). But, until recently, where such efforts should be concentrated was not clear. This changed with the publication earlier this month, by the Global Trachoma Mapping Project, of an atlas of risk (see above).

The survey which created this atlas, led by Sightsavers, a British charity, examined 2.6m people over three years to see whether they had the disease. That sample was drawn from a population of 224m in 29 countries reckoned at risk. The project’s methodology was designed to be simple and reliable. Out went pens and paper. In came smartphones. Data could thus not be lost to the rain, and their quality could be checked continuously. Nor was there any doubt about where they were collected from, since the phones were tracked by the Global Positioning System.

The atlas’s publication brings encouraging news. Malawi, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda had much lower levels of trachoma than expected. Laos and Cambodia, unsurveyed since the 1960s, turned out to be virtually free of it. And, for those places that are infected, the full force of antibiotic-distribution and face-washing education programmes can now be brought to bear. The World Health Organisation aspires to eliminate trachoma as a public-health risk by 2020, leaving only sporadic cases that local doctors can clear up. That sounds ambitious. But knowing where to concentrate fire certainly helps.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693565-disease-has-robbed-1m-people-their-sight-under-systematic-attack-now/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sexual reproduction

Plucking rubies from the rubbish

Sex is not just an emotional mystery. Its very existence poses a deep question

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



GUILT-FREE intercourse may, as Philip Larkin wrote, have begun in 1963, but sexual reproduction has been around a good deal longer than that. Single-celled organisms began exchanging and mixing up genetic information in ways modern biologists recognise as rudimentary forms of sex about two billion years ago. Yet the question of why sex exists at all remains troublesome. A creature which reproduces asexually passes on all of its genes to each of its progeny. One that mates with another, by contrast, passes on only half of them. On the face of things that is a huge selective disadvantage. There must therefore, evolutionary biologists believe, be equally huge compensating benefits.

Two ideas exist about what these might be. One is that the constantly changing genetic variety sex creates stops parasites and pathogens evolving stable techniques for exploiting a host species. This is the “Red Queen” hypothesis, an allusion to a character in “Through the Looking-Glass” who had to run as fast as she could to stay in the same place. The other idea is that the continual mixing of genes from generation to generation separates good and bad mutations, permitting the bad ones to be purged by natural selection without taking the good ones along for the ride. This process was described by Joel Peck, one of its progenitors, as plucking rubies from rubbish.

“Plucking rubies” and the “Red Queen” are not mutually exclusive. Both could be true. But, while the queen has experimental evidence to back her up, rubies have had little such validation. Until now. For Michael Desai of Harvard University believes he has demonstrated such plucking experimentally in brewer’s yeast. This is a well-understood experimental organism and one ideal for Dr Desai’s purpose because it can reproduce both sexually and asexually. Studying the switch between the two modes, he hoped, might illuminate the purging process. And, as he and his team write in Nature, it has.

Despite having two sexes, known as mating-types a and alpha, yeast’s default mode of reproduction is asexual, so Dr Desai’s first task was to work out a way to turn his yeast cells on to sex, as it were. He did this by adding to their DNA genes for resistance to two antibiotics, hygromycin and G418, and arranging for this resistance to be turned on only when the gene for mating was also active. Adding the antibiotics to the yeast’s growth medium meant only sexually active yeast cells could survive.

This done, he and his team set up 24 lines of this modified strain (12 of mating-type a and 12 of alpha) and let them grow for six months, a period that corresponds to about 1,000 yeast generations. Six lines of each mating type were forced to undergo sexual reproduction every 90 generations, by mixing the sexes together and adding the antibiotics. Others were left to carry on cloning themselves. At these 90-generation break points the researchers also sampled each line to look for any genetic mutations that had arisen in the intervening period. Such mutations are the stuff of evolution, and Dr Desai hoped they might tell the story of why, in an evolutionary sense, sex works.

They did. The researchers found, as predicted, that when a beneficial mutation appeared in a few of the asexually reproducing cells, it would spread only if its positive effects outweighed the negative effects of any deleterious mutations that appeared in the same cells. Even if a good mutation prospered, it did so slowly, as any bad mutations associated with it came along for the ride when the genome it was in passed from one generation to the next.

In the sexual yeast population, however, good and bad mutations often went their separate ways when the parent cell’s genome was chopped up and mixed around during reproduction. This permitted different combinations of good and bad mutations to pass to the genomes of different offspring of the same parent cells. That made it easier, in an evolutionary sorting of wheat from chaff, for the good mutations to spread, even if they first appeared in bad company. So, as evolutionary theory predicts, over the course of the experiment genomes containing deleterious mutations disappeared and positive mutations accumulated in the genomes of cells that remained.

The crucial test, though, came at the end of the experiment, when Dr Desai compared the asexual to the sexual strains. In every case, the descendants of sexually reproducing yeast cells bested their asexual rivals in the competition for food and resources. His experiments thus confirm that the ruby hypothesis works—at least, in a laboratory. That puts it on an equal footing with the Red Queen. What goes on in the wild, though, has yet to be determined.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693542-it-not-just-emotional-mystery-its-very-existence-poses-deep-question-sex/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Cuckoldry and song

Fidelio

Birds that sing together, cling together

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Sing up, dear

THE lovey-dovey monogamy which the untutored eye may perceive in pairs of songbirds, raising their young together in nests constructed by joint endeavour, has long been exposed by zoologists as a fantasy. Even by the adulterous standards of the ornithological world, though, the red-backed fairy-wren, an Australian bird, is a champion. According to a study just published in Biology Letters by Daniel Baldassarre of Cornell University and his colleagues, almost half of fairy-wren nestlings are not fathered by the male that is helping to feed them, and 60% of nests contain at least one such chick. For male fairy-wrens, then, trying to guarantee paternity is a continual struggle, and Dr Baldassarre and his team wondered which strategies worked best.

Broadly, a male fairy-wren has two options. He can try to discourage interlopers by beating them up, or he can woo his mate to encourage her not to stray. He does this by duetting with her. That both keeps her attention and may suggest to other males that she is, indeed, loyal.

To see which was the better approach Dr Baldassarre and his team ran some experiments in Queensland. They challenged male fairy-wrens with dummy interlopers who were given voice by recorded songs. They then compared the males’ typical responses to these artificial encounters with the paternities of actual nestlings subsequently raised, as estimated by comparing the youngsters’ DNA with that of their purported fathers.

In practice, all challenged males responded both by attacking the stuffed rival and by duetting with their mates. They did so, however, with varying levels of enthusiasm for each approach.

Altogether, in the course of several slightly different experiments, the researchers looked at the adults and offspring in 51 territories. Their results were intriguing. A male’s level of aggression towards the dummy made no perceptible difference to his chance, subsequently measured, of being a cuckold. His level of duetting, by contrast, made a big one. The best duetters had almost no offspring born of adultery inflicted on them.

Aggression, presumably, brings other advantages, otherwise it is hard to see why it happens. Probably, it serves to protect a territory (and thus its food resources) from predatory neighbours. In the matter of sexual fidelity, though, it seems to be useless. For female fairy-wrens, it is rather a mellifluous mate that is the key to domestic harmony and a loyal partnership.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21693567-birds-sing-together-cling-together-fidelio/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




Hieronymus Bosch: Painter of our greatest fears

British newspapers: Per ardua ad Astor

Return to nature: Animal instinct

Free-diving: Blue hole, black hole

Family ties: In knots

Johnson: Je suis circonflexe





Articles Sections Next

Hieronymus Bosch

Painter of our greatest fears

A major new exhibition shows Hieronymus Bosch to be startlingly modern

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Heavenly bodies

FOR centuries the received wisdom was that the Renaissance started in Italy. Ever since Giorgio Vasari, one of the first art historians, wrote in 1550 of a new naturalness in painting—as opposed to medieval mannerism—the idea of the Renaissance has been linked with frescoes in Florence or the sinuous forms painted on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. Now, an important show of work by Hieronymus Bosch, one of the finest Dutch painters, in his home town of ’s-Hertogenbosch, challenges that view. It shows how an artist usually associated with the medieval was using a naturalist style at least 50 years before Vasari.

The exhibition, which marks the 500th anniversary of Bosch’s death, has been over a decade in the making, and is the culmination of six years of work by the Bosch Research and Conservation Project, in which experts analysed the paintings of Bosch in piercing detail. It is a remarkable achievement. Of the 24 paintings known to be by Bosch, 17 are on display, while 19 of his drawings are also shown, making it the largest exhibition of his work to date. Managing to get all of these paintings together, often from large and possessive museums in Madrid, New York and Venice, is a coup for a small, regional gallery which owns no Bosch pictures of its own.

Bosch’s work has inspired many different interpretations: from the idea that he belonged to a sexual sect to the notion that his paintings, often full of fantastical creatures, could have been created only while on psychedelic drugs. This show is blissfully free of heavy-handed interpretation. Instead it presents his work alongside documents (bibles, books of hours and missals) which help put his paintings in context. But the commentary is minimal. The work is allowed to speak for itself.

The result is outstanding. Bosch came from a long line of artists. His grandfather was a painter, as was his father and three of his uncles. Painting was their way of understanding the world. Bosch’s work is deeply religious: with a few exceptions, his pictures depict moments from the Bible and the lives of the saints, or scenes of heaven, hell and the bits between. Many were commissioned by a local church, St John’s, where in 1487-88 he became a “sworn brother” of the Brotherhood of Our Lady, a religious fraternity.

The energy of his devotion can be felt in the scathing social commentary of “The Haywain”, where crowds of people, including nuns, grasp at a haystack which is being led to hell by creatures that are half-fish and half-man. Or it can be glimpsed in “The Ascent of the Blessed”, where angels guide people from purgatory up to heaven—their arms outstretched—and jubilantly push these souls upwards (see picture).

But this exhibition also shows how his work is rooted in the everyday. His drawings, with all their vitality and observed detail, have a special sharpness. His religious works, too, are grounded in reality. In “The Last Judgment” the instruments of torture are crafted out of funnels, barrels, jugs and bells. In “Ecce Homo”, which depicts the moment Christ is condemned to death, in the background a man and a woman peer over a bridge, oblivious to what is going on near them.

This mix of the extraordinary and the mundane appears even more original when comparing Bosch’s work with that by members of his workshop. This exhibition often invites such comparisons. Bosch’s luminous “The Adoration of the Magi”, on loan from the Metropolitan Museum in New York, hangs next to a work of the same name by one of his followers. Bosch’s painting is full of life and details: daisies sprouting out of the base of a wall and two men warming their hands over a fire in the background. By contrast, although his follower’s work is a later painting it seems stiffly medieval. No such details of life exist in it, while its perspective is skewed. So too with one of the workshop editions of “Ecce Homo”: Bosch presents a Christ who is bowed and lacerated with whippings and dripping with blood, whereas his follower presents Christ standing upright, seemingly unhurt.

Earthly delights

Not all of Bosch’s works are on display. “The Garden of Earthly Delights”, perhaps his best-known painting, still hangs in the Prado in Madrid. Two other works from the Prado were withdrawn at the last minute, after the Bosch Research and Conservation Project found they were likely to be by one of his followers instead. This is a shame. But the experience of seeing so many of Bosch’s paintings and drawings together, and in the town where they were first created, mostly makes up for these losses. There are images that run throughout the work: owls, long associated with evil, appear often.

What is remarkable is how modern Bosch’s work feels. He was “on the brink of the new time,” says Charles de Mooij, the director of the Het Noordbrabants Museum. This feels too modest. Bosch’s scenes of hell and damnation may not have the same spiritual impact on a largely secular society. But there is a sense of urgency to his paintings that demands attention, and which feels distinctly new. His figures, whether saints or mischievous sinners, are depicted with a naturalness which makes them stand apart from those of other painters of his time. This exhibition suggests that half a millennium ago, in a small town once considered an artistic backwater, the Renaissance began with Bosch.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21693549-major-new-exhibition-shows-hieronymus-bosch-be-startlingly-modern-painter-our/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

British newspapers

Per ardua ad Astor

The lasting influence of Britain’s great liberal newspaper editor

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Setting the liberal agenda

David Astor. By Jeremy Lewis. Jonathan Cape; 416 pages; £25.

DAVID ASTOR, who edited the Observer from 1948 until 1975 (and whose family owned it), belonged to a time when newspapers were Britain’s principal source of information. For well over 20 years, Astor’s Observer was the voice of Britain’s liberal consensus. It campaigned persistently and successfully against the death penalty, theatre censorship and racial discrimination; in favour of the decolonisation of Africa and of tolerance towards homosexuality. The laws that were passed subsequently freed people to make social and moral decisions for themselves. Jeremy Lewis, in a lively, gossipy and affectionate biography, asserts that Astor was “one of the outstanding editors of the last century”, and it is hard to disagree.

Although Astor never learned to type, he was a good copy editor and headline writer. He hired writers he admired, even if they had not dutifully served the usual three-year journalistic apprenticeship in the provinces. Anthony Sampson, one of his most distinguished editorial acquisitions, thought that the paper was more like a family charity, or an eccentric college, than a commercial newspaper.

One significant difference between Astor and most Fleet Street editors was his inherited wealth. He was brought up at Cliveden, a great house on the Thames: “a shallow, vapid, cotton-wool life”, he once said, dominated by his obtrusive and overbearing American mother Nancy, Britain’s first female member of parliament. It is no surprise that he sought consolation in Freudian psychoanalysis, in which he never lost his faith.

His father, Waldorf, (whose own father had bought the paper from Lord Northcliffe in 1911) suggested it might provide David with a suitable occupation. The young man not long out of Eton and Oxford found the idea wearisome, but the outbreak of the second world war piqued his interest. While still on the staff of Lord Mountbatten’s Combined Operations, he persuaded a reluctant Observer editor to run a weekly series that contemplated life after the war. In 1945 he became its foreign editor, nurturing temperamental central European intellectuals such as Arthur Koestler and Isaac Deutscher.

David Astor’s reputation was made by his violent opposition to the Suez invasion in 1956. The Observer damned it as gangsterism. Although advertising suffered, circulation did not. His paper fought the cold war, was routinely Atlanticist and favoured a federal Europe. But it was the campaigns that defined it. The other crucial ingredient was writing that burnished a golden age of Sunday journalism. Kenneth Tynan’s theatre reviews, the reportorial brilliance of Patrick O’Donovan and Michael Davie, Jane Bown’s photographs, Hugh McIlvanney’s match reports and Terry Kilmartin’s literary pages set standards few journalists could match.

The problem was money. Waldorf Astor had set up a charitable trust to protect the paper from disagreeable predators, with statutes that prevented it from making a profit or borrowing money. The only legitimate source of new capital was the family, and David Astor himself ploughed at least £1.25m (in late 1960s money) into the paper and leant on his siblings for more. The money was needed to compete with the Sunday Times, but not even the Astors had enough.

Besides, Astor was not naturally competitive. When the Sunday Times published a magazine, he declined to follow suit, until his commercial department forced him to. Shortage of capital meant the Observer could not rival the size and range of the Sunday Times, and, as an editor, he had little sympathy with the investigative journalism that became the powerful speciality of its rival.

He was wrong; by the 1970s, the battle for supremacy on Sundays was over. When Astor retired in 1975, Sir Harold Evans, the celebrated editor of the Sunday Times, declared that he no longer thought of the Observer as a rival. The Sunday Times published some memorable journalism; none more so than its determination to win compensation for the victims of thalidomide. But the Observer’s campaigns for social liberalism have profoundly affected the way Britain lives and thinks. So who was the more influential editor? It was David Astor, surely.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21693548-lasting-influence-britains-great-liberal-newspaper-editor-ardua-ad-astor/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Return to nature

Animal instinct

How writing about wild animals morphed into trying to become an animal

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



Being a Beast. By Charles Foster. Profile; 218 pages; £14.99. To be published in America by Metropolitan in June, $28.

STRIDING around describing plants and animals, often in flowery prose from behind a desk or a camera lens, seems rather old-fashioned. In “Being a Beast” Charles Foster takes a more modern approach, getting down to the animal’s level to see what it is really like to be a badger, an otter, a fox, a red deer and a swift.

It is an extreme proposition. Mr Foster, a writer and barrister who qualified as a vet and has a PhD in medical law and ethics from Cambridge, doesn’t just investigate the taxonomical differences with humans; he attempts to overcome them. This means eating rubbish from bin bags as an urban fox would do, living in a sett as a badger, cowering naked on a moor as a red deer and launching himself fully clothed into a river pretending to be an otter.

Mr Foster is a nature writer, but not one you would recognise. There is plenty of shit and blood and dirt and very little description of the beauty of the animals. Because who needs to read that? Readers know that a badger is handsome. What they do not know is what worms taste like. Since you ask, it’s like wine apparently: once you get past the slime, each worm has its own individual terroir.

Mr Foster shapeshifts with the book. In the badger chapter he is sensuous yet ruthless. As an otter he has ADHD. As a fox he is a canine kind of street smart. And as a swift? Suddenly transcendent. The book contains some very funny moments, usually involving other humans who are confused as to why a man is sleeping under a shed, eating spiders or growling at a dog.

But to dismiss Mr Foster as an eccentric would be a mistake. In each chapter the reader learns a lot about the animals involved. What does it feel like to sleep by a road, hunt voles or be hunted by hounds? The author hones senses long neglected. As a badger he maps the dark wood by smells alone, as an otter he sees the river through a thousand tiny bubbles, and as a fox he slinks into a new city of London defined by dark corners and rubbish dumps.

The idea that people should stop managing the landscape and let the wild back into their tired lives has gained so much in popularity it now goes by the buzzword “rewilding” in conservation circles. Mr Foster is the real thing, going truly feral and in the process discovering a whole new world. It is not a midlife crisis so much as a lifelong passion.

Yet no matter how hard he tries, poor Charles Foster is such a very human homo sapiens. He cannot escape being a middle-aged man. It is like watching a geek with the cool kids at a party, trying to assume the character of a cunning fox or a confident badger. He has moments, like when he discovers the joy of chasing a cat or earthworms emerging after the rain. But in the end, he is too clumsy, too bipedal—and altogether too intellectual.

A streak of eastern mysticism runs through Mr Foster’s book. In the end he listens to its call and lets rip. This is the moment when he becomes a swift, allowing his writing and his thoughts to fly and “slash the veil”, as he calls it. He believes that the closest he can get to being a swift is to understand the finer details of the planet he shares with the bird: “The velvet flow of a caterpillar’s legs and the grunt of a crocus as it noses out of the earth.”

Finally, the author accepts that he is human, which is all about being curious and pushing boundaries. This idea is not new. Attempting to connect to animals and even become them has been tested over generations, not least as shamans and through stories, such as “Homeward Bound”. What is new is the modern world that humans have created full of cars and houses and computers, where “sensitivity is impossible”. It would be all too easy to mock the author’s commitment to recognising his atavistic abilities and releasing his inner animal. But curiosity prevails. “Being a Beast” wastes no time telling you how to identify nature or become a better person. It encourages you to get down on your hands and knees and start sniffing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21693553-how-writing-about-wild-animals-morphed-trying-become-animal-animal-instinct/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free-diving

Blue hole, black hole

A story of hubris and obsession

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition

Ray of sunshine

One Breath: Free-diving, Death and the Quest to Shatter Human Limits. By Adam Skolnick. Crown Archetype; 336 pages; $26. Corsair; £20.

THE death of Nick Mevoli, an American freediver, on November 17th 2013, while competing at Dean’s Blue Hole—a 202-metre-deep funnel of darkness in the Bahamas—is a litany of “if onlys”. If only the 32-year-old from Brooklyn, tired and in pain, had not attempted a dive that day. If only, sensing trouble, he had turned back to the surface sooner. If only his team’s resuscitation efforts had succeeded. “One Breath”, Adam Skolnick’s dissection of an extreme sport and post-mortem of a dive gone wrong, becomes a morality play of hubris, imprudence and obsession.

Free-diving, descending as deep as possible on a single breath, is a niche interest that is more dangerous than any sport other than base-jumping (leaping from a bridge or cliff wearing a wingsuit). Perils include punctured eardrums, embolisms, blackouts and “lung squeezes”. Diving at extreme depths brutalises the lungs, which at a depth of 30 metres compress to a quarter of their normal size. At worst, capillaries and pulmonary vessels rupture and a diver drowns in his own blood.

It took Mevoli, who began his first formal course in free-diving in 2011, slightly more than a year to rocket from being a novice competitor to a record-holder, and that was part of the problem. “The biggest problem with freedivers now is they hurry. They go too deep too fast,” said Natalia Molchanova, possibly the world’s greatest freediver, who drowned last August off the coast of Spain. She was giving a private lesson when she made a dive for pleasure. Not being clipped to a line, she was swept away and never found. Even the best of the best are not immune.

Mevoli grew up in a broken home with a neglectful, self-absorbed father who gave his son a life-insurance policy for his 18th birthday and made himself the beneficiary. Before his parents’ divorce, Mevoli would plunge into the backyard pool of his boyhood home in Florida, surface to check if the angry voices had subsided, and, if not, submerge again.

In free-diving he found solace and self-worth. “Each dive”, Mr Skolnick writes, became “a referendum on his own value.” Mevoli-the-friend was caring and large-spirited. Mevoli-the-competitor was reckless—“cowboyish” a friend said—prone to tantrums, sulks and self-excoriation. “I really liked Nick,” a fellow diver observed. “But I didn’t like him as a competitor. He was exorcising demons from his past and using free-diving to do that.”

It is a haunting tale. To the list of “if onlys” one should perhaps add one more: If only Nick Mevoli hadn’t measured his self-worth in metres. “Numbers infected my head like a virus,” he wrote in a blog post shortly before he died. “The need to achieve became an obsession.” And “obsessions”, he noted, “can kill.”

At 20 metres, the body loses its buoyancy. Pressure builds, the lungs shrink, gravity exerts its pull. The diver goes into free fall, carried ever deeper away from light and into blackness. One imagines Nick Mevoli, young and beautiful—an undersea Icarus falling from the sun, away from friends, family and life.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21693552-story-hubris-and-obsession-blue-hole-black-hole/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Family ties

In knots

A tender novel about an adult daughter’s longing for her mother

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



My Name Is Lucy Barton. By Elizabeth Strout. Random House; 193 pages; $26. Viking; £12.99.

“DON’T ever worry about story,” a novelist assures her writing students in “My Name Is Lucy Barton”, Elizabeth Strout’s new novel. “You have only one.” Every writer may indeed be telling the same story over and over, with slight variations. So it is for Ms Strout, who turns every book (including her Pulitzer-prize-winning “Olive Kitteridge”) into a kind of love story. These are not romances, mind you, but yarns about the primal, unwieldy love of family—those unchosen mothers and hapless brothers—and the bonds that can sometimes feel like manacles.

Ms Strout’s latest book unfurls in retrospect. Lucy Barton, a writer in New York, is recalling a time in the 1980s when a mysterious illness forced her to stay in hospital for nearly nine weeks, away from her husband and young daughters. Her solitude left her aching with loneliness, eager for visits from her doctor (who “wore his sadness with such loveliness”) and nurses, who were too busy to linger. So it is with relief that she wakes up one day to discover her mother at the foot of her bed. “Hi, Wizzle,” her mother says shyly. It has been years since they last saw each other, after a falling out over Lucy’s husband. But suddenly the recognition of her mother using her pet name makes Lucy “feel warm and liquid-filled, as though all my tension had been a solid thing and now was not.”

This sweet but odd visit by her mother dredges up more complicated memories of Lucy’s impoverished and isolated childhood in rural Illinois, with a father who was never quite right after what he saw in the second world war. Lucy managed to escape this deprivation, first through books and then through a scholarship to university, where she met her husband. After her parents ignore her wedding and then barely acknowledge her daughters, her contact with them is reduced to awkward phone calls on holidays. Not even the thrum of the city can displace the ache of loneliness left by her youth.

Yet these grievances quietly evaporate in the hospital. For Lucy, the sound of her mother’s voice nattering on with town gossip while she dozes in and out leaves her with an overwhelming feeling of comfort. “I thought: All I want is this.”

Of course Lucy is alert to what makes her mother so frustrating, too. How is it that her mother never seems to ask her a single question? Or even pay her a compliment? But the older Lucy narrating this slim and compassionate book is too wise to fan the flames of these disappointments. She knows her mother loved her, albeit imperfectly—(“Because we all love imperfectly.”) And there are times in a grown woman’s life when there are few things more reassuring than a flawed mother’s love.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21693554-tender-novel-about-adult-daughters-longing-her-mother-knots/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

Je suis circonflexe

Why a minor fiddling with French spelling causes such anguish

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



SOMETIMES it really is the little things that count. France faces high unemployment, a divided political establishment and surging xenophobia. But the issue that has the French particularly outraged is an argument about language.

Two decades ago the French Academy, a group of 40 greybeards charged with keeping the language pure, decided to reform French spelling. The government took its time with implementing the academy’s decisions. But, starting in the autumn, new school textbooks will at last comply. What has French social media in an uproar? The academy wants to simplify or regularise certain tricky spellings—allowing nénufar for nénuphar (water lily), and ditching a silent “i” in oignon, making it ognon (onion). But one change has symbolised all the others: maîtresse will become maitresse, and many other words will similarly lose the tricky little hat-shaped accent-mark that gives the online protest its name: #JeSuisCirconflexe.

It should take something serious to make the French repurpose the hashtag used after the massacre in January 2015 of staff at Charlie Hebdo at the hands of jihadist murderers. But the French who have joined the protest might retort that for them, language is serious indeed: a typical criticism on Twitter read “simplification, glorification of mediocrity, sinking to the lowest common denominator”.

The French take linguistic prowess as a proxy for intellectual agility of all kinds. For many “prowess” is a mastery of the complexity (some of it quite pointless) of the written language. The academy was founded in 1635. Official French spelling, which largely reflected its Latin roots, has changed little. But like every other language, the spoken argot has gone on changing. This has left French with many silent letters. The tricky circumflex, which on many words does not change a vowel’s pronunciation, still had to be there. Top French students prize themselves on taking down dictée in much the same way their American counterparts compete in spelling bees. But plenty of ordinary people hate spelling, just as in English.

Much of the analysis outside France on the circumflex case has made two related observations. Pointlessly difficult spelling isn’t actually pointless: it shows who has had a fine education. Those howling about mediocrity, under this theory, are really afraid for their expensively acquired status. The second theory is that it is France itself—always closely identified with its language—that is on the decline, and that the need to simplify the spelling just shows that the country isn’t as vigorous as it used to be.

Both these analyses are working too hard to put France’s peculiarities on the psychoanalyst’s couch. In fact, a glance across the Rhine shows that the circumflex dead-enders are in good company—with their German neighbours. In the 1990s a government-sponsored commission proposed a few sensible reforms, including simplifying a few spellings, much as France is now doing, and removing the distinctive German “sharp S” (ß) from many words with a short vowel sound.

The result was an almighty pushback. Intellectuals such as Günter Grass, a Nobel-prize-winning novelist who, before his death last April, had been a kind of steward of Germany’s post-war moral self, rejected the reform ostentatiously. Springer, a huge publishing house, and the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, one of Germany’s main national broadsheets, said they would refuse to observe the reforms. One of the 16 federal states went as far as to hold a referendum against the spelling changes—which passed. (The reforms were slightly modified, and the holdouts gave in in the end.)

All this took place in a Germany that was much more at ease with itself than France is today. People just have an irrational attachment to spelling. What they associate with hard but successful work as a child—learning to spell—is more precious than the pointy-headed reformers ever realise. The best analogy outside spelling might be the demoting of Pluto from its status as a planet. Many of those who had hardly bothered to think about the icy rock-ball at the far edge of the solar system suddenly found a childhood memory tarnished, mnemonic devices now featuring a superfluous P at the end. Humans, it seems, are natural conservatives: even if Pluto really isn’t a planet, even if the circumflex really is useless most of the time, it is not about the thing itself. Human beings don’t like going back and rewriting old memories.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21693551-why-minor-fiddling-french-spelling-causes-such-anguish-je-suis-circonflexe/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Harper Lee and Umberto Eco: The finger of fame





Articles Sections Next

Harper Lee and Umberto Eco

The finger of fame

Harper Lee and Umberto Eco, two unexpected literary celebrities, both died on February 19th, aged 89 and 84

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



SHE was a plain, chubby, chain-smoking southern girl, living in a cold-water flat in New York and working as an airline-reservation clerk. He was a paunchy, balding, chain-smoking teacher of semiotics, the study of signs, codes and meanings in language, at various Italian universities. Both enjoyed producing small articles and pastiches, she for the college magazine, he for avant-garde publications, and it was only challenges from friends that induced either to embark on a novel. His first, “The Name of the Rose”, published in 1980, sold 10m copies worldwide. Her first, “To Kill a Mockingbird” (1960), sold more than 40m, and was proclaimed by some to be the best American novel of the 20th century. Umberto Eco rode literary stardom like a plump surfer on a giant laughing wave. Harper Lee was drowned by it.

“Mockingbird”, set in fictional Maycomb, Alabama, was a story of racial injustice seen through the clear but innocent eye of a small tomboy, Scout, whose father, Atticus Finch, was given the hopeless task of defending a black man accused of raping a white woman. On the eve of the civil-rights era the novel pricked America’s conscience, and reporters raced to photograph Miss Lee in her home town of Monroeville, Alabama, on the porch and in the courthouse, nervously smiling. The book was assumed to be her life in thin disguise. But in a rare interview in 1961 she said it was all fiction, nothing to do with her “dull” real childhood, and (unspoken but implied) would they please now go away.

Mr Eco would have queried that wished-for divide between fact and fiction. It wasn’t as clear-cut as that. The urge to tell stories, weave myths and simply lie lay deep in the possibilities of human language. But if facts could become fables, fables could lead to facts, just as wild medieval tales of lost kingdoms had inspired Europe’s exploration of America. Besides, any novel pretended to be true, and a good “open” text would spur the reader to judge and interpret that truth for himself. “Mockingbird” and “The Name of the Rose” were both essentially whodunnits, and “Who done it?” Mr Eco said, was the fundamental question of all philosophy.

His own journey through the labyrinth described an investigation by William of Baskerville and his sidekick, the novice Adso, into a series of gruesome murders in an unnamed abbey in the year 1327. He began with a pleasing idea, that a monk might be poisoned by reading a book, and took it from there, lovingly channelling the Middle Ages and pouring forth everything he knew. Again, though this was fiction, pages covered the theological, philosophical and scientific debates of the time, well-dosed (for those who knew) with his own semiotics in medieval dress.

Both he and Miss Lee dealt in sealed-off worlds: Maycomb isolated in cotton fields and quiet red dust; the abbey perched on precipices behind high walls. In suchworlds rumours festered and conspiracy theories proliferated, fed by the feverish interpretation of signs. Both featured places (in the abbey, the library; in Maycomb, the tumbledown Boo Radley house) peopled by shadows and littered with symbols. In the abbey, painted phrases from the Apocalypse beckoned towards horror. In Maycomb, Indian-head pennies left in a tree seemed to do the same.

Despite her protests, Miss Lee’s minute evocation of Maycomb—the talcum scent of white women in the humid afternoons, the smell of Hoyt’s Cologne in the blacks’ church—was evidently drawn from childhood. And she had honed her skills of observation afterwards when Truman Capote, a childhood friend, took her along in 1959 to help with the exhaustive forensic interviews in Holcomb, Kansas that became “In Cold Blood”. Mr Eco, who worked from notebooks, index cards, obscure codices and hand-drawn maps, was seldom autobiographical, save for musing on the seductive symbols and myths of fascism with which he had grown up; and save for reflecting that his omnivorous curiosity, his love of lists and lunatic science (“Ptolemy, not Galileo”) and his analysis of every conceivable cultural artefact, from Thomas Mann to Mickey Mouse, from Snoopy to Avicenna, from TV quiz shows to the “Poetics” of Aristotle, had been fed in boyhood by reading Jules Verne.

Opening the text

Sudden fame encouraged him all the more. He travelled the globe, wrote columns for left-wing newspapers and produced six more novels: one, “Foucault’s Pendulum” (1988), about an all-encompassing conspiracy theory; another, “Baudolino” (2000), about webs of lies. All sold well. In his several residences he amassed a collection of 50,000 books; but he still spent five days a week merrily teaching semiotics in Bologna, partly at the university and partly, till late, in the tavernas of the town.

Harper Lee vanished. The second novel would not come, and she retreated to Monroeville. In 2015 the discarded part of “Mockingbird” was published as “Go Set a Watchman”, to tepid reviews. She too, in confused old age, was indifferent to it. But in Bologna one professor might have noted that “Watchman”, in which the noble Atticus suddenly expressed racist opinions, had opened up “Mockingbird” to new and startling interpretations: which surely should encourage the millions who loved it to read it all over again.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21693524-two-unexpected-literary-celebrities-who-reacted-fame-startlingly-different-ways-harper-lee/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Sovereign-wealth funds

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21693597/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693593-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693595-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693599-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sovereign-wealth funds

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition



China’s four sovereign-wealth funds have $1.5 trillion-worth of assets between them. None is larger than Norway’s $825 billion government pension fund, according to the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute (SWFI), a think-tank. Norway’s fund, like many others, is fed by revenues from natural resources: oil-and-gas-based sovereign-wealth funds make up 56% of the market by asset value. The falling oil price means many countries sold assets last year to finance budget deficits. Outflows have mainly been from liquid assets like equities, which may have contributed to stockmarket turbulence this year. The SWFI predicts that another $404 billion could be withdrawn from listed equities in 2016.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693598-sovereign-wealth-funds/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Feb 27th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21693571-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Fri, 26 Feb 2016]

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



The Republicans: Time to fire him





Britain and the European Union: The real danger of Brexit





Making Indonesia work: Open up





Traffic in megacities: Jam today





Privacy and security: Code to ruin?





Letters



International students, Trump history, China's economy, monuments, tax reliefs, linguistics, Supreme Court: Letters to the editor





Briefing



Britain and the EU: The Brexit delusion





Britain’s EU reforms: A change of status





United States



Marco Rubio: The moral of his story





The Nevada caucuses: Winning big





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





The religious left: The least of these





Fringe movements: Finding Keepers





Lexington: A Latino firewall totters





The Americas



Crime in Mexico: Mean beaches





Urban architecture: Biography of a building





Bello: Evo Morales’s fall from grace





Asia



Caste in India: Backward ho!





Individualism in South Korea: Zero to hero





Politics in Japan: What’s in a name?





Traffic in the Philippines’ capital: Slowly does it





Politics in Cambodia: Same old, same old





Banyan: Taking arms





China



Football: Patriotic goal





Single parents: Pariahs





Online dissent: Punching high





Middle East and Africa



Trade within Africa: Tear down these walls





Ethiopia’s drought: On the edge of disaster





Syria: Russia calls the shots





Consanguineous marriage: Keeping it in the family





Israeli politics: An Arab agenda





Iran’s election: Even hardliners want reform





Kurdistan: Fin de renaissance





Europe



Refugees in Greece: No way out





German right-wingers: Radikale Rechte





Organised crime: China nostra





Happiness in Europe: Hell is other people, for Swedes





Charlemagne: Ever farther union





Britain



The justice system: Law in a time of austerity





Tories and the EU referendum: Blue on blue





Nuclear energy: What’s the (Hinkley) point?





Schools and careers: Posh professions





European migrants: Tunnels and channels





Pig farming: Fearing the wurst





Foreign property-buyers: Mountains and molehills





International



Ending energy poverty: Power to the powerless





Special report: Indonesia



Indonesia: Jokowi’s moment





Politics: Lone fighter





Corruption: The Setya show





Business and economics: Roll out the welcome mat





Infrastructure: The 13,466-island problem





Foreign policy: Less talk, more action





Forests: A world on fire





Looking ahead: The country of the future





Business



Industry in China: The march of the zombies





The India-China trade gap: Arrive full, leave empty





The film business: Fading stars





Hollywood: Silver-screen playbook





Natural resources: Flare-up





German industry: Town and company





Schumpeter: On the stump





Finance and economics



Share trading: Complicate, then prevaricate





Exchange mergers: Stocks exchanged





Banks and money-laundering: Whoops apocalypse





Buttonwood: Donald ducks the big questions





China’s stockmarket: Fail to the chief





Reshaping banking: Shake your money makers





BBVA: Digital addition





India’s budget: Leap of faith





Free exchange: Gotham on Thames





Free exchange: Correction:“Chop, chop”, January 30th





Science and technology



Cryptography: Taking a bite at the Apple





Cancer: A run a day keeps the tumour at bay





Trachoma: Now is the time to say “goodbye”





Sexual reproduction: Plucking rubies from the rubbish





Cuckoldry and song: Fidelio





Books and arts



Hieronymus Bosch: Painter of our greatest fears





British newspapers: Per ardua ad Astor





Return to nature: Animal instinct





Free-diving: Blue hole, black hole





Family ties: In knots





Johnson: Je suis circonflexe





Obituary



Harper Lee and Umberto Eco: The finger of fame





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Sovereign-wealth funds





Markets





