The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Business

Finance and economics

Economics brief

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics

Business

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



America’s Democrats gathered in Philadelphia to nominate Hillary Clinton as their candidate for president of the United States. Some supporters of her opponent for the nomination, Bernie Sanders, refused to give up the fight and chanted the Trump cry, “Lock her up!” But Mr Sanders gave an impassioned speech supporting Mrs Clinton. She also revealed Tim Kaine, a senator from Virginia, as her vice-presidential running mate. See article.

Thousands of leaked e-mails showing that the Democratic Party leadership favoured Hillary Clinton over Bernie Sanders exposed rifts within the party. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the head of the Democratic National Committee (DNC)—which should have remained impartial during the primaries—resigned. The DNC blamed Russian hackers for the stolen e-mails, which were released via WikiLeaks. See article.

Prosecutors dropped the remaining charges against three Baltimore police officers relating to the death of Freddie Gray, bringing an end to the case without a conviction. Gray died in April 2015, a week after he sustained a spinal injury while in the back of a police van. His death had prompted widespread protests against police brutality towards black men. Three of the six officers charged in the case had already been acquitted.



Brazilian police arrested a dozen people who were planning terrorist attacks during the Olympic games, which are due to start in Rio de Janeiro on August 5th. They had been inspired by Islamic State (IS). Brazil’s justice minister, Alexandre Moraes, said they were “absolutely amateur” and “unprepared”.

Hundreds of Venezuelans have marched to demand that the country’s electoral commission rule on whether a referendum to recall the president, Nicolás Maduro, can proceed. The protesters think that the commission has delayed its decision on whether to approve nearly 2m signatures demanding the vote to protect the unpopular regime. If Venezuelans vote to remove Mr Maduro after January 10th it would not trigger a fresh election. Instead, the vice-president, Aristóbulo Istúriz, would become president.

Les misérables



In a week of violence, two men inspired by IS slit the throat of Father Jacques Hamel, an 85-year-old priest, during a church service in Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray, a suburb of Rouen in northern France. The assailants—one of whom had been jailed twice for trying to join IS in Syria—were shot dead by police. In Bavaria, a German-Iranian teenager shot and killed nine people in a Munich shopping centre, and a failed Syrian asylum-seeker blew himself up, injuring 15, after being refused entry to a music festival being held in the town of Ansbach. See article.

Russia’s Olympic athletes will not all be banned from competing in Rio de Janeiro, the International Olympic Committee announced. Instead, decisions over bans will be left to individual sports’ federations. The World Anti-Doping Agency, which exposed Russia’s massive, state-sponsored doping programme and recommended a blanket ban, said it was disappointed. See article.

Michel Barnier, a former foreign minister of France and vice-president of the European Commission, has been appointed to lead the EU’s Brexit negotiations with Britain. Mr Barnier is seen as a tough adversary for Britain. He is best known for introducing banker bonus caps and other regulations disliked in Britain when he was the EU’s single-market commissioner.

Theresa May, Britain’s new prime minister, continued her Brexit charm offensive this week. She met the leaders of Northern Ireland’s devolved government to reassure them that a “hard” border would not be reimposed between Britain and Ireland. She also met for talks in London Enda Kenny, Ireland’s prime minister, and Italy’s premier, Matteo Renzi, in Rome. See article.

Digging up old history

Palestinian officials announced a plan to sue Britain over the Balfour Declaration of 1917 that laid out a vision for a Jewish homeland in Palestine.

A big truck bomb in the Kurdish-controlled Syrian city of Qamishli killed 44 people. IS claimed responsibility for the blast, which detonated near a security headquarters.

Salva Kiir, the president of South Sudan, has replaced his vice-president, Riek Machar, the leader of the main opposition, threatening a fragile peace deal between the two. Mr Machar had fled the capital a few days earlier after an outbreak of fighting between his forces and those who are still loyal to the government.

The Shabaab, a jihadist group in Somalia, used two suicide-bombers driving car bombs to attack a United Nations base near the airport in Mogadishu, the capital. Thirteen people were killed in the attacks. Unlike previous attacks by the group, gunmen did not accompany the suicide-bombers.

A new retirement home

A military court in China jailed a retired general, Guo Boxiong, for life for accepting bribes in return for promotions. He is the most senior military official to be convicted of corruption since the Communists came to power in 1949.

Two Hong Kong journalists were imprisoned in China for articles they had published in their home territory. Hong Kongers are supposed to have press freedoms not enjoyed in the mainland. But these two journalists, who were arrested in 2014, were charged for mailing copies of their magazines into China.



Four officials were suspended from their posts for allegedly mismanaging floods in China’s northern province of Hebei that have killed at least 130 people and affected 9m others. Torrential rain has caused the country’s worst flooding in several years. See article.

Nineteen residents of a care home for the disabled near Tokyo were stabbed to death and another 25 wounded, in Japan’s worst mass killing in the post-war era. Satoshi Uematsu, a 26-year-old former employee with a history of urging that the disabled be euthanised, turned himself in to the police. See article.

At least 70 have died and many more made homeless in Nepal after monsoon rains triggered widespread flooding and landslides. Rescue and relief efforts have been launched in 14 of Nepal’s 75 districts.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21702817-politics/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



After a months-long bidding process, Yahoo, a struggling internet company, announced that it is to sell its core business to Verizon. Last year the wireless carrier also paid $4.4 billion for AOL, another former internet darling. Merging AOL and Yahoo will give Verizon more eyeballs to sell to digital advertisers. The deal will surely bring the curtain down on Marissa Mayer’s tenure at Yahoo, which is widely regarded as a failure. Between 2012, when Ms Mayer took over, and 2015, Yahoo’s gross earnings have fallen by 44%. The firm has also written off much of the value of Tumblr, a social-networking site that it bought for $1.1 billion in cash in 2013. See article.

Sales of Apple’s iPhone continued to fall. The world’s largest listed company said it sold some 40m smartphones between April and June, around 15% fewer than during the same period last year. It also forecast sales would drop again in the coming quarter. The phones are responsible for around half of Apple’s sales. Its quarterly profit fell to $7.8 billion, down by 27% on the year before. Sales in China, which produces cheap competitors to the iPhone, were particularly hard-hit.

Ryanair became the latest European airline to warn of troubles ahead. The continent’s largest low-cost carrier followed easyJet, Air France-KLM and Lufthansa in suggesting that business may be hit this year. European airlines have had to deal with a litany of woes, including air-traffic-control strikes in France, terrorist atrocities in Belgium, France and Egypt, and an attempted coup in Turkey. Consumer confidence may also be damaged by Brexit and the subsequent fall of the pound. The good news for flyers is that European carriers may now have to lower fares to fill their planes.

A top-up

AB InBev, the world’s biggest brewer, raised its offer for SABMiller, a rival based in Britain. The two firms struck a deal in November but the pound’s fall after the Brexit referendum prompted AB InBev to revise its offer from £44 (now $58) to £45 a share. The merged company will have nearly a third of the world’s beer market.

It was a bad week for Goldman Sachs. The firm was sued for $510m by a big shareholder of EON Capital, a Malaysian bank that Goldman once advised. Primus Pacific Partners accused Goldman of a conflict of interests because it concealed its links with 1MDB, Malaysia’s sovereign-wealth fund, which was launched by Najib Razak, the prime minister. Goldman also advised on the takeover of EON by Hong Leong Bank, which had ties to Mr Razak. Primus says Goldman undervalued EON as a result, an allegation it denies. Goldman also faced criticism from British MPs for its role as an informal adviser to Sir Philip Green, then owner of British Home Stores. BHS went bust after Sir Philip sold the department-store chain for £1. MPs said he had failed to resolve a £571m pension-fund hole. No illegality was alleged. Sir Philip denies wrongdoing.

BP’s half-yearly profit fell by 44% to $720m, compared with the same period last year. It blamed the low oil price. Brent neared $44 a barrel this week; it was over $50 in May. BP reckons the current glut of oil could last for 18 months. The firm said it hoped it had now drawn a line under the Deepwater Horizon disaster of 2010, which has cost it some $62 billion. Shell also announced poor quarterly results, down 72% on the year before.

This bird has flown

There was little sign of Twitter escaping the doldrums. The firm announced that both revenue and the number of people using the social network had grown slowly in the second quarter of this year. The loss-making site also suggested revenue for the current quarter might be as low as $590m, well below market expectations.

Ericsson, a Swedish telecoms firm, ousted Hans Vestberg, its chief executive, following a disappointing financial performance over the past year. The firm has also faced probes into alleged corruption. See article.

Deutsche Bank said profits had dropped by 98% to €20m ($22m) in the second quarter, compared with the same period last year. It suggested that cost-cutting, which has already led to 9,000 job losses, may now have to go even deeper. Deutsche is also trying to come to a settlement with American regulators over its alleged mis-selling of mortgage-backed securities. It has set aside €5.4 billion to deal with litigation.

America’s Federal Reserve decided against raising interest rates, as good news about the country’s economy, such as better employment data, was offset by subdued inflation expectations and global worries. But the Fed kept open the possibility of a rate rise later this year, saying the near-term risks had diminished.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21702798-business/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21702809-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




Globalisation and politics: The new political divide

Abenomics: Overhyped, underappreciated

Russian dirty tricks: Doping and hacking

The parable of Yahoo: From dotcom hero to zero

Air pollution: Cleaning up the data





Articles Sections Next

Globalisation and politics

The new political divide

Farewell, left versus right. The contest that matters now is open against closed

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



AS POLITICAL theatre, America’s party conventions have no parallel. Activists from right and left converge to choose their nominees and celebrate conservatism (Republicans) and progressivism (Democrats). But this year was different, and not just because Hillary Clinton became the first woman to be nominated for president by a major party. The conventions highlighted a new political faultline: not between left and right, but between open and closed (see article). Donald Trump, the Republican nominee, summed up one side of this divide with his usual pithiness. “Americanism, not globalism, will be our credo,” he declared. His anti-trade tirades were echoed by the Bernie Sanders wing of the Democratic Party.

America is not alone. Across Europe, the politicians with momentum are those who argue that the world is a nasty, threatening place, and that wise nations should build walls to keep it out. Such arguments have helped elect an ultranationalist government in Hungary and a Polish one that offers a Trumpian mix of xenophobia and disregard for constitutional norms. Populist, authoritarian European parties of the right or left now enjoy nearly twice as much support as they did in 2000, and are in government or in a ruling coalition in nine countries. So far, Britain’s decision to leave the European Union has been the anti-globalists’ biggest prize: the vote in June to abandon the world’s most successful free-trade club was won by cynically pandering to voters’ insular instincts, splitting mainstream parties down the middle.

News that strengthens the anti-globalisers’ appeal comes almost daily. On July 26th two men claiming allegiance to Islamic State slit the throat of an 85-year-old Catholic priest in a church near Rouen. It was the latest in a string of terrorist atrocities in France and Germany. The danger is that a rising sense of insecurity will lead to more electoral victories for closed-world types. This is the gravest risk to the free world since communism. Nothing matters more than countering it.

Higher walls, lower living standards

Start by remembering what is at stake. The multilateral system of institutions, rules and alliances, led by America, has underpinned global prosperity for seven decades. It enabled the rebuilding of post-war Europe, saw off the closed world of Soviet communism and, by connecting China to the global economy, brought about the greatest poverty reduction in history.

A world of wall-builders would be poorer and more dangerous. If Europe splits into squabbling pieces and America retreats into an isolationist crouch, less benign powers will fill the vacuum. Mr Trump’s revelation that he might not defend America’s Baltic allies if they are menaced by Russia was unfathomably irresponsible (see article). America has sworn to treat an attack on any member of the NATO alliance as an attack on all. If Mr Trump can blithely dishonour a treaty, why would any ally trust America again? Without even being elected, he has emboldened the world’s troublemakers. Small wonder Vladimir Putin backs him. Even so, for Mr Trump to urge Russia to keep hacking Democrats’ e-mails is outrageous.

The wall-builders have already done great damage. Britain seems to be heading for a recession, thanks to the prospect of Brexit. The European Union is tottering: if France were to elect the nationalist Marine Le Pen as president next year and then follow Britain out of the door, the EU could collapse. Mr Trump has sucked confidence out of global institutions as his casinos suck cash out of punters’ pockets. With a prospective president of the world’s largest economy threatening to block new trade deals, scrap existing ones and stomp out of the World Trade Organisation if he doesn’t get his way, no firm that trades abroad can approach 2017 with equanimity.

In defence of openness

Countering the wall-builders will require stronger rhetoric, bolder policies and smarter tactics. First, the rhetoric. Defenders of the open world order need to make their case more forthrightly. They must remind voters why NATO matters for America, why the EU matters for Europe, how free trade and openness to foreigners enrich societies, and why fighting terrorism effectively demands co-operation. Too many friends of globalisation are retreating, mumbling about “responsible nationalism”. Only a handful of politicians—Justin Trudeau in Canada, Emmanuel Macron in France—are brave enough to stand up for openness. Those who believe in it must fight for it.

They must also acknowledge, however, where globalisation needs work. Trade creates many losers, and rapid immigration can disrupt communities. But the best way to address these problems is not to throw up barriers. It is to devise bold policies that preserve the benefits of openness while alleviating its side-effects. Let goods and investment flow freely, but strengthen the social safety-net to offer support and new opportunities for those whose jobs are destroyed. To manage immigration flows better, invest in public infrastructure, ensure that immigrants work and allow for rules that limit surges of people (just as global trade rules allow countries to limit surges in imports). But don’t equate managing globalisation with abandoning it.

As for tactics, the question for pro-open types, who are found on both sides of the traditional left-right party divide, is how to win. The best approach will differ by country. In the Netherlands and Sweden, centrist parties have banded together to keep out nationalists. A similar alliance defeated the National Front’s Jean-Marie Le Pen in the run-off for France’s presidency in 2002, and may be needed again to beat his daughter in 2017. Britain may yet need a new party of the centre.

In America, where most is at stake, the answer must come from within the existing party structure. Republicans who are serious about resisting the anti-globalists should hold their noses and support Mrs Clinton. And Mrs Clinton herself, now that she has won the nomination, must champion openness clearly, rather than equivocating. Her choice of Tim Kaine, a Spanish-speaking globalist, as her running-mate is a good sign. But the polls are worryingly close. The future of the liberal world order depends on whether she succeeds.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21702750-farewell-left-versus-right-contest-matters-now-open-against-closed-new/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Abenomics

Overhyped, underappreciated

What Japan’s economic experiment can teach the rest of the world

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



IN THE 1980s Japan was a closely studied example of economic dynamism. In the decades since, it has commanded attention largely for its economic stagnation. After years of falling prices and fitful growth, Japan’s nominal GDP was roughly the same in 2015 as it was 20 years earlier. America’s grew by 134% in the same time period; even Italy’s went up by two-thirds. Now Japan is in the spotlight for a different reason: its attempts at economic resuscitation.

To reflate Japan and reform it, Shinzo Abe, prime minister since December 2012, proposed the three “arrows” of what has become known as Abenomics: monetary stimulus, fiscal “flexibility” and structural reform. The first arrow would mobilise Japan’s productive powers and the third would expand them, allowing the second arrow to hit an ambitious fiscal target. The prevailing view is that none has hit home. Headline inflation was negative in the year to May. Japan’s public debt looks as bad as ever. In areas such as labour-market reform, nowhere near enough has been done.

Compared with its own grand promises, Abenomics has indeed been a disappointment. But compared with what preceded it, it deserves a sympathetic hearing (see article). And as a guide to what other countries, particularly in Europe, should do to cope with a greying population, stagnant demand and stubborn debts, Japan again repays close attention.

This arrow points up

Take monetary policy. The lesson many are quick to draw from Abenomics is that the weapons deployed by the Bank of Japan (BoJ)—and, by extension, other central banks—since the financial crisis do not work. The BoJ has more than doubled the size of its balance-sheet since April 2013 and imposed a sub-zero interest rate in February; still more easing may be on the way (the BoJ was meeting as The Economist went to press). Yet its 2% inflation target remains a distant dream.

The naysayers have it wrong. Unlike other countries, Japan includes energy prices in its core inflation figure. Excluding them, core consumer prices have risen, albeit modestly, for 32 months in a row. Before Abenomics, Japan’s prices had fallen with few interruptions for over ten years; they are now about 5% higher than they would have been had that trend continued. Japan has increased inflation while it has fallen in Australia, Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Spain.

If central banks have more sway than some pundits allow, Abenomics also shows the limits of their power. The BoJ has buoyed financial assets, but it has failed to drum up a similar eagerness on the part of consumers or companies to buy real assets or consumer goods. Household deposits are high. And despite bumper corporate profits, firms doubt such plenty will persist. They have been happy to raise prices but less eager to lift investment or base pay (which are harder to reverse). Japan’s non-financial firms now hold more than ¥1 quadrillion ($9.5 trillion) of financial assets, including cash.

Herein lies another lesson of Abenomics: monetary policy is less powerful when corporate governance is lax and competition muted. Mr Abe has handed shareholders greater power. In 2012 only 40% of leading companies had any independent directors; now nearly all of them do. But if Japan’s equity culture were more assertive still, shareholders might demand more of the corporate cash hoard back—to spend or invest elsewhere. And if barriers to entry were lower, rival firms might expand into newly profitable industries and compete away these riches. They might also pay more. In theory, reflating an economy should be relatively popular, because wage rises should precede price increases. In reality, the price rises came first and pay has lagged behind. That is why the IMF has pushed for Japan to adopt an incomes policy that spurs firms to raise wages.

Someone must spend

If companies are determined to spend far less than they earn, some other part of the economy will be forced to do the opposite. In Japan that role has fallen to the government, which has run budget deficits for over 20 years. Mr Abe set out intending to rein in the public finances. But after a rise in a consumption tax in 2014 tipped Japan into recession, he has backed away from raising the tax again. This week he signalled a large new fiscal-stimulus package worth ¥28 trillion, or 6% of GDP (although it was unclear how much of that money will be new).

Abenomics has not only demonstrated how self-defeating fiscal austerity can be, particularly when it comes in the form of a tax on all consumers. It has also shown that, in Japanese conditions, sustained fiscal expansion is affordable. Without any private borrowers to crowd out, even a government as indebted as Japan’s will find it cheap to borrow. Japan’s net interest payments, as a share of GDP, are still the lowest in the G7. Politicians in Europe make fiscal rectitude a priority. Abenomics shows that public thrift and private austerity do not mix.

Many people argue that Mr Abe’s monetary and fiscal stimulus has served only as an analgesic, masking the need for radical structural reform. To be sure, greater boldness is needed—to encourage more foreign workers into the country, for example, and to enable firms to hire and fire more easily. But a revival in demand has encouraged supply-side improvement, not simply substituted for it. Stronger demand for labour has drawn more people into the workforce, despite the decline in Japan’s working-age population. The increased presence of women in the labour force has prompted the government to create 200,000 extra places in nurseries, and to make life harder for employers who discriminate against pregnant employees. In recognising that reflation and reform go hand in hand, Abenomics is an unusually coherent economic strategy.

Abenomics has fallen short of its targets and its overblown rhetoric. That makes it easy to dismiss as a failure. In fact, it has shown that central banks and governments do have the capacity to stir a torpid economy. And in some senses, the hype was needed. Japan’s stagnation had become a self-fulfilling prophecy; Abenomics could succeed only if enough people believed it would. This is a final lesson that Japan’s economic experiment can impart to the rest of the world. Aim high.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21702751-what-japans-economic-experiment-can-teach-rest-world-overhyped-underappreciated/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Russian dirty tricks

Doping and hacking

Russia is waging a silent war on the international order

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



IT HAS been a good few days for Russia’s dirty-tricks squad. On July 24th the International Olympic Committee (IOC) announced it would not ban the Russian team as a whole from next month’s games in Rio de Janeiro, even though an investigation concluded that the country’s government had been running an extensive doping programme for athletes. Two days earlier WikiLeaks, a whistleblowing website, had published embarrassing e-mails from officials of the Democratic National Committee, which is meant to be neutral between Democrats, disparaging Bernie Sanders. Security experts determined the e-mails had been stolen by Russian government hackers.

Compared with the other misdeeds of Vladimir Putin’s regime, these ones may seem tame. Russia is, after all, a country that stripped the markings from its soldiers’ uniforms in order to invade Ukraine while lying about it, and assassinated a defector in London by putting polonium in his tea. But cheating at sport and hacking e-mails to sway an American election are serious offences too. More important, they reflect a broader pattern of behaviour. In arena after arena, Russia is not only violating the rules; it is trying to break the international order, to splinter any body or group that might hold it to account.

Sex, drugs and Russia’s role

The Russian government routinely humiliates domestic opponents using kompromat (embarrassing surveillance material, often sex tapes) gathered by its spooks. But using the technique in a Western election is something new. The Russians clearly wanted to help Donald Trump (see article), whose isolationist tendencies delight Mr Putin (and whose top campaign official and foreign-policy adviser have ties to Russia). Besides professing his admiration for Mr Putin, Mr Trump has suggested that America should not defend its allies unless they have, in his judgment, fulfilled their commitments (see article). This is music to the ears of Mr Putin, who knows that without its guarantee of mutual defence, NATO is dead.



A timeline of Vladimir Putin’s unshakeable popularity

Russia’s efforts to sow discord in NATO mirror its attempts to divide the European Union. In eastern Europe, Russia funds anti-EU political parties and uses its Russian-language television channels to support them. A Russian bank has provided loans to France’s anti-immigrant National Front; Russian groups supported French conservatives’ campaign against legalising gay marriage. In Germany, Russian propagandists cooked up a media frenzy over a bogus sexual assault to foment discord over Muslim immigration. In 2015 Russia even hosted a “separatists’ convention” in Moscow, attended by secessionists from Northern Ireland and Catalonia (and Hawaii). The goal is to render the West too divided to respond to Russian aggression, as it did by imposing sanctions over Ukraine.

America and the EU struggle to cope with these tactics. But one might have hoped that the IOC, of all international bodies, would respond firmly to Russian rule-breaking. Sport is nothing without rules; permitting cheating risks destroying the whole enterprise. Yet even in the face of a state-run doping programme affecting hundreds of athletes, the IOC would not ban the Russians entirely, but instead kicked the issue down to the governing bodies of individual sports. Russia trumpeted this as proof that the doping was a matter of a few bad apples and the investigation an American-led witch-hunt.

Western governments and voters may not be able to stop Russia from hacking politicians’ servers, spreading disinformation or assigning intelligence officers to unscrew the lids on urine samples. But they can stop Russia from pitting them against each other. Mr Putin is exploiting Western democracies’ divisions for his own ends. They should not let him.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21702755-russia-waging-silent-war-international-order-doping-and-hacking/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The parable of Yahoo

From dotcom hero to zero

Yahoo is no longer an independent company. Its failure had many fathers

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS one of Silicon Valley’s most riveting success stories. Now it stands as a warning to others. Yahoo began in 1994 as a lark in Stanford’s dormitories, when two students, David Filo and Jerry Yang, assembled their favourite links on a page called “Jerry and David’s Guide to the World Wide Web”. The site, which they renamed Yahoo, quickly became the “portal” through which millions first encountered the internet. At its peak in 2000, Yahoo had a market value of $128 billion. In the dotcom version of Monopoly, Yahoo got the prime slot.

This week its history as an independent firm came to an end. On July 25th Verizon, a telecoms giant, announced that it would pay around $4.8 billion to acquire Yahoo’s core business (see article). The sale will come as a blessed relief to shareholders. Yahoo churned through four chief executives in the three years before the hiring of Marissa Mayer in 2012. Her efforts to turn the company round may have failed, but the seeds of this week’s sale were sown long before she arrived. Three problems explain the firm’s demise.

The first was a chronic lack of focus. Right from the start Yahoo was ambivalent about whether it should be a media or a technology company. As a result, whenever the internet zigged, Yahoo zagged. It could not decide whether search was a “commodity” business to be outsourced or an area worthy of heavy investment; its prevarication allowed Google to rise. It took too long to respond to the emergence of social media and the coming of the mobile internet. Ms Mayer, and the company’s toothless board, did nothing to resolve Yahoo’s split corporate personality.

Instead of focusing, Yahoo sprawled. By 2001 it had 400 different products and services. Its cumbersome structure proved no match for specialised rivals such as Google in search and eBay in e-commerce. Yahoo was notoriously dysfunctional: at one point it had four different classified-advertising businesses, each using different technology. This contains a warning for others. Silicon Valley is known for its world-changing ambitions, but managers can be distracted by doing too many things at once. Alphabet, Google’s parent company, which continues to push into new areas, should take note.

A second problem at Yahoo concerned dealmaking. Some of its purchases paid off: by the end, its stake in another web giant—Alibaba, a Chinese e-commerce firm—was worth far more than its own internet properties. Others flopped: Ms Mayer, for example, bought Tumblr, a social-networking platform, for $1.1 billion in 2013, even though it was about to run out of money. But a company’s success depends as much on the deals it does not do as on the ones it does. Yahoo’s history is littered with transactions that should not have been passed up. It did not buy Google for $1m when it had the chance. It agreed to buy Facebook for $1 billion, but the deal fell through when Yahoo tried to negotiate down the price. It eschewed the chance to buy YouTube (subsequently bought by Google), and its purchase of eBay fell through because of clashing egos.

The long shadow of Steve Jobs

Most galling of all, Mr Yang, the chief executive at the time, had the chance to sell Yahoo to Microsoft for around $45 billion in early 2008. His pride and his desire to head his company led him to reject the offer. This is the third lesson from Yahoo’s demise: founders can often be too attached to their progeny to make the right strategic decisions. Silicon Valley still believes in the idea of founders as visionary turnaround artists. Last year Jack Dorsey was brought back to run Twitter, a social-media firm (while continuing to run Square, a payments company that he also founded). Shareholders of both firms should consider Yahoo’s example carefully. For every Steve Jobs, who successfully resurrected Apple, there is a Mr Yang.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21702752-yahoo-no-longer-independent-company-its-failure-had-many-fathers-dotcom-hero-zero/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Air pollution

Cleaning up the data

The dangers of dirty air need to be made much more transparent to city-dwellers

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



WHAT if all Londoners, no matter how young or frail, smoked for at least six years? In effect, they already do. The city’s air pollution exacts an equivalent toll on each resident, cutting short the lives of nearly 10,000 people each year and damaging the lungs, hearts and brains of children.

Yet few Londoners realise that things are this bad. Citizens of other big cities in the rich world are equally complacent (those in the developing world are unlikely to be in any doubt about the scale of their pollution problem). Official air-quality indices do exist. They alert people when to stay at home, particularly those with asthma and other medical troubles. But these indices focus on the immediate risks to health, which for most people are serious only when the air is almost unbreathable. No equivalent source of information exists to warn residents about the dangers that accumulate from much lower amounts of pollution. It is all too easy for people to take the short-term index, which says “low pollution” most of the time, as a proxy for their lifelong risks.

Easy, and wrong. Analysis of one year’s worth of pollution data from 15 big cities in the rich world by The Economist shows how far from the truth such assumptions can be (see article). Daytime levels of nitrogen dioxide in London exceeded the World Health Organisation (WHO) limit for hazardous one-year exposure for 79% of the time, and were on average 41% above the guideline. About half the time both nitrogen dioxide and fine particulates were above the limit. In daytime Paris, at least one of these pollutants exceeded the WHO’s limit for 82% of the time. Pollution is less of a problem in American cities, partly because most cars run on petrol and emit less nitrogen dioxide than diesel vehicles, which are preferred in Europe.

A dependable long-term air-quality index, similar in design to existing short-term gauges, is needed in the world’s big cities. That would educate policymakers and voters about the nature of the problem. It would help doctors dispense routine advice to pregnant women, children and other more vulnerable people on how to reduce exposure to pollution. And it would enable the development of apps and products that can deliver practical advice to everyone.

Our analysis gives a flavour of what such advice might contain. In Paris, for example, 8am is a much better time than 9am for the morning commute, with levels of nitrogen dioxide lower by 26% on average, and fine particulates by 10%. In Amsterdam, Brussels, London and Paris, there is 10-22% less nitrogen dioxide floating around on Sundays than Saturdays, suggesting that might be the better day to schedule children’s weekend outdoor activities.

Organising daily and weekly routines in this way can materially affect the amount of pollution inhaled. A study in Barcelona found that, although travel accounts for just 6% of people’s time, that is when they breathe in 24% of their intake of nitrogen dioxide.

Breezy does it

Reducing air pollution may take lots of money, time and compromises. But telling people just how bad pollution is for them and how to avoid it is easy, uncontroversial and cheap. Not everyone will heed the advice (for proof, look no further than the sunburnt arms and faces on an English summer day). But even if a minority do, thousands of people in every big city will live longer, healthier lives.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21702753-dangers-dirty-air-need-be-made-much-more-transparent-city-dwellers-cleaning-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




On Republicans, Pokémon, blood-testing, Brazil, John Cleese, Italian banks: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

On Republicans, Pokémon, blood-testing, Brazil, John Cleese, Italian banks

Letters to the editor

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



Former Republicans

Donald Trump’s insurgent takeover of the Republican Party (“The dividing of America”, July 16th) has an ironic counterpart in 1940, when the party nominated Wendell Willkie to run against Franklin Roosevelt. Like Mr Trump, Willkie was a former Democrat, never held political office and was perceived as an alternative to entrenched politicians in both parties. But there the comparison ends. He positively favoured civil rights, trade and internationalism. By defeating the Republican isolationists, he gave crucial cover to Roosevelt to build American support for Britain in its lone defence against Nazi Germany.

Willkie lost the election, but afterwards he became an unofficial ambassador for FDR. He also championed equal rights at home and opposed the prospect of post-war colonialism. When he died suddenly in 1944, a journalist recorded that Willkie had come “on the American scene like a meteor and like a meteor he burned himself out”. He was a “challenging figure possessed of an integrity, honesty and courage far beyond the average measure.”

It does not seem a trivial question to ask, but where are the Willkies of today?

WARD CAMPBELL

Sacramento, California

I would be persuaded by your thesis that Donald Trump will leave a lasting mark on the Republican Party but for one distinction between him and the examples you put forth: Barry Goldwater and George McGovern were men of profound and verifiable conviction. Mr Trump is a man of mirage. I predict that the mirage will fade.

FRED LAKNER

San Diego

If people want to know why Mr Trump says crazy things they should turn to this Wikipedia article on narcissistic personality disorder: it “is a long-term pattern of abnormal behaviour characterised by exaggerated feelings of self-importance, an excessive need for admiration and a lack of understanding of others’ feelings. People affected often spend a lot of time thinking about achieving power, success or their appearance. They often take advantage of the people around them.”

TIMOTHY COTTON

New York





Pokémon no!

Once upon a time, adults who chased fairies at the bottom of the garden were locked up. Now, through “Pokémon GO” and the wonders of smartphone technology, they are encouraged to play with other fairy-chasers (“I mug you, Pikachu!”, July 16th). I’m still trying to work out if this represents progress or regress.

NICK WILLS-JOHNSON

Perth, Australia





Testing blood

You wrote about the problems at Theranos, a blood-testing startup that gave incorrect results to patients (“Red alert”, July 16th). The underlying reason for Theranos’s ascent was the lack of general awareness of the advances in the in-vitro diagnostics field over the past 50 years and the critical and widespread contribution it makes to health care. The biggest irony is that “the ability to perform multiple tests in a tiny droplet of blood” has long been a reality in medical diagnosis and is actually carried out millions of times a day in laboratories everywhere. The challenge does not lie in the instruments used, but in the lack of reliable methods to transfer the sample to those instruments.

Diagnostic tests were already performed routinely using a drop of blood from a pinprick long before Theranos existed. However, the blood obtained that way differs from, and is far more variable than, that drawn from the vein. This fact is widely known in the industry. For example, last year the Centres for Medicare and Medicaid prohibited the unrestricted use of fingerstick glucose-testing on critically ill patients, after several fatal incidents that were linked to spurious pinprick tests.

The silver lining around Theranos’s lamentable cloud might be a wider awareness of this important practice.

SAMUEL REICHBERG

Laboratory Assessment and Biotech Systems

New York





A pair of comedians

If Theresa May wanted a comedian as foreign secretary (“May time”, July 16th), John Cleese would have been a better pick than Boris Johnson. He openly supported Brexit and has ministerial experience (at the ministry of silly walks). And although both are classical scholars, Boris is fact light, whereas Mr Cleese is intellectually rigid, pointing out that Romani ite domum is the correct Latin spelling for “Romans go home” in “Life of Brian”. With those attributes he is much better equipped to negotiate the complexities of Brexit.

MICHEL VAN ROOZENDAAL

Helsinki

Brazil's future

The problems in Brazil cannot be denied (“A sporting chance of safety”, July 9th). The Petrobras scandal makes Watergate look like child’s play. But another way of looking at it is that, after a long history of corruption throughout colonisation and dictatorship, the crooks are at last getting rounded up, ousted from office and sent to jail. In fact, Brazil is a success story for the global anti-corruption movement, the Olympic spirit and the rule of law.

In the midst of a vote-buying scandal, a recession, the rare back-to-back hosting of the world’s biggest sporting events, and a much-resented increase in fares on public transport, Brazilians took to the streets to protest against corruption and mismanagement. Its Congress responded by enacting a dramatic series of anti-corruption laws. In 2011, public-procurement reforms and a new freedom of information law. In 2013 a statute addressing corporate complicity in public corruption and another giving federal prosecutors important new enforcement tools. These laws made possible the investigations and convictions of today.

So let’s turn the conventional narrative on its head. Short-term, Brazil is in a political and economic crisis. But long-term, Brazil is becoming less corrupt; democracy and the rule of law are becoming stronger, not weaker. In this regard, its prospects may actually be improving.

ANDY SPALDING

Associate professor

University of Richmond School of Law

Richmond, Virginia



The self-preservation society

You wrote about the parlous state of the Italian banking system and the lessons that go unheeded in the banking industry. Your headline, “The Italian job” (July 9th) was an amusing parallel with that wonderful film and only served to underline the scale of the problem, on whose rear end the stash of gold seized by Charlie Croker and his mob would represent but a pimple. Perhaps you could have taken the parallel one step further by using another line from the film, which sums things up neatly: “Camp Freddie, everybody in the world is bent.”

ARCHIE BERENS

Abu Dhabi



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21702734-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Globalisation and politics: Drawbridges up





Articles Sections Next

Globalisation and politics

Drawbridges up

The new divide in rich countries is not between left and right but between open and closed

Jul 30th 2016 | CLEVELAND, LINZ, PARIS, ROME, TOKYO AND WARSAW | From the print edition



IS POLAND’S government right-wing or left-wing? Its leaders revere the Catholic church, vow to protect Poles from terrorism by not accepting any Muslim refugees and fulminate against “gender ideology” (by which they mean the notion that men can become women or marry other men).

Yet the ruling Law and Justice party also rails against banks and foreign-owned businesses, and wants to cut the retirement age despite a rapidly ageing population. It offers budget-busting handouts to parents who have more than one child. These will partly be paid for with a tax on big supermarkets, which it insists will somehow not raise the price of groceries.

“The old left-right divide in this country has gone,” laments Rafal Trzaskowski, a liberal politician. Law and Justice plucks popular policies from all over the political spectrum and stirs them into a nationalist stew. Unlike any previous post-communist regime, it eyes most outsiders with suspicion (though it enthusiastically supports the right of Poles to work in Britain).

From Warsaw to Washington, the political divide that matters is less and less between left and right, and more and more between open and closed. Debates between tax-cutting conservatives and free-spending social democrats have not gone away. But issues that cross traditional party lines have grown more potent. Welcome immigrants or keep them out? Open up to foreign trade or protect domestic industries? Embrace cultural change, or resist it?

In 2005 Stephan Shakespeare, the British head of YouGov, a pollster, observed:

We are either “drawbridge up” or “drawbridge down”. Are you someone who feels your life is being encroached upon by criminals, gypsies, spongers, asylum-seekers, Brussels bureaucrats? Do you think the bad things will all go away if we lock the doors? Or do you think it’s a big beautiful world out there, full of good people, if only we could all open our arms and embrace each other?

He was proven spectacularly right in June, when Britain held a referendum on whether to leave the European Union. The leaders of the main political parties wanted to stay in, as did the elite of banking, business and academia. Yet the Brexiteers won, revealing just how many voters were drawbridge-uppers. They wanted to “take back control” of borders and institutions from Brussels, and to stem the flow of immigrants and refugees. Right-wing Brexiteers who saw the EU as a socialist superstate joined forces with left-wingers who saw it as a tool of global capitalism.

A similar fault line has opened elsewhere. In Poland and Hungary the drawbridge-uppers are firmly in charge; in France Marine Le Pen, who thinks that the opposite of “globalist” is “patriot”, will probably make it to the run-off in next year’s presidential election. In cuddly, caring Sweden the nationalist Sweden Democrats topped polls earlier this year, spurring mainstream parties to get tougher on asylum-seekers. Even in Germany some fear immigration may break the generous safety net. “You can only build a welfare state in your own country,” says Sahra Wagenknecht, a leader of the Left, a left-wing party.

In Italy, after the Brexit vote, the leader of the populist Northern League party tweeted: “Now it’s our turn.” Japan has no big anti-immigrant party, perhaps because there are so few immigrants. But recent years have seen the rise of a nationalist lobby called Nippon Kaigi, which seeks to rewrite Japan’s pacifist constitution and make education more patriotic. Half the Japanese cabinet are members.

There’s no we in US

In America the traditional party of free trade and a strong global role for the armed forces has just nominated as its standard-bearer a man who talks of scrapping trade deals and dishonouring alliances. “Americanism, not globalism, will be our credo,” says Donald Trump. On trade, he is close to his supposed polar opposite, Bernie Sanders, the cranky leftist who narrowly lost the Democratic nomination to Hillary Clinton. And Mrs Clinton, though the most drawbridge-down major-party candidate left standing, has moved towards the Trump/Sanders position on trade by disavowing deals she once supported.

Timbro, a Swedish free-market think-tank, has compiled an index of what it calls “authoritarian populism”, which tracks the strength of drawbridge-up parties in Europe. On average a fifth of voters in European countries back a populist party of the right or left, it finds. Such parties are represented in the governments of nine countries. The populist vote has nearly doubled since 2000 (see chart 1). In southern Europe austerity and the euro crisis have revived left-wing populism, exemplified by Syriza in Greece and Podemos in Spain. In Northern Europe the refugee crisis of 2015 has boosted the populists of the right.



Drawbridge-up populists vary from place to place, but most share a few key traits. Besides their suspicion of trade and immigration, nearly all rail against their country’s elite, whom they invariably describe as self-serving. British people “have had enough of experts”, said Michael Gove, a leader of the Brexit campaign. Mr Trump last week said that the elite back Mrs Clinton because “they know she will keep our rigged system in place….She is their puppet, and they pull the strings.”

Distrust of elites sometimes veers into conspiracy theory. Poland’s defence minister suggests that Lech Kaczynski, a Polish president who died in a plane crash in 2010, was assassinated. Mr Trump talks of “the plain facts that have been edited out of your nightly news and morning newspaper”. Panos Kammenos, a member of Greece’s ruling coalition, wonders if Greeks are being sprayed with mind-altering chemicals from aeroplanes.

Nearly all drawbridge-up parties argue that their country is in crisis, and explain it with a simple, frightening story involving outsiders. In Poland, for example, Law and Justice accuses decadent Western liberals of seeking to undermine traditional Polish values. (A recent magazine cover spoke of “Poland against the Gay Empire”.) It also plays up the threat of Islamist terrorists, who have killed no one in Poland since the days of the Ottoman Empire—but will start again, unless the government is vigilant.

Poland’s previous government, led by a party called Civic Platform, agreed last year to take a few Middle Eastern refugees—7,000 in total—to show solidarity with fellow members of the EU. Law and Justice accused them of recklessly endangering the lives of Poles. Voters kicked them out of office.

The recent string of terrorist attacks in France, Belgium and Germany has boosted support for drawbridge-raising throughout Europe. On Bastille Day a jihadist in a truck killed 84 people in Nice; on July 26th two men linked to Islamic State slit the throat of an 85-year-old Catholic priest celebrating mass near Rouen. These assaults on symbols of French culture—the anniversary of the revolution and the dominant, if declining, religion—prompted President François Hollande to declare war on Islamic State. He vowed that: “No one can divide us.” Ms Le Pen retorted on Twitter: “Alas, @fhollande is wrong. Islamic fundamentalists don’t want to ‘divide’ us, they want to kill us.”

Europe’s drawbridge-uppers would have enjoyed the Republican convention in Cleveland last week, where team Trump wrote a new script for the party of Lincoln. Speaking by video link, Kent Terry and Kelly Terry-Willis described the murder of their brother Brian, a border-patrol agent, in a shootout in Arizona. Later, three parents told the audience how their children had been murdered by illegal immigrants. There is no evidence that illegal immigrants commit more crimes than other people. But Mr Trump said that to Barack Obama, each victim was “one more child to sacrifice on the altar of open borders”.

The great disruption

Mr Trump’s charisma aside, the success of drawbridge-up parties in so many countries is driven by several underlying forces. The two main ones are economic dislocation and demographic change.

Economics first. Some 65-70% of households in rich countries saw their real incomes from wages and capital decline or stagnate between 2005 and 2014, compared with less than 2% in 1993-2005, says the McKinsey Global Institute, a think-tank. If the effects of lower taxes and government transfers are included, the picture is less grim: only 20-25% of households saw their disposable income fall or stay flat. In America nearly all households saw their disposable income rise, even if their headline wages stagnated. Such figures also fail to take full account of improvements in technology that make life easier and more entertaining.

Nonetheless, it is clear that many mid- and less-skilled workers in rich countries feel hard-pressed. Among voters who backed Brexit, the share who think life is worse now than 30 years ago was 16 percentage points greater that the share who think it is better; Remainers disagreed by a margin of 46 points. A whopping 69% of Americans think their country is on the wrong track, according to RealClearPolitics; only 23% think it is on the right one.

Many blame globalisation for their economic plight. Some are right. Although trade has made most countries and people better off, its rewards have been unevenly spread. For many blue-collar workers in rich countries, the benefits of cheaper, better goods have been outweighed by job losses in uncompetitive industries. For some formerly thriving industrial towns, the impact has been devastating (see page article).

Economic insecurity makes other fears loom larger. Where good jobs are plentiful, few people blame immigrants or trade for their absence. Hence the divide between college-educated folk, who feel confident about their ability to cope with change, and the less-schooled, who do not.

Consider Austria, where a presidential election on October 2nd will pit Norbert Hofer of the anti-immigrant, Eurosceptic and protectionist Freedom Party against a global-minded Green candidate, Alexander van der Bellen. In Linz, an industrial city on the Danube, the central Kaplanhof district is full of startups and technology firms that have moved into former factories and warehouses. Here, globalisation means customers and opportunities; pro-openness messages go down a treat. In a nearby café, Mr van der Bellen told cheering regulars: “Don’t forget that in Austria, every second job is directly or indirectly linked to trade with the rest of the world.”

A couple of miles south is a different Linz: the Franckviertel. Vast chimneys from chemical plants loom over rusting railway sidings. Streets are lined with cheap clothes shops and empty video-rental outlets. Here, globalisation has meant decline. Like Kaplanhof, it has an above-average proportion of foreigners (32% of the population), but these tend to be the poorer, less well qualified sort: Afghans and north Africans attracted by low rents. This has bred resentment: “It’s the Moroccans. They rape, they sell drugs. Have you seen the train station?” complains Peter, a “Linzer born-and-bred” waiting for the trolley bus into town. In these parts Mr Hofer is likely to win.

This divide is new in Austria. For decades it was dominated by a centre-left and a centre-right party. But both have struggled to reconcile the cosmopolitan and nativist parts of their electoral coalitions. In the first round of this year’s presidential election, they won just 22.4% of the vote between them and had to drop out.

The second force pulling drawbridges up is demographic change. Rich countries today are the least fertile societies ever to have existed. In 33 of the 35 OECD nations, too few babies are born to maintain a stable population. As the native-born age, and their numbers shrink, immigrants from poorer places move in to pick strawberries, write software and empty bedpans. Large-scale immigration has brought cultural change that some natives welcome—ethnic food, vibrant city centres—but which others find unsettling. They are especially likely to object if the character of their community changes very rapidly.

This does not make them racist. As Jonathan Haidt points out in the American Interest, a quarterly review, patriots “think their country and its culture are unique and worth preserving”. Some think their country is superior to all others, but most love it for the same reason that people love their spouse: “because she or he is yours”. He argues that immigration tends not to provoke social discord if it is modest in scale, or if immigrants assimilate quickly.

When immigrants seem eager to embrace the language, values and customs of their new land, it affirms nationalists’ sense of pride that their nation is good, valuable and attractive to foreigners. But whenever a country has historically high levels of immigration from countries with very different moralities, and without a strong and successful assimilationist programme, it is virtually certain that there will be an authoritarian counter-reaction.

Several European countries have struggled to assimilate newcomers, and this is reflected in popular attitudes. Asked whether having an increasing number of people of different races in their country made it a better place to live, only 10% of Greeks and 18% of Italians agreed (see chart 2). Even in the most cosmopolitan European countries, Sweden and Britain, only 36% and 33% agreed. In America, by contrast, a hefty 58% thought diversity improved their country. Only 7% thought it made it worse.



Most immigrants to America find jobs, and nearly all speak English by the second generation. For all Mr Trump’s doomsaying, the recent history of race relations is one of success. But that cannot be taken for granted. In one respect, America is entering uncharted waters. Last year white Christians became a minority for the first time in three centuries. By 2050 whites will no longer be a majority. The group that has found these changes hardest—whites without a college education—forms the core of Mr Trump’s support.

White Americans, like dominant groups everywhere, dislike constantly being told that they are privileged. For laid-off steelworkers, it doesn’t feel that way. They do not like being accused of racism if they object to affirmative action or of “microaggressions” if they say “America is a land of opportunity”. Another Pew poll found that 67% of American whites agreed that “too many people are easily offended these days over language”. Among Trump supporters it was 83%.

How to fight back

What can drawbridge-downers do? The most important thing is to devise policies that spread the benefits of globalisation more widely. In the meantime, and depending on how their national political system works, they are trying various tactics. In Sweden, France and the Netherlands, the mainstream parties have formed tactical alliances to keep the nationalists out of power. So far, they have succeeded, but at the cost of enraging nationalists, who see the establishment as a conspiracy to keep the little guy down.

Instead of, or in addition to this, mainstream politicians sometimes borrow the nationalists’ clothes. In Britain the Conservatives have taken a far tougher line on immigration than many of their cosmopolitan leaders would have preferred. Theresa May, the new prime minister, was the architect of this policy. In America Mrs Clinton’s flip-flop on free trade is a tactical concession to her party’s protectionist wing: among the free-trade deals she now decries is one that she helped negotiate.

Virtually no politicians have forthrightly argued that free trade and well-regulated immigration make most people better off. Emmanuel Macron, France’s economy minister, says it is time to try. Drawbridge-downers in France’s main parties have more in common with each other than with the National Front, he says, so he has launched a new movement.



An obvious objection is that if parties align themselves into explicitly globalist and nationalist camps, this might lend the nationalists legitimacy and accelerate their ascent. Piffle, says Mr Macron. “Look at the reality,” he says: in France the National Front was already the top party in voting at the most recent (regional) elections. It’s not a risk; it has already happened.

Although the drawbridge-uppers have all the momentum, time is not on their side. Young voters, who tend to be better educated than their elders, have more open attitudes. A poll in Britain found that 73% of voters aged 18-24 wanted to remain in the EU; only 40% of those over 65 did. Millennials nearly everywhere are more open than their parents on everything from trade and immigration to personal and moral behaviour. Bobby Duffy of Ipsos MORI, a pollster, predicts that their attitudes will live on as they grow older.

As young people flock to cities to find jobs, they are growing up used to heterogeneity. If the Brexit vote were held in ten years’ time the Remainers would easily win. And a candidate like Mr Trump would struggle in, say, 2024.

But in the meantime, the drawbridge-raisers can do great harm. The consensus that trade makes the world richer; the tolerance that lets millions move in search of opportunities; the ideal that people of different hues and faiths can get along—all are under threat. A world of national fortresses will be poorer and gloomier.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21702748-new-divide-rich-countries-not-between-left-and-right-between-open-and/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




The Democratic convention: Bridging the torrent

On the trail: Philly special

Putin, Trump and the DNC: Signal and noise

The PGA championship: Who’ll win?

Southern living: From crop to pop

Political parties: Defining realignment

Lexington: Able Kaine





Articles Sections Next

The Democratic convention

Bridging the torrent

Democrats successfully unite behind Hillary Clinton, an unloved nominee

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



IN THE end, Bernie Sanders came through. The senator from Vermont had threatened to take his fight for a “political revolution” to the floor of the Democratic National Convention, which was held in Philadelphia between July 25th and 28th. But when his aggrieved supporters had the temerity to take that threat seriously, by booing the convention’s early stages, Mr Sanders tried to calm them, and just about succeeded. Reprising the healing role Hillary Clinton played on behalf of Barack Obama in 2008 when she was the loser, it was he who declared her the Democratic presidential nominee. Mrs Clinton is the first woman to fill that role for either of America’s main parties.

Mr Obama, who is currently enjoying his highest approval ratings in years, was another star turn. Before a stadium hushed in adoration, he talked up his former secretary of state, rebuked the divisiveness of her Republican rival, Donald Trump, and sought to breathe self-confidence back into a country too short of it. “Anyone who threatens our values, whether fascists or communists or jihadists or home-grown demagogues, will always fail in the end,” he said. It was perhaps his last great speech as president—though arguably his family’s second-best in Philly.

Earlier, Michelle Obama had elegantly placed Mrs Clinton’s nomination in the sweep of America’s march to equality. “I wake up every morning in a house that was built by slaves,” she said. “And I watch my daughters, two beautiful, intelligent black young women playing with their dogs on the White House lawn. And because of Hillary Clinton, my daughters and all our sons and daughters now take for granted that a woman can be president of the United States.” Mrs Clinton, in her own speech (due on July 28th, after The Economist had gone to press), could hardly have hoped to do better.

The contrast with the much smaller Republican convention, which was held in Cleveland the previous week, and boycotted by most Republican heavyweights, was striking. In Mr Sanders, the Obamas, Bill Clinton, Joe Biden and Senator Elizabeth Warren, among others, the Democrats paraded speakers whose popularity, in the blue half of America, was a rebuke to the cynicism about politics upon which Mr Trump has fed. A notable independent, Michael Bloomberg, the billionaire former mayor of New York, also made an appearance to offer a more direct rebuke. He urged Americans to elect Mrs Clinton on the basis that she, unlike her rival, is “sane”.

The entertainment was better in Philly, too. Where Mr Trump, by way of showbiz glitz, had produced a couple of reality-television stars, the Democrats paraded a stream of A-listers. To recommend unity, Paul Simon sang “Bridge over Troubled Water”. Not everyone was mollified. Among the 4,763 state delegates attending the convention, a few dozen Sanders supporters kept up a determined protest. Several complained, before banks of television cameras, that their “voices were not being heard”. Outside the arena, meanwhile, Philadelphia saw bigger protests, by thousands of Sanders voters, anarchists and pro-dope campaigners carrying a giant inflatable spliff. Yet the lasting impression, which opinion polls support, was of the Democrats uniting against a common enemy; 90% of Mr Sanders’s supporters in the primaries say they will vote for Mrs Clinton.

The convention illustrated another big Democratic advantage. In Cleveland, the delegates were lily-white. In Philadelphia they were the multi-hued representatives of an electorate that is growing rapidly less white, and where minorities vote blue. In 2000, non-whites accounted for 23% of the electorate; this year they will represent over 31%. No wonder the convention was largely dedicated to issues, such as gun control, criminal justice and immigration reform, that concern non-whites especially. This is the demographic wave that Mr Obama rode to electoral victories; the board, and a tremendous natural advantage, now passes to Mrs Clinton. Yet the question, which lurked beneath the jollity and the protest in Philadelphia, is whether the former secretary of state can surf.

It is amazing how badly she is doing. The latest opinion polls suggest she is at best level-pegging with Mr Trump, having forfeited a seven-point lead in the past month. According to calculations by Nate Silver, a respected number-cruncher, Mrs Clinton currently has only a 53% chance of winning in November. In other words, given Mr Trump’s stated plans, her performance is threatening a catastrophe for America and the world.

You get me too, folks!

The tightness of the race is largely due to Mr Trump’s success in rallying working-class whites with his dystopian vision, racially loaded language and promise to reverse globalisation. His conference speech, in which he described America as a “divided crime scene” which he alone could fix, went down a storm with them. According to a poll for CNN, his lead over Mrs Clinton with non-college-educated whites has since doubled, to almost 40 percentage points. The consensus view has long been that there are too few of these voters to give Mr Trump victory. It is estimated that he would need to bag around 70% of them, which seems unlikely. Yet that assumes Mrs Clinton does almost as well as Mr Obama in turning out non-white and younger voters, and she may not.

Her trouble with working-class whites is fuelled by deep forces, including wage stagnation and rage against the elite, that might poleaxe any establishment politician. Yet Mrs Clinton’s struggle is exacerbated by her wretched trust ratings, for which she is clearly to blame. Her irregular e-mail arrangements as secretary of state, and, what was worse, her spiky mishandling of the furore this caused, has trashed her standing with millions of voters. Only 30% consider her honest; by comparison, 43% say the same of Mr Trump, though his speeches are packed with untruths.

This has encouraged a notion that the nominees are as bad as each other—“Hillary and Trump are Coke and Pepsi, both bad for you,” spat out a retired teacher from Minnesota at an anti-Clinton rally in Philadelphia. Disenchanted by their choice, a quarter of voters say they are still undecided. Among younger voters, an important part of Mr Obama’s winning coalition, a quarter say they mean to vote for a candidate other than Mr Trump or Mrs Clinton.



Timeline: United States presidential nominating conventions

Beyond reconciliation, the Democratic convention was largely designed to relaunch Mrs Clinton’s image—most obviously in her husband’s address. It was, for the most part, a schmaltzy, meandering recollection of the couple’s early years together. “In the spring of 1971, I met a girl,” he began, then recounted details of the courtship that ensued: the fine public swimming-pool close to her parents’ house in Illinois, his two failed marriage proposals.

It would have been more moving, perhaps, if all this wasn’t familiar from a couple of biographies. The strength of the bond he described would certainly have been more convincing had he mentioned the infidelities with which he tested it; “She’ll never quit on you. She never quit on me,” was as close as he came. But the Democratic crowd was gripped. And when Mr Clinton set his own portrait of an indefatigably public-spirited Mrs Clinton against the devious caricature her opponents describe—“One is real, the other is made up”—he won her her first serious ovation of the convention.

It was well done, though unlikely to sway many partisans. Republicans have spent three decades hating the Clintons. In a rousing speech Mr Biden, the vice-president, delivered a more promising defence. “Everyone knows she’s smart, everyone knows she’s tough, but I know what she’s passionate about,” he roared. In other words: you may not like her, you may not believe her, but at least trust that, in a lifetime of public service, Mrs Clinton has been motivated mainly to do good.

It is a low bar but, 100 days from the election, perhaps the biggest reset Mrs Clinton can hope for. A popular slogan in Philadelphia was “Love trumps hate”. But, well as the convention went, there was no great love in the air for her there.



Barack Obama passes the baton to Hillary Clinton

The sitting president’s role was predictable, but the long arc of the day bent nicely



Bill Clinton hails Hillary the change-maker

On the evening of her official nomination, Bill Clinton makes an eloquent case for his wife



The Sandernistas’ last hurrah in Philadelphia

Yet disunity is not the Democrats’ biggest problem



Hillary Clinton chooses Tim Kaine

It should be balm to centrists’ souls to hear Senate colleagues from both parties agree that Mr Kaine is a thoroughly decent and reasonable man



Courts strike down unfair voting laws

Three courts thwart Republican efforts to dampen support for Democrats at the polls





More US election coverage



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21702799-democrats-successfully-unite-behind-hillary-clinton-unloved-nominee-bridging/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

On the trail

Philly special

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



Scoop

“We’re gonna cut you off right now. We’re gonna cover right now Boyz II Men, Philadelphia’s own, is here and they’re performing onstage.”

CNN cuts from demonstrators outside the convention to watch an ageing pop band

No speaky

“I’m hoping I’m not going to have to start kind of brushing up back on my Dora the Explorer to understand some of the speeches given this week.”

A CNN political consultant is upset that Senator Tim Kaine, Hillary Clinton’s running-mate, speaks Spanish

Accentuate the positive

“But boring is the fastest-growing demographic in this country.”

Senator Tim Kaine defends himself. NBC

Meme of the moment

“I don’t know who created Pokémon Go, but I’m trying to figure out how we get them to Pokémon Go to the polls!”

Mrs Clinton keeps up with popular culture

History repeating

“Today is the anniversary of Dylan going electric at the 1965 Newport Folk Fest, basically the last time the Left felt this betrayed.”

Olivier Knox. Twitter

Vegas, baby

“With a spirit as wild and free as our mustangs.”

Nevada casts its vote

Stages of grief

“OK. Fine. Hillary, I guess.”

A bumper-sticker for resigned BernieSanders fans, circulating on the internet

RIP

“Before the dawn comes the deepest dark of night.”

A huddle of #NeverTrump Republicans in Washington, DC hold a wake for their party

Ladylike

“She’s got a fresh mouth. Other than that, she’s got nothing going.”

Donald Trump really doesn’t like Elizabeth Warren

With friends like these...

“It’s probably China. Or it could have been somebody sitting in his bed…Russia, if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 e-mails that are missing. I think you will probably be rewarded mightily by our press.”

Mr Trump, answering questions about the hacking of DNC e-mails, brings up Hillary’s deleted ones and appeals to Vladimir Putin to help retrieve them



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21702814-philly-special/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Putin, Trump and the DNC

Signal and noise

A hack fuels suspicion of plots against Bernie Sanders—and against America

Jul 30th 2016 | PHILADELPHIA | From the print edition

Dreaming of Donald

NEVER interfere in other countries’ internal affairs, Vladimir Putin has insisted—except by invading them, bankrolling their nastiest politicians and, perhaps, conspiring to embarrass America’s Democratic Party and its presidential candidate.

The Kremlin’s precise role and purpose in the scandal over the Democratic National Committee’s (DNC’s) e-mails, and whom it will harm most, remain to be seen. The known facts of the story are that, on July 22nd, WikiLeaks published over 19,000 e-mails hacked from the DNC’s accounts. (Five days later it followed up with a clutch of purloined voicemails.) Some confirmed the conviction of supporters of Bernie Sanders that party apparatchiks favoured Hillary Clinton in its primaries. In one of the grubbiest messages, an official seemed to float the idea of insinuating that the senator was an atheist. Disgruntled Sandernistas were already intending to disrupt the convention in Philadelphia; Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a Floridian congresswoman, duly resigned as the committee’s chairman on July 24th.

Russian involvement had already been identified by CrowdStrike, a cyber-security firm, which the DNC enlisted in May. In a judgment supported by digital clues and shared by other cyber-sleuths—including, it seems, American spooks—it found that the hack began last summer, and was perpetrated by two groups thought to be associated with Russian intelligence agencies. They are known to aficionados as “Fancy Bear” and “Cozy Bear”; the latter was also implicated in cyber-raids on the State Department, the White House and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Andrei Soldatov, an expert on the Russian security services, offers another hypothesis: that one of the intruders is a private outfit, the second its state-affiliated client. The claim to responsibility of a pseudonymous hacker, who said he was Romanian but couldn’t speak the language, looks like an unconvincing decoy.

WikiLeaks—whose founder, Julian Assange, used to present a TV show on a Russian propaganda channel—denied the Russian connection; the Kremlin scoffed at it. Nevertheless, Mr Putin’s aversion to Mrs Clinton, and thus a possible motive to undermine her, is well-documented. In 2011 he blamed her for protests against Russia’s rigged parliamentary election: she “set the tone” and “gave them a signal”, railed Mr Putin, for whom unrest in the post-Soviet world is generally a sign of American machinations. In Moscow she is widely seen as a warmonger and sanctions hawk.

Donald Trump seems much more palatable. He prefers bilateral dealmaking to alliances and isolationism to global activism. He downplays Russian human-rights abuses and America’s role in addressing them; most encouragingly for Mr Putin, he disparages NATO, suggesting that its mutual-defence commitment might be optional. All that leads some to discern a Russian bid to boost his candidacy; the conspiratorially minded even suspect a link between his campaign and the Kremlin. They point to his business dabblings in Russia, sycophantic comments about Mr Putin and his confidants’ pasts. Paul Manafort, his campaign chairman, once advised Viktor Yanukovych, a former Ukrainian president who fled to Russia. A foreign-policy adviser, Carter Page, has ties to Gazprom.

Mr Trump scoffed, too—then, astonishingly, seemed to call for the Russians to dig up Mrs Clinton’s private e-mails as well. He also entertained the prospect of recognising Russia’s annexation of Crimea. Still, the overlap in personnel could be explained by correlation rather than conspiracy: working for Mr Putin’s stooges, and for Mr Trump, require similar lacks of scruple. Maria Lipman, editor of Counterpoint, a journal of George Washington University, thinks the Kremlin knows its influence in American politics is small. If Russia is responsible, the aim might be to portray American democracy as tawdry and flawed, rather than, more ambitiously, to swing the contest for Mr Trump.

An FBI probe might clarify whether this hack fits alongside other Kremlin-directed exposés of inconvenient politicians, more typically involving tapped conversations or fuzzy footage of extramarital sex. Whatever the intention, meanwhile, Mr Trump seems more likely to be damaged by the episode than Mrs Clinton—if, that is, he is still embarrassable at all.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21702813-hack-fuels-suspicion-plots-against-bernie-sandersand-against-america-signal-and-noise/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The PGA championship

Who’ll win?

Crunching the probabilities

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition





INTERACTIVE: Spectacular golfing collapses

ALL eyes will be on Henrik Stenson at the PGA Championship, the last of the year’s four major men’s golf tournaments, which began on July 28th in Springfield, New Jersey. At the British Open two weeks before he led a men’s field by the biggest margin since 1955. But EAGLE (Economist Advantage in Golf Likelihood Estimator), our new golf prediction system, is unimpressed. Based on data from 450,000 holes played in past tournaments, it thinks Mr Stenson has only a 5.0% chance of winning. Instead—though he is under the weather at the moment—it favours the victor of last year’s PGA, Jason Day (above), giving him a 10.5% chance of defending his title. You can follow EAGLE’s projected win probabilities, updated every 15 minutes during the event, at economist.com/eagle.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21702803-crunching-probabilities-wholl-win/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Southern living

From crop to pop

What the rise of a vertically integrated lolly-maker says about urban trends

Jul 30th 2016 | ATLANTA AND WINSTON, GEORGIA | From the print edition

Competition royally licked

WHEN Steven Carse began hawking ice lollies on a corner in Atlanta, one of his best customers was a lawyer representing Unilever. Mr Carse’s brand name was King of Pops, but his marketing used the word Popsicle—a trademark indirectly acquired by the conglomerate from a Californian who, as a child, accidentally invented the delicacy on a wintry night in 1905. The lawyer would serve him “cease and desist” notices, Mr Carse recalls. But she always bought some pops, too.

That was in 2010, when he was 25. He had abandoned a brief stint in Idaho as a journalist and returned to Georgia, where he grew up, to be a data analyst for an insurance firm. Losing that job in a post-crash cull, he reverted to selling candyfloss at baseball games, as he had in college: good practice, he says, for making eye contact and ten-second sales. Hoping to buy a pop-freezing machine, he became embroiled with a Cypriot businessman in West Palm Beach, who undertook to import one from Brazil (he didn’t). He made his pops by night in a shared Atlanta kitchen, lugging a cart to his corner to sell them by day.

Soon his brother, Nick, ditched his career as a prosecutor and joined him. Six years on, Mr Carse reckons he may hit annual sales of 2m lollies. King of Pops is still a family concern: his dad deals with wholesale distribution—they deliver for other outfits as well—while his mum oversees collections. But it now has around 100 street vendors in eight cities, supplies hundreds of retailers and runs a catering arm.

Much of this success came from hard work. But evolutions in taste, and in Atlanta itself, have contributed. The supremacy of King of Pops is also a parable of trends in consumerism and in urban living.

Mr Carse traces his enthusiasm for pops to the trips he made to Latin America to visit his other brother, an anthropologist. He ate lots of paletas, Popsicle-esque treats that make use of otherwise superfluous produce. Those origins suggest one advantage pops offer startups: low overheads and, potentially, high margins. Twitter helped Mr Carse to realise those, letting him inform his customers where his cart was and which flavours he was peddling.

Meanwhile, as in other places, growing numbers of Atlantans have been attracted by his reliance on local ingredients. At first he bought at farmers’ markets, but two years ago King of Pops invested in its own farm—King of Crops—30 miles west of the city. Touring it, Mr Carse points out peppers used in pineapple habanero, cucumbers soon to be mixed with lime and lemongrass with coconut. These exotic combinations are part of another relevant shift: the rise of posh street food, driven by enlightened licensing authorities, a cohort of shoestring entrepreneurs and diners looking for low-cost sophistication.

Coincidentally, in Atlanta as elsewhere, more people are getting around by foot or bicycle; in a related change, more young professionals are choosing to live in town, often with their pop-happy offspring. The King of Pops’ HQ and kitchen has a window counter on the BeltLine, a converted railway trail that is the axis of Atlanta’s redevelopment. A mile up, it has opened a bar in a revamped mall. On Tuesdays hundreds of people gather on the BeltLine for a King of Pops-sponsored yoga class. It has become the flagship brand of a newly pedestrianised lifestyle.

How far can Mr Carse’s pops go, before their hip and eco-credentials melt? Once he couldn’t afford a store; now King of Pops has bricks-and-mortar outlets in Atlanta, Charleston, Charlotte and Richmond. From the farm to the carts, it is an integrated crop-to-pop producer: a bold, unusual model that might prove impractical on a bigger scale. And between King of Crops, Poptails (cocktails, frozen and otherwise) and King of Pups (icy dog treats), it may be reaching its alliterative limit.

For now, Mr Carse hopes that—within the South, with its long pop season—it can continue to take in roughly a city a year. In any case, King of Pops is already an institution, a status that might take decades to acquire in other cities but in Atlanta, novelty-seeking and hungry for hometown champions, can be won at speed. Two recent events sealed it. Dad’s Garage, a local theatre, put on a musical in which the King of Pops does battle with a corporate villainess, the Ice Queen of Cones. Then in May the city’s mega-brand, Coca-Cola, enlisted the firm to make a celebratory float for its 130th anniversary. On the wrapper a Coke bottle sports a King of Pops crown.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21702812-what-rise-vertically-integrated-lolly-maker-says-about-urban-trends-crop/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Political parties

Defining realignment

The anger and fickleness of voters are forcing change. But in which direction?

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition

BIG structural changes to political parties happen only once in a generation. Academics reckon that in 219 years America has seen just six different party systems, each attracting a distinct coalition of voters. Donald Trump’s idea of turning the Republican Party, long the ally of big business, into a “workers’ party” may yet force a seventh. To track the trend, The Economist has melted down the American electorate into their policy choices and priorities alone, freeing them from party labels to see what kind of winning policy platforms might emerge in future.

First-past-the-post voting like America’s tends inevitably to yield two-party systems, which usually require awkward coalitions. What determines which interest groups coalesce? In 1929 Harold Hotelling, an economist, wrote that a rational voter would choose a candidate whose views showed most “proximity” to his own. In turn, a political party serious about winning should take the positions most likely to convince the voter in the electorate’s ideological middle. Since both parties needed to attract most votes from a broad electorate, this “median-voter theorem” would push them both towards the centre. Hotelling observed that American candidates tended to “pussyfoot” for just that reason, giving ambiguous answers to policy questions for “fear of losing votes”.

Hotelling’s logic remains airtight today. If a hypothetical party system is to remain stable, it will have to give both sides roughly equal opportunities to cobble together 50.1% of the electorate. To identify the most viable potential coalitions, we used an online poll of over 7,000 registered voters conducted by YouGov from May to July, which asked respondents both to express their preferences on 12 different issues (see table) and say how much they cared. By multiplying each position by its importance and adding them up for every voter, we could tell not just which present party they might support, but also which way they would lean in more than 300,000 hypothetical alternative systems.



Leftward shifts

Starting with the candidates’ actual platforms in the 2016 race, this approach shows that, free of party loyalties, 52% of registered voters are closer to Hillary Clinton’s basket of policies than to Mr Trump’s. That suggests a win for the Democrats in November. And, surprisingly, Mrs Clinton has room to shift further leftward. Around 9% of voters hold views currently closer to Mr Trump’s, primarily because of their support for building a border wall with Mexico, but would wind up on Mrs Clinton’s side if she embraced a $15 federal minimum wage and fully-taxpayer-funded college tuition. In that case, the Democrats’ share of the vote would increase to 54%.

However, Mrs Clinton should not stray too far in this direction. The positions of her left-wing rival, Bernie Sanders—raising taxes without cutting spending, reluctance to wage war on terrorism—are anathema to much of the electorate. Forced to choose between Mr Trump’s positions and Mr Sanders’s, 57% would vote for Mr Trump.

Nonetheless, the poll still indicates that Hotelling’s coveted median voter sits to the left of the midpoint between the presidential candidates. Mr Trump’s opposition to American military intervention in Syria does cost him votes, particularly against a hawkish Democrat like Mrs Clinton. But on almost every other topic save immigration, he would have to slide left to cut into his rival’s lead. Given Mrs Clinton’s positions, he could conceivably win 70% of the non-college-educated vote if he backed a liberal wish-list diametrically opposed to his current platform, including legal abortion and gun control. (If anyone could pull off such a flip-flop, it would be him.)

Although candidates are usually rewarded for taking the centre ground, there is no simple rule of thumb for winning over the median voter. Views on many topics tend to be correlated: for example, 65% of people who want gay marriage banned also want more restrictions on abortion. This forces politicians to adopt these paired opinions as a package, even if one is far more popular than the other. So parties continually attract and repel votes as they shift their platforms. The more eclectic the average voter’s mix of positions, the more unstable the party system becomes.

On pure policy grounds, American voters hold far more heterogeneous views than their perfectly-polarised representatives in Congress. Just 12% have down-the-line liberal or conservative positions on economic and social questions. And immigration, which has split both parties, is an unusually potent issue. Not only do 53% of respondents expressing an opinion support building a wall on the Mexican border; 94% of those said doing so was “important” or “very important”.

As Hotelling would predict, the most conceptually consistent (and therefore ideologically extreme) platforms are not politically viable. A mercantilist party that favoured moral and fiscal conservatism and intervention abroad would collect less than 30% of the vote against Mrs Clinton or Mr Trump. And a pure libertarian opposing all restrictions on guns, abortion, immigration or free trade would pick up a mere 26% of the vote against Mrs Clinton and 34% versus Mr Trump.

The YouGov survey suggests, however, that a winning coalition could be built around an anti-globalisation message. The candidate would have to take centrist positions on abortion, gay marriage and gun control, and alienate business by backing popular but costly government benefits like national health insurance. When combined with supporting a border wall, opposing the North American Free Trade Agreement and ignoring climate change, this basket would secure 51.2% of the vote against a more socially liberal platform backing NAFTA and immigration: close enough to maintain a stable two-party system across election cycles.



Hotelling’s theory of proximity accurately predicts how people will actually vote. The YouGov figures show that a robust 84% of respondents already support the party closer to their beliefs. The remaining 16%, our model suggests, often cling to a party for reasons other than policy, such as party identity. In 2004 Thomas Frank, a journalist, argued that America’s white working class acts against its own economic interests by backing the Republicans on cultural grounds; and our analysis proves that an additional 2.5% of the white non-college-educated vote would go over to the Democrats if policy choices alone mattered. However, this effect is more than offset by a similar number of people who support the Democrats despite holding Republican-friendly views. These are disproportionately less-educated non-whites, many of whom associate Republicans with hostility to immigrants. As Marco Rubio, a Republican senator, put it in 2012 regarding Hispanics: “It’s really hard to get people to listen to you…if they think you want to deport their grandmother.”

Two caveats are necessary. Our analysis shows that far more Americans hold moderate views than extreme ones. But this may be because they are uncertain where they stand, and are waiting to be persuaded. For example, 45% are unsure whether NAFTA has helped or harmed economic growth. A study based, like ours, on Hotelling’s policy-preference-maximising automatons, captures this confusion.

Perhaps most important, our analysis ignores the quality of the candidates themselves. Just 26% of the YouGov respondents said that agreeing with a candidate’s positions was the most important factor guiding their vote. Personality, or lack of it, accounts for the rest. Great campaigners can and do sway voters who may disagree with some of their views, while lacklustre ones can disenchant even their natural supporters. And then there are the downright ornery voters—as many as 10-15% of respondents in our survey—who refuse to be pigeonholed at all. As Robert Kennedy observed in 1964, “One-fifth of the people are against everything all the time.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21702805-anger-and-fickleness-voters-are-forcing-change-which-direction-defining/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

Able Kaine

Hillary Clinton’s choice of running-mate suggests she hopes to heal the partisan divide

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



TIM KAINE, the senator from Virginia chosen by Hillary Clinton as her running-mate, is endearingly bad at hiding how excited he is by his new gig. The morning of July 27th found the rumpled ex-missionary and harmonica aficionado in Philadelphia, preparing for a televised address that evening to the Democratic National Convention. To limber up, Mr Kaine dropped in on the Virginia state delegation as they breakfasted at their hotel. He described the telephone call in which he was invited to join the Democratic presidential ticket. Hillary Clinton called “at 7.32pm”, he told them, before pausing, abashed by the precision of the memory. “Now, who’s counting?” he blushed. “I mean just 7.32-ish.” Mr Kaine is good at folksy self-effacement.

Vice-presidential picks are chosen less to sway many votes in their own right than to complement the top of the ticket. That makes them revealing—their strengths are a guide to the qualities that presidential candidates fear they lack. Mr Kaine is affable. He is detectably a normal human being, despite decades in politics. He first ran for the city council in Richmond, Virginia’s mostly black capital, then as mayor, before serving as Virginia’s governor and senator. He sent his children to Richmond public schools. In this he followed a family tradition—his wife, Anne, was also sent to Richmond schools by her father, a Republican governor of Virginia with an unusually progressive record on civil rights. There are Republican senators who like Mr Kaine, and who have admitted to this in public since his elevation.

In a rancorous election season, Mr Kaine sends an important signal about how Mrs Clinton thinks she may win. Political campaigns can be boiled down to two tasks, one nobler than the other. The first involves maximising turnout on voting day, too often by pandering and stoking the passions of core supporters. The second task is persuasion. At its finest, this involves crafting arguments that lure voters to cross party lines.

In choosing Mr Kaine, Hillary Clinton is placing at least a partial bet on persuasion. Mr Trump has gone the other way. His Republican National Convention in Cleveland was a four-day gamble on turnout, with angry, dystopian speeches aimed at mostly white voters who believe their country has been stolen from them. In his statewide races Mr Kaine has done well with black voters and with the state’s growing Hispanic population. His early work as a civil-rights lawyer, fighting racist landlords, helped, as does his fluent Spanish, picked up as a Catholic missionary in Honduras in a year out from Harvard Law School. But some of his most impressive vote tallies were run up in suburban counties with names like Loudoun and Fairfax—places filled with college-educated whites in leafy cul-de-sacs, where folk like taxes low and yearn to feel safe from terrorism, but are repelled by angry culture wars and anti-government slogans.

Mr Kaine is not exactly a centrist. Doctrinaire conservatives cannot forgive his support for legal abortion (though personally opposed to the practice, he says that such decisions fall in the sphere of personal morality). Virginia Republicans have attacked his stance against the death penalty, though he fought back by explaining that his beliefs flowed from his Catholic faith—and as governor he oversaw 11 executions, saying that he bowed to the law. His is a social-justice strain of Catholicism, with a whiff of Latin America and of Pope Francis to it. He was an outspoken advocate for immigrants, an early supporter of gay rights, and pushed for gun controls after a shooting at Virginia Tech University in 2007 when a gunman killed 32 people.

Yet unlike some politicians who hold similar views, he knows how to present progressive goals in a patriotic light. In his first campaign event as Mrs Clinton’s running-mate in Miami on July 23rd, he said immigration was a vote of confidence in America, asking naturalised citizens to raise their hands and telling them: “Thank you for choosing us.” Addressing those Virginia delegates in Philadelphia, he praised Mrs Clinton for her plans to tackle economic inequality, the great cause that animates the Democratic Party’s loud populist wing. But rather than denouncing the economy as “rigged”, in the manner of Senator Bernie Sanders, Mr Kaine said his boss has “the right ideas about how to grow the economy and make sure that we grow it for everybody and not just a few”. That focus on growth as a motor of social justice puts him in the Bill Clinton tradition of Democratic politics.

The Truman Show, revisited

In foreign policy Mr Kaine is an admirer of Harry Truman, the Democratic president whose doctrine established America as a cold-war defender of democracy against Soviet dictatorship. He angers the left by backing free trade, though he has had to join Mrs Clinton in saying the next big trade pact, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, is too flawed to support. In his convention speech he attacked the Republican nominee from the right on national security, noting that his son, Nat, is a marine who this month deployed to Europe “to defend the very NATO allies that Donald Trump now says he would abandon”.

The new running-mate talked of growing up in Kansas City, and the small ironworking business that his father ran. He noted that his father-in-law remains a Republican in his 90s, but feels abandoned by a party that could nominate Mr Trump. Directly addressing any Republicans in despair at what has become of their “party of Lincoln”, Mr Kaine told them: “We’ve got a home for you right here in the Democratic Party.”

This is only part of the Kaine mission: expect to see him deployed to drive up Democratic turnout, too. He is a master of delivering partisan blows with an aw-shucks smile. But Mr Trump’s gruesome demagoguery has left millions of Republicans bereft. Genial Mr Kaine represents a pitch by Mrs Clinton for some of those votes. If he bridges the partisan divide, even a little, some good may come out of the Trump era.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21702804-hillary-clintons-choice-running-mate-suggests-she-hopes-heal-partisan-divide-able/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Brazil’s Olympics: Not yet medal contenders

Bello: Cash in bin liners, please





Articles Sections Next

Brazil’s Olympics

Not yet medal contenders

The Olympic city has been in decline since the 1960s. The games will not change its direction

Jul 30th 2016 | RIO DE JANEIRO | From the print edition



WHEN Rio de Janeiro won the right almost seven years ago to host the Olympic games in 2016, the cidade maravilhosa (wonderful city) seemed to deserve its nickname. Violence, as much part of Rio’s image as its beaches, had been falling for more than a decade (see chart). Rio’s economy, and that of the surrounding state (also called Rio de Janeiro), was booming, thanks to the world’s demand for the oil that lies off its shores. The games would show off a prosperous, self-confident city, its organisers claimed. As important, if Rio could show that it can plan as well as it parties, it would bury the idea that “Brazil is not a serious country,” as a Brazilian diplomat put it in the 1960s. “Those who give us this chance will not regret it,” promised Luis Inácio Lula da Silva, the president who brought the games to Brazil.



With days to go before the opening ceremony on August 5th, Rio’s self-confidence is looking shaky. On July 24th the Australian team stormed out of the Olympic village in the district of Barra da Tijuca, complaining of clogged toilets and loose wires. But those are trivial glitches compared with the other problems plaguing the host city. Guanabara Bay, where Olympic sailors are to compete, remains in parts an open sewer. An outbreak last year of the mosquito-borne Zika virus, which causes birth defects, has scared away some sportsmen. Male golfers, in particular, are shunning Rio as if Ipanema beach were a giant sand trap. Policemen, whose salaries were delayed by a bankrupt state government, have greeted visitors at the international airport with signs that read (in English) “welcome to hell”. A new metro line and bus corridor, the games’ main legacy to cariocas, as the city’s residents are called, are behind schedule.

These local difficulties are compounded by national crises. Brazil is suffering from a severe recession. Its president, Dilma Rousseff, is being impeached on charges that she manipulated government accounts; an interim government, led by Michel Temer, is in charge. Rio is one of the centres of national dysfunction. Petrobras, the state-controlled oil firm at the centre of a multibillion dollar scandal that fuelled demands for Ms Rousseff’s impeachment, has its headquarters there. The city’s policemen are no exception to the violent Brazilian norm: they killed 40 people in May alone. Its reputation as an urban Dorian Gray—gorgeous to behold but infected by corruption—is not entirely undeserved.

Rio may yet confound doubters. It hosts a huge Carnival every year without plunging into chaos. The sporting arenas are ready. Rio’s cost overruns for building them and for other Olympic spending are smaller than average for host cities, and most of the money was from private sources. The federal government has given the state 2.9 billion reais ($890m) in emergency aid in part to pay policemen’s salaries. It has sent 27,000 soldiers and national guards to fight crime and prevent terrorism (on July 21st police said they had foiled a plot by home-grown jihadists). The bus links are late but working; organisers promise that the metro will be running by July 30th. After quick repairs to their quarters, the displaced Australians returned.

They and the 500,000 sports fans expected to attend the games will leave the city once they are over. Rio’s 6.5m inhabitants will remain. Whether the Olympics dazzle or disappoint, cariocas will find that they have done little to arrest the city’s long decline.

Beauty is not enough

Whether they live on Rio’s glitzy seafront, in one of the city’s 1,000-odd favelas (shantytowns) or in dowdy dormitory districts, the mood is grim. A law student who came three years ago, intending to stay after her studies, now wants to leave: she is fed up with cuts to the budget of her state university and strikes that have forced it to cancel classes. A group of businessmen tried to improve the state’s governance in 2008 by paying for a renowned consultant to offer management advice to the administration. A few years later the bureaucrats slipped back into clientelistic habits. Carioca friends of José Padilha, a film director who lives in Los Angeles, have been telling him to stay there. According to a poll conducted last September, 56% of cariocas want to leave the city, up from 27% in 2011.

No tourist will fail to notice the jarring juxtapositions of wealth and poverty, a consequence of Rio’s exuberant topography as well as its poor governance. Residents of lush Gávea can expect to live past 80, 13 years longer than their neighbours in Rocinha, a large favela next door. Crime rates vary wildly. Last year 133 people died violently in Santa Cruz, a deceptively tranquil district at Rio’s western tip, where broccoli and books are sold side by side in a shabby central market. In the three beachfront bairros of Zona Sul (the southern zone), whose joint population is roughly equal to Santa Cruz’s, just 11 did. A priority in middle-class Copacabana, where a quarter of residents are 65 or older, is fixing uneven pavements, says Fernando Gabeira, a writer who was an unsuccessful candidate for mayor in 2008. In Complexo do Alemão, a large northern favela with a young population, it is better schools and jobs. Everyone worries about crime.

The vast majority of cariocas live neither along beachfront avenues nor the alleyways of ramshackle favelas. Zona Sul is home to 11% of the city’s inhabitants. Favelas account for 3.7% of the city’s area and house 22% of its people. Most live in charmless low-rise apartment blocks that arch across Rio’s north and west. And then there is Barra da Tijuca, a fast-growing mini-Miami of car dealerships, marshland and identikit condominiums with names like “Sunflower” and “Villaggio Felicitá”.

Gently down the sewer

Tourism and other services provide most jobs: a quarter of young people work in bars and restaurants. Many have long commutes. Emanuel, a jovial 60-year-old with a missing front tooth, grumbles that it takes him an hour-and-a-half to commute to Leblon, where he sells biscuits and iced tea along the beachfront, from Jacarepaguá, 24km (14 miles) to the west. Some 2m workers stream into Rio daily from its underdeveloped periphery.

The roots of Rio’s discontent go back at least to 1960, when Brazil’s federal government moved to Brasília, the purpose-built capital. Rio had lost industrial leadership to São Paulo, which had more space and more immigrants, 40 years before. The loss of its capital-city status was a blow from which it has yet to recover. The idea of moving the seat of government to spur development away from the coastline is an old one, set forth in an early constitution enacted in 1891. Few Brazilians took it seriously until Juscelino Kubitschek, elected president in 1956, pushed through a law to make it happen. Even after civil servants began moving to the modernist capital, cariocas thought important ministries would stay put. Who, they wondered, would swap the cidade maravilhosa for a barren savannah in the middle of nowhere? Rio thrived briefly as a city-state, called Guanabara, but was soon merged into the poorer surrounding state of Rio de Janeiro.

By the 1980s nearly all federal agencies had disappeared. The financial sector followed. Brazil’s central bank stopped using the city as the main centre for trading government securities. Bankers were frightened away by a spate of kidnappings for ransom in the 1980s. Rio’s stock exchange, founded 180 years earlier, was taken over piecemeal by São Paulo’s exchanges in the 2000s. Brazil’s state development bank still has its headquarters in Rio and a few asset managers moved in. But the city’s importance for Brazil’s economy has progressively diminished.

Apart from the annual bacchanal of Carnival, Rio has found no vocation to replace banking and bureaucracy. The discovery of huge underwater oil deposits in 2007 seemed to offer the city (and the state) an alternative source of jobs and growth. But the industry has been devastated by a combination of low oil prices and the Petrobras scandal. The oil boom reversed the relative decline of Rio’s economy, but perhaps only briefly. The city is home to a clutch of creative enterprises and universities: Rede Globo, Brazil’s biggest media group, and research units of Microsoft and GE. But these are no more than a kernel for a more dynamic economy.

Culture has not replaced commerce. Bossa nova was conceived on Rio’s beaches in the 1950s, but since then the city has become stifling, says Caetano Veloso, one of Brazil’s most famous musicians, who lives in the city. Tropicalismo, a blend of Brazilian and pop music that Mr Veloso helped pioneer, was born in São Paulo. “Rio was too blasé,” he says. Blessed with the natural riches of oil and scenery, it has not striven to create its own wealth. Cariocas do not plant, they “just pluck”, observes Ruy Castro, a chronicler of the city.

Olympic hopefuls

Politics have done little to stir them from complacency. Rio’s status as the national capital stunted its institutions. Presidents appointed the mayor; the senate could overturn his decisions. Mayors offered jobs to senators’ sons, encouraging habits of patronage that Rio has yet to break. The merger between Rio de Janeiro and Guanabara, imposed by military dictators, brought the state’s clientelistic culture to the city. The state especially has been profligate, while spending too little on the services and infrastructure needed to spur investment and improve welfare.

In June the acting governor of Rio state, Francisco Dornelles, declared that its finances constituted a “public calamity”, a formality that allowed the federal government to send aid during the Olympics. The immediate cause was a drop in taxes and royalties from oil, but years of fiscal mismanagement had paved the way.

Cariocas hoped that the games might be a catalyst for better public services and more jobs. The city’s government has partly met those expectations. The mayor, Eduardo Paes, nearly trebled spending on health and education. He hired 43,000 teachers and 21,000 health workers, 80% of whom work in the city’s impoverished north and west. Now 4.4m people have access to family doctors, up from 329,000 when Mr Paes took office in 2009. The proportion of cariocas served by mass transit rose from 18% to 63% during his tenure. City hall should be making these improvements anyway, the mayor admits, but the Olympics provided a “pretext” to push them through quickly. Games-related works boosted the local economy while Brazil was in recession. Cariocas’ incomes rose even as they fell in Brazil as a whole, according to a study by the Fundação Getulio Vargas, a university.



Daily chart: Crime and the Olympics

The state government meanwhile tried to curb violent crime. Starting in 2008 it sent heavily armed troops into 38 favelas to evict drug gangs, then set up “pacification police units” (UPPs) to keep the peace. It worked. Violent crime in Rio halved between 2009 and 2012.

But police commanders created too many UPPs too quickly, overstretching the force. In training they continued to emphasise the skills required to hold territory, neglecting those needed to forge strong relations with the community. “A year of this and you could turn a Benedictine monk into a warrior,” laments Íbis Pereira, a former police commander now at Viva Rio, an NGO. In Complexo do Alemão, shootouts between gangsters and trigger-happy police have become frequent, says Luisa Cabral, a social worker in the neighbourhood. After its decline, the number of violent deaths has crept back up across the city this year. Ms Cabral now thinks the UPPs should leave the favelas, letting the drug traffickers return. After Mr Paes accused the state of doing a “horrible” job on security in an interview on CNN, 20,000 Americans returned their Olympic tickets.

A successful games could lift Rio’s downbeat mood. That will not be enough to make the city an economic dynamo. The spectacular scenery makes people want to come, but it will take more enlightened crime-fighting, better fiscal management and improved public services to make them want to stay. Until its leaders provide that, Rio will not become a great city, merely a great setting for one.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21702811-olympic-city-has-been-decline-1960s-games-will-not-change-its/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

Cash in bin liners, please

The Argentine way of corruption, and of fighting it

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



IN THE early hours of June 14th a suspicious neighbour spotted a man armed with an automatic rifle throwing bulging black bin liners over a convent wall in General Rodríguez, a suburb on the western fringes of Buenos Aires. The man then leapt over the convent’s big wooden gateway. Fearing for the safety of the three elderly nuns who lived there, the neighbour called the police. Two patrol cars turned up. The officers say they refused the man’s attempt to bribe them.

The bin liners contained 90 kilos (200 pounds) of banknotes: $9m, plus €153,000 ($168,000) and smaller amounts in other currencies. The man was José López, who for 12 years was secretary of public works in the governments of Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and her late husband and predecessor, Néstor Kirchner. The antics of Mr López, who has been charged with illicit enrichment, have provided a defining retrospective image of the Kirchner era in Argentina.

As president Ms Fernández adopted a regal manner, never admitting mistakes and browbeating anyone, from businessmen to media owners and judges, who got in her way. After the narrow victory in November’s presidential election of Mauricio Macri, a centre-right opponent of her political heir, Daniel Scioli, there was talk that she would remain the dominant power in Argentina. Yet out of office, Ms Fernández has quickly been exposed as a paper tigress. Much of her Peronist movement has deserted her. And now she faces a real threat of jail.

Three judges are investigating her or her associates. One case involves her government’s sale of dollar futures last year to prop up the peso before the election, which cost the central bank $4 billion when Mr Macri’s inevitable devaluation followed. More personally damaging are two judicial probes into two hotel companies she and her family own in Santa Cruz, a province in Patagonia. Scores of rooms were block-booked (but few occupied) for months on end by Aerolíneas Argentinas, an airline which she renationalised, and by companies controlled by Lázaro Báez, a former bank clerk, and by another close business associate of the Kirchners. Mr Báez, who is in jail on suspicion of money-laundering, received the lion’s share of public-works contracts from Néstor Kirchner when he was governor of Santa Cruz and, later, many federal contracts.

One judge has blocked Ms Fernández’s bank accounts and credit cards; the other has found that Florencia Kirchner, her 26-year-old daughter, had $4.7m in several safe-deposit boxes and $1m in a bank account. She says this is her inheritance from her father. The Kirchner family’s declared wealth increased 17-fold during their dozen years in power to 119m pesos ($8m). They say that came from hotels and the revaluation of land, which they bought cheaply from local authorities.

Ms Fernández’s response to being investigated has been to embrace victimhood, blaming “judicial persecution”. Take on powerful interests, such as farmers and multinational companies, and “it’s clear that one of the risks is prison,” she told foreign reporters, whom she summoned to her retreat in El Calafate in Santa Cruz on July 23rd.

Whatever happens to the former president, several things stand out from these investigations. The first is how ham-fisted the alleged corruption seems. Mr López’s preference for crisp notes was shared by others; in 2013 two sidekicks of Mr Báez told an interviewer they had sent €55m in cash to accounts in tax havens (they later withdrew this claim). Another is the brazen sense of impunity. Much of the suspected wrongdoing was known about for years, thanks to investigative journalists. Judges did nothing about it.

“In Argentina while you are in power you are untouchable,” says Roberto Saba, a law professor at the University of Palermo in Buenos Aires. “The day you leave” official watchdogs and judges will investigate. That knowledge may have been behind the Kirchners’ quest for permanent power, by alternating in office (a scheme thwarted by Néstor’s death in 2010), by using the state to build a large clientelistic political base and by subordinating economic management to popularity.

Although the scale may have been greater under the Kirchners, padding public-works contracts has been going on for decades in Argentina. As in Brazil and Mexico, it has been a means to finance politics while, in some cases, getting rich. The Argentine clean-up is not comparable to that in Brazil, where judges are pursuing those who are now in power. Will that change? Mr Macri has praised the judiciary for “starting to work in an independent way” and said he hopes this will continue. That will require deeper changes.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21702810-argentine-way-corruption-and-fighting-it-cash-bin-liners-please/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Defending South Korea: Of missiles and melons

Politics in Indonesia: Look who’s back

Murder in Japan: Still safe

Terror in Afghanistan: Unwelcome guests

Young aborigines: Australia’s Abu Ghraib

Politics in Taiwan: A series of unfortunate events





Articles Sections Next

Defending South Korea

Of missiles and melons

South Koreans fear their country’s new missile-defence system

Jul 30th 2016 | SEONGJU | From the print edition



NEAR the Seongju county office, Lee Soo-in mans a makeshift stand for citizens wanting to renounce their affiliation to the ruling Saenuri party. Over 800 have signed up in a week. Mr Lee, born in this rural town of 14,000, is stunned: conservatives in North Gyeongsang, a south-eastern province, are normally staunch supporters of Park Geun-hye, South Korea’s president. But “now we feel betrayed,” says Mr Lee.

At issue is the planned installation, on a hilltop a few kilometres away, of an American-funded missile-defence battery called THAAD (Terminal High-Altitude Air Defence). Fearful of upsetting China, South Korea had long dithered over whether to add the sophisticated system—which could shoot down incoming North Korean ballistic missiles above the atmosphere—to its crop of Patriot batteries, which destroy missiles at lower altitudes. But after a suite of North Korean bomb and missile tests it is no longer delaying. Chinese opposition to the news, on July 8th, that a THAAD battery would be set up in South Korea within 18 months has been predictably shrill. It says that the system’s powerful radar might be used to snoop on China.

Yet it is the intensity of protests at home that has wrong-footed Ms Park’s administration. Misinformation about the battery has proliferated, in part because of the secrecy surrounding it. Residents in Seongju and nearby appear to fear irradiation from THAAD’s electromagnetic waves more than the (real) threat of nukes from North Korea—which has lately promised, with signature bombast, to turn Seongju into “a sea of fire” and “a pile of ash”.

The town is festooned with protest banners: “Opposed to THAAD with our lives” and “We must not pass the waves on to our young”. Residents turn out nightly for a two-hour vigil at the county office, holding candles (supplied by a local Buddhist temple) and sporting anti-THAAD pins (from the church). Rumour has it that no one wants to marry a Seongju bride. Farmers in the area grow melons, which they fear might somehow be contaminated.



South Korea has tried to quell panic by measuring what waves are emitted from its existing anti-missile systems, as well as from a THAAD battery at an American base in Guam. The military is trying to gain locals’ trust. On July 15th, two days after announcing that Seongju would host the battery, the prime minister and minister of defence visited to explain their decision (the mayor, Kim Hang-gon, says he first heard about it on television). Protesters pelted them with eggs and water bottles. Local officials, including Mr Kim, shaved their heads in protest and wrote petitions in their own blood.

Such zeal is common in South Korea’s young, raucous democracy. In the past decade civic groups have banded together with farmers and villagers to resist nuclear-power plants, naval bases and American military installations. These went ahead, but not without delays, ugly evictions and compensation. Katharine Moon of the Brookings Institution, a think-tank in Washington, DC, says state heavy-handedness has repeatedly irked local communities, particularly when it suggests the bilateral military alliance takes precedence over their livelihoods and self-governance.

Nationally, support for THAAD hovers above 50%. And America enjoys far higher approval ratings today in South Korea—84%, according to the Pew Research Centre, another think-tank—than it did a decade ago. Though small leftist outfits that resent its 28,000 troops and champion engagement with North Korea have rallied against THAAD in the capital, Seoul, they have managed to mobilise only a few hundred people. For now Seongju’s conservative protesters scoff at joining forces.



In graphics: What North and South Korea would gain if they were reunified

That suggests that there is still a chance for Ms Park to cool tempers in a region that is so important to her party. Yet her early rebuke to protesters for being “divisive” was taken as “an indirect declaration of war” on Seongju’s people by one South Korean daily. A group of elderly local women—anti-THAAD badges tacked to their flowery pink pyjamas—recently pulled an enormous portrait of Ms Park from the wall of their community centre, which stands not far from where some of her ancestors are buried. In the election in 2012, 86% in Seongju voted for her; since July 15th her approval rating in North Gyeongsang has tumbled from 50% to 41%.

Ms Park’s presidency has been overshadowed by botched responses to a deadly ferry accident and a national health scare over an outbreak of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome. Her party is still reeling from the loss of its majority in legislative elections in April—the first time for a ruling party in 16 years. Two minor opposition parties are drafting a resolution demanding that THAAD require parliamentary ratification. In a survey of South Koreans by Realmeter, a pollster, only a third agreed that deployment should not require MPs’ approval.

Such churn may delay deployment. South Korea and America plan to have the battery set up by late 2017—which, neatly, is when South Koreans go to the polls to elect their next (single-term) president. Choi Jong-kun of Yonsei University, in Seoul, thinks that presidential hopefuls will build election platforms on the promise of postponement. Perhaps by then some of the fervour will have cooled.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21702800-south-koreans-fear-their-countrys-new-missile-defence-system-missiles-and-melons/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Politics in Indonesia

Look who’s back

A sweeping cabinet reshuffle installs an unloved former general

Jul 30th 2016 | JAKARTA | From the print edition

Surprise!

JOKO WIDODO, Indonesia’s president, universally known as Jokowi, reshuffled his cabinet on July 27th for the second time since taking office in late 2014. Although observers had expected only minor fiddling, he made big changes.

Most contentious is the appointment of Wiranto (who like many Indonesians uses only one name) as chief security minister. Mr Wiranto (pictured) served as defence minister and head of the armed forces under Suharto, Indonesia’s late strongman, and afterwards during the independence referendum in East Timor (now Timor-Leste) in 1999. Between 1,000 and 2,000 civilians are thought to have lost their lives before and after the vote. Many more were forced to flee their homes. In 2003 a UN-backed court in Timor-Leste indicted Mr Wiranto for crimes against humanity. He has never appeared before it to answer the charges.

Human-rights groups reacted with dismay. They were already decrying Indonesia’s plans to execute by firing squad 14 people, most of them foreigners convicted of drug offences. Keith Loveard, a political-risk consultant in Jakarta, thinks that Mr Wiranto’s appointment may be a “wily” balancing act aimed at setting meddlesome former generals in the cabinet against one another. If so it could eventually allow Jokowi more room to manoeuvre.

Another notable change is the return of Sri Mulyani Indrawati to the post of finance minister. Ms Mulyani, who has been a director at the World Bank since resigning from the government of Indonesia’s previous president, was praised for her management of the economy in 2005-10. She returns at a time when slumping commodity prices are weighing down Indonesia’s growth. Her first priority will be a tax-amnesty scheme intended to lift dwindling revenues and prevent the budget deficit from breaching a legal limit of 3% of GDP.



Indonesia in graphics: Tiger, tiger, almost bright

Though the currency and stockmarket rallied on news of her return, Ms Mulyani will have to work alongside ministers who spoke against her during investigations into a controversial bank bail-out during the financial crisis of 2008-09. These include the vice president, Jusuf Kalla.

After a shaky start to his presidency, Jokowi—Indonesia’s first leader from outside the political or military elite—is looking more confident. In part this reflects a rapprochement with Golkar, the second-largest party in parliament. It backed a rival candidate for the presidency but has since changed its chairman and pledged to support Jokowi, strengthening him in the legislature. He rewarded the party with its first cabinet post, which went to Airlangga Hartarto, who takes the industry ministry, a portfolio his father held before him under Suharto.

No one can accuse Jokowi of dithering after so sweeping a reshuffle. Yet Indonesia’s international standing, already shaken by its policy of executing drug traffickers, will surely be tarnished by the return of Mr Wiranto to one of the most powerful positions in government.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21702801-sweeping-cabinet-reshuffle-installs-unloved-former-general-look-whos-back/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Murder in Japan

Still safe

A massacre at a care home risks provoking an overreaction

Jul 30th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



IN A world tormented by violence, Japan is remarkably safe. Muggings are rare and the murder rate low. Last year police recorded just a single gun death in a country of 126m people.

The weapon of choice when someone runs amok is a knife. And so it was on July 26th when a young man broke into a care home for the disabled and carried out Japan’s worst mass murder in decades. The killer methodically stabbed over 40 people lying in their beds, killing 19. Most of the wounds were to his victims’ necks.

Police have named the only suspect as Satoshi Uematsu, a 26-year-old former care worker at the home, who is now under arrest. Mr Uematsu had repeatedly threatened to kill disabled people. In February he wrote a letter explaining his goal of a world in which people unable to live unattended lives would be euthanised. It was hand-delivered to the residence of Japan’s Lower House speaker.

The pathology of mass killers is consistent, whatever their nationality. Almost all are young and male, fuelled by aggression and testosterone. In many cases the tripwire for murderous sprees can be an event that unravels their lives—losing a job, for example. Only Mr Uematsu knows what was going through his mind when he drove to the care home in the dead of night, armed with a bag of knives. He had reportedly been fired—hardly surprising, given his attitude to the disabled—and may have nursed a grudge. A brief enforced spell in hospital earlier this year ended when he was released into the care of his family.

His attack will almost certainly trigger more scrutiny of Japan’s post-bubble generation, the children who have come of age in leaner times. In June 2008 Tomohiro Kato murdered seven people by driving a truck into a crowd of shoppers in Tokyo and jumping out to slash pedestrians with a dagger. Mr Kato traced his failures in life in part to his vertiginous descent, aged 25, into the insecure world of temporary employment. But he added: “The crime I committed is all my responsibility.”

Such horrific events have triggered tighter controls (daggers of 6cm or longer have been banned since Mr Kato’s killing spree), and handwringing that Japan is becoming as dangerous as everywhere else. The statistics say otherwise. Crime last year hit a post-war low. Japan still incarcerates fewer of its citizens than almost any other rich country.

The main danger is overreaction. In 2001 a former school janitor murdered eight primary-school children in Osaka with a kitchen knife. Mamoru Takuma’s rampage is the reason why security guards stand outside some schools in Japan to this day—a sad reminder to millions of children that the world can be a scary place.

Japan’s biggest newspaper, the Yomiuri Shimbun, said this week that care homes for the mentally ill might consider following suit. Security is weak and many facilities lack strong doors or gates. But whatever follows, it is hard to protect everyone from the actions of an unstable citizen who is determined to do harm.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21702806-massacre-care-home-risks-provoking-overreaction-still-safe/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Terror in Afghanistan

Unwelcome guests

Islamic State claims an appalling attack

Jul 30th 2016 | KABUL | From the print edition

More common than ever

EVEN for a country as inured to war as Afghanistan, the strike on a crowd of peaceful protesters in Kabul on July 23rd was shocking. Bombs killed 81 people, perhaps the deadliest such attack in the capital since the civil war two decades ago. Islamic State (IS) claimed responsibility, saying it had sent two suicide-bombers to “a Shiite gathering” (the protesters were mainly Hazaras, a Shia minority). It hinted it would attack again should Afghan Shias keep travelling to Syria to fight on the side of its president, Bashar al-Assad.

The Afghan government said it thought IS was indeed guilty. The group published photos of two men they said were the bombers, and details of the attack bear IS’s hallmarks. But as with massacres in Europe, it seems likely that the culprits were inspired by IS’s propaganda rather than following direct orders. Though the exact number of self-styled IS fighters in Afghanistan is disputed, their ranks remain small and are not obviously growing. The group is opposed by the Taliban (which looks askance at its Arab origins). A cluster of fighters in Nangarhar, an eastern province, looks fairly well contained.

All this is no comfort to Afghanistan’s battered citizens. Civilian casualties have risen every year since the UN started counting in 2009 (during which time nearly 23,000 have been killed). On July 26th the government said it had cleared IS fighters from parts of Nangarhar. But it said something similar four months ago, and that did not prevent the bloodshed in the capital.

The Hazaras commonly face discrimination; they had gathered to protest against the planned rerouting of a power line around the Hazara-dominated province of Bamiyan. Security forces were present, but focused mostly on keeping protesters away from the city centre; they blocked roads with shipping containers.

Such marches are an increasingly popular way for young Afghans to exercise political rights; many now shun older politicians, whom they associate with tanks and guns. And for all its violence Afghanistan has managed to avoid the kind of sectarian bloodletting that afflicts neighbours such as Iraq. Afghans of all ethnicities are loudly decrying the attacks. That is some small solace, at least.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21702802-islamic-state-claims-appalling-attack-unwelcome-guests/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Young aborigines

Australia’s Abu Ghraib

Abuses at a juvenile prison prompt a national inquiry

Jul 30th 2016 | SYDNEY | From the print edition

Looks familiar

WHEN he announced plans on July 25th to strengthen Australia’s anti-terrorism laws, Malcolm Turnbull, the prime minister, declared that his administration’s “primary duty” was to keep citizens safe. Within hours Australians were watching videos of government employees doing harm. Inmates of a youth detention centre at Darwin, in the Northern Territory, most of them indigenous children, were shown being thrown on floors, manacled, stunned with tear gas and subjected to other cruel treatment by prison guards. Dylan Voller, then aged 17, was left alone in a cell for two hours after guards had tied his arms, feet and head to a metal chair and put a hood over his face.

The prison videos were shown on “Four Corners”, an Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) programme. Mr Turnbull said he was “shocked and appalled” and announced a royal commission inquiry to “expose the culture that allowed it to occur and allowed it to remain unrevealed for so long”.

In fact, lawyers and indigenous leaders have long called for government action to cut Australia’s high rate of aboriginal youth imprisonment. Mick Gooda, an aboriginal official at the Australian Human Rights Commission, calls it “one of the most challenging human-rights issues facing our country”. The Northern Territory, a federal dependency, has one of the worst records. Indigenous people are almost a third of the territory’s population, compared with 3% for Australia as a whole. But they account for 96% of youngsters aged between 10 and 17 in detention. Amnesty International reported last year that the number of indigenous young people in detention in the territory nearly doubled over the four years to 2014.

Nationwide, Amnesty says young indigenous Australians are 26 times more likely to be in detention on an average night than their non-indigenous counterparts. It says governments have failed to respond to a “national crisis”. The exposure of the territory’s prison footage, recorded over the past six years, seems to bear this out. Lawyers and journalists had unsuccessfully sought the footage under freedom-of-information laws; whistle-blowers apparently enabled the ABC finally to reveal it. Yet Adam Giles, the territory’s chief minister, claimed he had not seen it before. He blamed a “culture of cover-up”. He could have added blame-shifting. Nigel Scullion, Mr Turnbull’s minister for indigenous affairs, “assumed” the territory government was handling the problem: “It did not pique my interest.”



Daily chart: Australia struggles to bring equality to its indigenous population

The high detention rates echo broader problems: indigenous Australians are poorer, unhealthier and do worse in school than their compatriots. Eight years ago, the federal and state governments set targets for “closing the gap” with the rest of the country. The scheme’s latest report says two crucial areas, jobs and life expectancy, are “not on track”. Some lawyers blame governments for spinning “law and order” as a quick fix although locking up young people often sets them back even more.

Mr Voller was first detained when he was 11 years old. Now 18, he is in an adult prison and is due for release this year. Gillian Triggs, head of the human rights commission, says it is “not too extreme” to compare his treatment to that of prisoners in Abu Ghraib prison during the Iraq war.

Some want the inquiry to cover youth detention centres around Australia. Mr Turnbull will keep it “focused” on those in the Northern Territory; he wants it to report early next year. It will need to be more productive than another inquiry carried out 25 years ago, into high death-in-custody rates among indigenous people. Since then, says Mr Gooda, “our people are more likely than ever to be incarcerated.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21702807-abuses-juvenile-prison-prompt-national-inquiry-australias-abu-ghraib/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Politics in Taiwan

A series of unfortunate events

The new president faces troubles at home and abroad

Jul 30th 2016 | TAIPEI | From the print edition



TAIWAN’S first female president has had a testing start. Within weeks of Tsai Ing-wen’s inauguration in May, China announced that it had cut off important channels of communication with her government, because she refuses to accept the idea of “one China”, with Taiwan as part of it. Ms Tsai has inherited a struggling economy, hampered by sluggish global demand, and has had to contend with a series of mini-crises, too: a flood crippled the capital’s main airport; flight attendants at the largest airline, China Airlines, went on strike to demand better working hours and benefits (stoppages are rare in Taiwan); the navy accidentally fired an anti-ship missile, killing a fisherman.

At the annual congress of her Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) in mid-July, Ms Tsai displayed photographs of these events. “I would like everyone here to take a good look at these pictures, and this nation,” she said. “This is Taiwan under a DPP government.” Her words were meant to goad officials into action, not (presumably) to describe how she saw the coming four years of her term. But there is little doubt that her leadership risks being beset by problems at home and abroad that may eclipse those experienced by her predecessor, Ma Ying-jeou, of the Nationalist Party, or Kuomintang (KMT).



Start with the economy. Having contracted for three consecutive quarters, it looks unlikely to grow by much more than 1% in 2016. Ms Tsai’s rocky relationship with China endangers cross-strait economic activity, a vital underpinning of growth during Mr Ma’s presidency. (Tourists from the mainland have become sparser since her victory.) It will not help that this year Taiwan’s working-age population has begun to shrink.

Continued economic malaise could aggravate social tensions that led to big protests in 2014, ostensibly against free trade with China but fuelled just as much by widening inequality, stagnant wages and inflated house prices. Demonstrators gathered outside the DPP’s meeting this month, decrying a decision to cut seven national holidays; they accused the party, which likes to present itself as a supporter of workers’ rights, of siding with bosses.

Abroad, Ms Tsai has found herself unexpectedly embroiled in a legal wrangle not just with China, but with the world at large. On July 12th an international tribunal in The Hague, in a ruling on a case lodged by the Philippines against China’s claims in the South China Sea, concluded that an island controlled by Taiwan and commonly known as Itu Aba was merely a rock. This meant Taiwan could not claim an “Exclusive Economic Zone” of up to 200 nautical miles around it. Ms Tsai said the tribunal had “seriously infringed” Taiwan’s territorial claims and that the ruling, which was based on the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, did not bind Taiwan, which is not a UN member.

Ms Tsai’s hands may have been tied by Mr Ma’s efforts, just before his term ended, to whip up public support for Taiwan’s bizarre claim to Itu Aba, which is 1,400km (870 miles) away. He paid a rare visit there and separately invited foreign media to go. Lin Chong-pin, a former deputy minister of defence, says that with all the troubles Ms Tsai faces, she cannot afford to arouse yet more controversy by retreating from Taiwan’s claims—a legacy of the days when the KMT ruled the mainland as well as Taiwan.

While all this plays out, strife between Ms Tsai’s party and the KMT is intensifying. On July 25th the DPP-dominated legislature voted to establish a government commission empowered to retrieve assets stolen by political parties since 1945—a move clearly aimed at the KMT, which the ruling party accuses of having (long ago) pinched properties and other state-owned goodies that Japanese colonials gave back to Taiwan at the end of the second world war. But Ms Tsai must also handle rifts within her own party. At its recent congress some delegates said the DPP should drop its call for an independent Taiwan (which would please China), while others called for Taiwan’s official name, the Republic of China, to be abolished (which would infuriate it).

Ms Tsai’s travails are mostly not of her making. But supporters fret that her government, despite enjoying a large majority, looks shy of unpopular reforms. Conservative picks in the cabinet have disappointed young adherents without much placating the opposition. “I am worried that we will try to please everybody and end up offending everyone,” says Parris Chang, a former senior DPP official. As the glow from a big election win fades, the president’s troubles may only increase.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21702808-new-president-faces-troubles-home-and-abroad-series-unfortunate-events/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Flood control: Disgorging

Jiang Zemin: Jiang of Jiang Hall

Online media: Stop the virtual presses





Articles Sections Next

Flood control

Disgorging

At the world’s largest dam, the operation is successful but the patient is dying

Jul 30th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



OUTSIDE China, the monster Three Gorges dam across the Yangzi river is one of the most reviled engineering projects ever built. It is blamed for fouling the environment and causing great suffering among the 1.2m people who were relocated to make way for its reservoir. Inside China, officials insist that the dam is an “unsung hero” (in the recent words of the Yangzi’s chief of flood control). But controversy over the project occasionally flares. Amid the country’s worst flooding in years, it is doing so again.

The Communist Party took enormous pride in the completion of the Three Gorges dam a decade ago; officials said it would play a vital role in taming a river which, when it flooded, often claimed hundreds or thousands of lives. Recently, however, censors have permitted a few ripples of complaint to disturb the glassy surface of state-run media. Online critics have asked whether the dam has failed to protect cities from flooding or whether it has caused earthquakes—and have not had their posts deleted. Granting permission to complain may seem surprising. But officials have reason to feel confident. The much-denounced dam seems to be passing its first big test as a flood barrier.

This season has been one of the wettest in China’s recent history, with 150 towns and cities suffering record amounts of rain. The Yangzi basin has been particularly hard hit. In the week to July 6th Wuhan, a giant city downstream from the dam, received 560mm (22 inches) of rain, its biggest ever downpour (residents are pictured on a temporary bridge).

China’s most recent experience of weather like this was in 1998, which was also the last time El Niño, a shift in the weather patterns of the western Pacific, had a big impact on the world’s weather. That summer the Yangzi burst its banks, causing more than 1,300 deaths. So far this year fewer than 200 people have died in the river’s basin.

One big difference is that in 1998 the Three Gorges dam was still under construction (it went into full operation in 2012). By July 24th it had held back about 7.5 billion cubic metres (260 billion cubic feet) of potential floodwater, which would have compounded disasters caused by torrential rain in the middle and lower reaches: some of the heaviest rains have occurred downstream from the dam. It is too soon to declare victory over the floods. The rainy season is only halfway through and more downpours are expected in August. But so far, as a method of flood control, the dam has done more or less what it was supposed to.



That doesn’t necessarily justify the project. One of the most important criticisms of it, by the late Huang Wanli, a hydrologist at Tsinghua University in Beijing, is that so much silt will eventually build up behind the dam that it will have to be taken down, leaving the Yangzi basin worse off than if the barrier had never been built. The region in which the dam stands is also one of the world’s most seismically active. Geologists worry that the weight of water in the sinuous reservoir, 600km (370 miles) from end to end, and the rise and fall of it, is causing more frequent tremors along the fault lines. Even small earthquakes can cause perilous landslides.

Considered purely as a means of flood control, the dam is a mixed blessing. The silt-free water that gushes through it fails to replenish embankments downstream, thus weakening them as flood barriers (several have collapsed this year). Below the dam, the water now runs faster; it has scraped away and lowered the Yangzi’s bed by as much as 11 metres, according to Fan Xiao, a geologist working for Probe International, a Canadian NGO. As a result, nearby wetlands drain into the river, damaging their ability to act as sponges during a flood.

In 2000 another academic at Tsinghua, Zhang Guangduo (who had done the environmental feasibility studies for the dam), told the man in charge of building the barrier that “perhaps you know that the flood-control capacity of the Three Gorges Project is smaller than declared by us,” according to leaked documents. Peter Bosshard of International Rivers, an environmental NGO, asks whether it was wise to spend so many billions on one project, rather than strengthen flood-protection measures all along the Yangzi.

That point has been borne out by the many failures of local flood-control measures that have also occurred this year. In July parts of Wuhan’s metro system filled with water. This seems to be the result of bad management or corruption. According to People’s Daily, a party newspaper, only 4 billion yuan ($600m) of the 13 billion yuan allocated to improving drainage in the metro was actually spent. Local media say that one of the people responsible for drainage projects in the city is under arrest for taking huge bribes.

Such problems have been exacerbated by urban expansion. Wuhan used to have more than 100 lakes, but it has lost two-thirds of them to construction sites since 1949. The city’s wetlands have been gobbled up, too. Those that remain are too small to store flood waters. It is a relief that far fewer people have died in floods along the Yangzi this year compared with 1998. But it is no indication of the basin’s broader environmental health.

The Three Gorges dam has a historical parallel. In 1928 a tropical hurricane caused Lake Okeechobee, in central Florida, to flood, drowning 2,500 people in the southern half of the state. Determined that such a thing would never happen again, America’s Army Corps of Engineers over the next few decades drained much of the Everglades, which then covered much of the southern part of the state. No human disaster has recurred but the Everglades is a shadow of its former self and conservationists are battling to save it from destruction. The Yangzi is in danger not only from floods but from its flood controls.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21702774-worlds-largest-dam-operation-successful-patient-dying-disgorging/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Jiang Zemin

Jiang of Jiang Hall

It began as mockery of a former leader. Now it has a strange life of its own

Jul 30th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition

He has some great qualities has Toady

ONE of the least understood players in Chinese politics is the former president, Jiang Zemin. On August 17th he will celebrate his 90th birthday, yet he is still thought to exert influence. Rumours swirl in Beijing about strife between him and the current president, Xi Jinping. The life sentence imposed this week on a former general who was once close to Mr Jiang, Guo Boxiong, will fuel such speculation: Mr Guo is the highest ranking military officer to be jailed for corruption since the Communists seized power in 1949.

But there are some in China who are rooting for Mr Jiang, who led China from 1989 to 2002. They call themselves “toad-worshippers”. Mr Jiang (pictured, in the Dead Sea) has earned the nickname Toad thanks to his broad mouth, oversize glasses and generous waistline. At first it was meant as an insult. Now it is commonly used with affection.

When he was president, Mr Jiang was widely regarded as a bit of a buffoon, given to occasional boorishness (eg, combing his hair in front of Spain’s king). More recently, however, he has acquired a cult status online. Fans share videos of him on social networks. In one he angrily accuses Hong Kong reporters in English of being “too simple, sometimes naive”—a phrase that entered common internet parlance in China. In another, Mr Jiang is seen breaking into song and reciting parts of the Gettysburg address (again, in heavily accented English).

Some admire Mr Jiang’s willingness to extemporise, in contrast with Mr Xi’s scripted public persona. Mr Xi would not deign to express such poisonous American ideas as those of Abraham Lincoln that Mr Jiang enjoyed quoting. Last year students in Beijing conducted an online survey of toad-lovers. Among the 508 people polled, fondness for Mr Jiang was balanced by disapproval of Mr Xi.

Censors have tried to purge toad-worship from the internet. But Mr Jiang’s fans are a dedicated lot. Some have taken to buying mobile-phone cases, flash drives or T-shirts adorned with the former president’s thick-rimmed glasses. One user on Zhihu, a question-and-answer forum, said she owed her job to toad-knowledge. When she was being interviewed for the post, she wrote, the questioner used one of Mr Jiang’s catchphrases and she responded with another. “That moment he realised we were on the same path.” Unfortunately for political fun-lovers, Mr Xi is on a different one.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21702777-it-began-mockery-former-leader-now-it-has-strange-life-its-own-jiang-jiang-hall/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Online media

Stop the virtual presses

Officials try to fill a crack in the edifice of censorship

Jul 30th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



WHEN reading about themselves or their country’s affairs of state, China’s leaders do not like to be surprised or contradicted. They have little to worry about in conventional media, over which—for the most part—the Communist Party exerts tight control. But matters are different online, where journalists sometimes have had better luck in dodging the party’s censors. They may not for long.

On July 24th the Beijing municipal branch of the Cyberspace Administration of China ordered some of China’s biggest internet companies, including Sina, Sohu and Netease (which are listed on NASDAQ), to stop publishing independent reports on politically sensitive topics. Official media said some news portals would be fined. Such restrictions have been in place at least since 2005. But internet companies have often ignored them (albeit cautiously), hoping to attract more readers among the country’s 700m netizens.

One violation that is believed to have angered the leadership was a typo this month in the headline of a story published by Tencent News. Instead of “Xi Jinping delivered an important speech”, it said that the president had “flipped out” when doing so—a difference of only one Chinese character. With such stories even headlines are supposed to be copied from official media. Tencent’s failure to do so properly was an egregious error in the party’s eyes: the report was not only about Mr Xi, but the party’s own birthday.

Censors may also be worried that online media might contradict official reports on recent floods. They have clamped down hard on users of social media who have done so. In the northern city of Xingtai, three people have been punished for spreading “rumours” online about flash floods there that caused at least 34 deaths. One of those sanctioned was a 35-year-old man who was jailed for five days for claiming the flood was caused by an intentional discharge of water from reservoirs.

Mr Xi is wary of any hint of journalistic daring. In February he visited the country’s three biggest party-controlled news organisations, and reminded them that their job was to serve the party. This month a prominent liberal journal, Yanhuang Chunqiu, closed after a purge of its top editors. On July 22nd a court in Beijing rejected an attempt by the former editors to challenge their removal. Among China’s journalists, despondency is spreading.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21702778-officials-try-fill-crack-edifice-censorship-stop-virtual-presses/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Zimbabwe’s president: Comrade Bob besieged

South Africa’s local elections: Young rivals

Nigeria’s struggling states: Running out of road

The Arab League: A new low

The Saudi bombardment of Yemen: Worse than the Russians

Water in the West Bank: Nor yet a drop to drink





Articles Sections Next

Zimbabwe’s president

Comrade Bob besieged

A fresh round of challenges to Robert Mugabe’s deadly grip on power

Jul 30th 2016 | HARARE | From the print edition



WHEN the presidential motorcade tears through the posh Borrowdale suburb where Robert Mugabe resides in Harare, all traffic still pulls onto the verge in reluctant deference to the despot. At 92 he is plainly bent on staying in power for as long as he lives. But nowadays the vendors hawking newspapers at the roadside, with Zimbabwean flags draped around their shoulders like superhero capes, are selling a different story. “Writing on the wall for Mugabe,” blares one independent newspaper’s headline. In the past few weeks a string of setbacks for the old man has increased the chances that his luck may finally be running out, even before he dies.

The most striking development is the sudden rise of a protest movement led by a previously unknown clergyman, Evan Mawarire, whose hashtag #ThisFlag has caught the nation’s imagination. His campaign, bolstered by the clever use of social media, has drawn support from churches and the middle class which had hitherto tended to steer clear of street politics. When Mr Mawarire, whose trademark is the Zimbabwean flag wrapped around himself, was arrested earlier this month, a large crowd, including many lawyers, converged on the court-house where he was being held, until he was freed amid triumphant cheers the next day. (More recently Mr Mawarire has found it wiser to stay in neighbouring South Africa.)

But this is not the only recent setback for Mr Mugabe. As the economy again threatens to collapse, feuding within his own ZANU-PF party has intensified. Thousands of civil servants, including teachers and health-care workers, are being paid late or not at all. Worse still for Mr Mugabe, self-proclaimed veterans of the liberation war whom he has long cosseted (and paid to intimidate his opponents) have turned against him. Even the army and police have become increasingly sour as their monthly salaries have been paid late.

An old man in no hurry

On July 6th a general strike organised by #ThisFlag was heeded by an unusually large number of people. Many Zimbabweans, especially the legions who eke out a living by petty trading, have been infuriated by a ban on the import of basic household goods. This provoked demonstrations and the torching of a warehouse at the Beitbridge border with South Africa. Minibus drivers frustrated by the mushrooming of roadblocks where police demand bribes have also protested violently. Rarely have so many problems hit the president at the same time, says Eldred Masunungure of the Mass Public Opinion Institute in Harare. “For the regime, it should give them sleepless nights.”

Mr Mugabe was probably most shaken by the hostility of the “veterans”, (many of whom are too young to have seen action in the civil war of the 1970s). On July 21st an association of them deplored his “bankrupt leadership”. “We note with concern, shock and dismay the systematic entrenchment of dictatorial tendencies, personified by the president and his cohorts, which have slowly devoured the values of the liberation struggle,” they declared.

“It gives people confidence that Mugabe has been ditched by his erstwhile friends,” says Wilson Nharingo of the Zimbabwe Liberators’ Platform, a rival veterans’ group that has long derided those who have recently turned on Mr Mugabe as thugs for propping him up in the first place. “They have been benefiting from the system,” says Mr Nharingo. “But now they’ve been kicked off the gravy train, they’re seeing the light.”

ZANU-PF heavies have begun a witch-hunt to identify and root out those responsible for the veterans’ angry declaration. Saviour Kasukuwere, the local-government minister and a leading backer of the president’s avaricious wife, Grace, to succeed the old man, has warned disgruntled war veterans that their farms (many of which they seized from whites) would be confiscated. “There could be blood on the floor,” says Pedzisai Ruhanya, a pundit. “Mugabe is very vindictive. He will not let go.” Newspaper ads summoned all war veterans to ZANU-PF headquarters on July 27th to prove their loyalty to Mr Mugabe.

Amid these ructions the calculations of Emmerson Mnangagwa, the vice-president, who is likeliest, at least in the short run, to take over if Mr Mugabe falls or dies, have been unclear. He has previously had the tacit support of the war veterans, the army chiefs and the security service. But as the jockeying gets more feverish, new factions in every corner of the ruling establishment may emerge.

Mrs Mugabe, perhaps wary of the wind blowing in so many directions, has been away a lot in Singapore. The ZANU-PF Women’s League, which she heads, and the party’s Youth League, are both deemed doggedly loyal to the president—and presumably to herself. After the anti-government protests earlier this month thousands of youths were bussed into Harare from the countryside to march in support of Mr Mugabe and the ruling party, with loose promises that they would be given plots of land in Harare and in Bulawayo, the country’s second city.

Some opposition figures have called for a transitional authority to take over as Mr Mugabe’s authority dips. Joice Mujuru, who was vice-president until she was ejected from ZANU-PF in 2014, is hoping to lead the fray against whoever takes over her old party. But Mr Mugabe has not yet ceased to astonish his would-be successors with his resilience and cunning. “We are reaching a tipping point,” says Mr Masunungure. “But don’t underestimate the capacity of ZANU-PF to recreate itself.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21702760-fresh-round-challenges-robert-mugabes-deadly-grip-power-comrade-bob/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

South Africa’s local elections

Young rivals

Can an energised opposition, with two fresh leaders, poach ANC voters?

Jul 30th 2016 | JOHANNESBURG | From the print edition

Will Maimane (left) or Malema hurt the ANC more?

FORGET ducking and dodging corruption charges. Jacob Zuma’s new signature move is the “dab”. At rallies ahead of local government elections on August 3rd, South Africa’s 74-year-old president drops his forehead to the crook of one arm and bops—a dance move borrowed from American hip-hop culture. These elections will be a crucial test of support for the African National Congress (ANC) under the unpopular Mr Zuma.

He is facing two much younger rivals seeking to knock the ruling party off its post-liberation perch. The ANC, in an attempt to update its image among young voters, has adopted “dabbing” for its campaign events, along with pop star endorsements and branded leather jackets. For South Africa’s two biggest opposition parties, this election offers their best shot yet of denting the ANC’s dominance.

Mr Zuma’s rivals hail from different political planets. Mmusi Maimane, just 36 years old, leads the Democratic Alliance (DA), a liberal-leaning party that drew 22% of the vote in the 2014 general elections. For Mr Maimane, the first black leader of what many still regard as a white-dominated party, this is a make or break election. The DA, with a record of clean governance, is desperate to win a big city outside its Western Cape base. Nelson Mandela Bay metro, which includes the city of Port Elizabeth, is the party’s likeliest target; taking Johannesburg or Tshwane (Pretoria) would be a triumph. Although Mr Maimane, who until recently doubled as a preacher, is known for giving impassioned speeches—notably, an address in parliament damning Mr Zuma as a “broken man”—he has faced an uphill battle in trying to sway a mostly black electorate.

On the political left is the bombastic Julius Malema, 35, “commander-in-chief” of his radical Economic Freedom Fighters. The EFF was formed after Mr Malema, a former youth league leader in the ANC, fell out with Mr Zuma and was booted out of the party. Now only three years old, the EFF has shaken up South African politics with revolutionary rhetoric and attention-grabbing moves such as wearing workers’ costumes to parliament—overalls, maids’ uniforms—topped with Che Guevara-style red berets (these have become a must-have accessory for youth on the march). The party’s new smartphone app includes EFF-themed playlists and push notifications for Mr Malema’s latest missives.

Mr Malema, who once said he would “kill for Zuma”, now accuses the president of being a dictator. He courts angry young voters who chafe at the scarcity of jobs and flagrancy of corruption under the ANC. He is also a skilled demagogue, making inflammatory remarks that often have a racial overtone. Some have compared him to Idi Amin, which is rather unfair as Mr Malema is not a mass murderer.

The big question is whether disgruntled ANC supporters will stay loyal, stay home or cast a ballot for an alternative. Weekly polls commissioned from Ipsos by eNCA, a private broadcaster, have the DA leading the ANC in all three battleground metro areas. The DA’s own polling is less optimistic. The EFF, which aims to triple its support from the 6% received in the 2014 general elections (10-12% is thought a more likely number), has focused on Mr Malema’s home province of Limpopo, as well as KwaZulu-Natal, where the ANC has been racked by violent internal disputes.

Sensing danger, Mr Zuma has gone on the attack, dancing his way past his legal problems and using crude insults to distract his audiences. During a recent campaign event he called the DA a “poisonous snake” and accused the party of being anti-black. He said that Mr Malema and the EFF party leaders were “small boys who have no respect”. “Voting ANC is like opening [the] gates to heaven,” Mr Zuma warned a cheering crowd at a rally in the Eastern Cape. “If you do not vote ANC, it’s like choosing to be with [the] devil.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21702761-can-energised-opposition-two-fresh-leaders-poach-anc-voters-young/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Nigeria’s struggling states

Running out of road

The end of state-sponsored marriages is just the funny bit

Jul 30th 2016 | LAGOS | From the print edition



WEDDINGS do not come cheap, as Kano’s state government has found out. Over the past four years its Islamic morality police, the Hisbah, has arranged, and helped pay for, marriages for more than 4,000 lonely ladies. Yet even the most pious can put a price on love. As Nigeria’s economy heads into recession, the state now says that it cannot afford to pay bride prices or to fill marital homes with furniture and cooking kit. Ten thousand disappointed daters have been left to find love and marriage the normal way.

They can hardly be so aggrieved as Nigeria’s 36 state governors. Most of them have little in the way of either local industry or foreign investment, meaning that they are incapable of providing for themselves. They borrowed heavily when oil prices were high, and also rely on monthly allocations from the federal government to keep afloat. But two years of low oil revenues have eaten nastily into those disbursements (see chart), leaving them unable to service their debts or pay their inflated workforces.

Out of the window have gone more pricey programmes, such as pilgrimages sponsored by Niger. This state (not to be confused with the country) generated monthly revenues of 500m naira ($2.5m) in 2015, while running up a wage bill over four times that. “Other equally people-oriented demands” must now take precedence over journeys to Jerusalem and Mecca, Governor Abubakar Bello said recently. Politicians in Bayelsa, a southern state that has a reputation for oil and alarming kidnap rates, waved goodbye to a five-star hotel which has been over a decade in the making. Good riddance, many said. The 18-storey monstrosity cost the governor 6 billion naira before he shelved it.



More important investments in roads and schools have long since dried up, according to BudgIT, a fiscal analysis group in Lagos. Civil servants no longer hope to get their salaries on time, and in some places their already meagre pay has been slashed by half. Osun state, which previously splurged on six stadiums, is now surviving without a cabinet. Governors best known for fast cars and love nests are suddenly professing restraint. In Niger state, Mr Bello has said he will cut spending on housing for officials by at least 80%; an easy promise to make, given that his books are not made public.

This points to a general problem within federal Nigeria. With a couple of exceptions, its local and state governments do not publish budgets, so they can spend at will. It is no surprise therefore that they failed to cut spiralling costs as oil prices fell. Or that the governors squandered the 660 billion naira federal bail-out package intended to pay salaries last year. In just one mysterious transaction, Imo decided that 2 billion naira might be put to best use on the government accommodation account.

Having frittered away this lifeline, they are now asking for a new one. Last month Nigeria’s finance minister agreed to lend the states 90 billion naira, provided they start publishing audited accounts. That is a start. Meanwhile, the governors will take hope from a resurgence in their gross June and July allocations (thanks to higher federal tax collections). But in Kano, the Hisbah is looking for a quicker solution: private sponsors for mass weddings. “Stopping it altogether [is] unthinkable,” its director-general said. Recession be damned.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21702783-end-state-sponsored-marriages-just-funny-bit-running-out-road/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Arab League

A new low

Even by its own dismal standards, the League’s latest summit was a flop

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition

Room at the top

WHAT if they held a summit and no one came? That, almost, is what has just happened in Nouakchott, the capital of Mauritania—which most Arabs probably did not know was part of the Arab League at all. On July 25th only seven of its 22 heads of state bothered to attend their summit and one of them, Ould Abdul Aziz of Mauritania, was there anyway. Another, Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi of Yemen, was booted out of his capital by rebels in 2015, and doesn’t have much else to do. A third, Omar al-Bashir of Sudan, is wanted by the International Criminal Court for genocide, meaning that his travel options are severely limited. Not that Nouakchott is a very flash destination. For want of a suitable venue, the meeting was held in a tent.

King Salman of Saudi Arabia said he was ill—which is probably true since he is 80 and infirm. But he did not think it worth sending his son, Muhammad bin Salman, the 30-year old deputy crown prince, who actually runs the country these days. Another no-show was King Mohammed VI of Morocco. He was meant to have been hosting the summit himself. But in February he renounced the honour. His foreign ministry put out a statement saying that “given the absence of important concrete initiatives which could be submitted to Arab Heads of State, this summit will only be an occasion to take ordinary resolutions and deliver speeches which pretend to give a false impression of unity and solidarity between Arab States.”

That, of course, is the rub. The implosion of so many states, the region-wide strife between Sunni and Shia Arabs, and the economic crises caused by the weak oil price have all combined to produce unprecedented levels of division and bitterness among the League’s members. Far easier just to stay at home.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21702780-even-its-own-dismal-standards-leagues-latest-summit-was-flop-new-low/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Saudi bombardment of Yemen

Worse than the Russians

The West is abetting vast loss of life

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



NINETY years ago Britain’s planes bombed unruly tribes in the Arabian peninsula to firm up the rule of Abdel Aziz ibn Saud, the founder of the Saudi state. Times have changed but little since then. Together with America and France, Britain is now supplying, arming and servicing hundreds of Saudi planes engaged in the aerial bombardment of Yemen.

Though it has attracted little public attention or parliamentary oversight, the scale of the campaign currently surpasses Russia’s in Syria, analysts monitoring both conflicts note. With their governments’ approval, Western arms companies provide the intelligence, logistical support and air-to-air refuelling to fly far more daily sorties than Russia can muster .

There are differences. Russian pilots fly combat missions in Syria; Western pilots do not fly combat missions on behalf of the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen. Nor are their governments formal members of the battling coalition. Their presence, including in Riyadh’s operations room, and their precision-guided weaponry, should ensure that the rules of war that protect civilians are upheld, insist Western officials. But several field studies question this. Air strikes were responsible for more than half the thousands of civilian deaths in the 16-month campaign, Amnesty International reported in May. It found evidence that British cluster bombs had been used. Together with other watchdogs, including the UN Human Rights Council, Human Rights Watch and Oxfam, it has documented the use of Western weaponry to hit scores of Yemeni markets, medical centres, warehouses, factories and mosques. One analyst alleges that the use of its weapons amounts to Western complicity in war crimes.

The war in Yemen has certainly been lucrative. Since the bombardment began in March 2015, Saudi Arabia has spent £2.8 billion ($3.8 billion) on British arms, making it Britain’s largest arms market, according to government figures analysed by Campaign Against Arms Trade, a watchdog. America supplies even more.

Western support might have helped reduce Saudi Arabia’s ire at the nuclear deal America and other world powers signed easing sanctions on Iran. But it has also fuelled another conflict in the Middle East. Together with the ground war and the Saudi-led blockade, it has devastated infrastructure in what was already the Arab world’s poorest country, displaced over 2m people and brought a quarter of Yemen’s population of 26m to the brink of famine. Aid agencies warn that another refugee exodus across the Red Sea and on to the Mediterranean could be in the offing.

Negotiations aimed at ending the war resumed on July 16th in Kuwait. But both sides have scoffed at Kuwait’s threats to expel their delegations if they fail to conclude a deal within two weeks. Yemen’s president-in-exile, Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi, who hopes to install his own government, has dismissed the UN envoy’s proposals for a power-sharing administration. He has shored up his own team with hardliners. A civil war in the 1960s, note observers gloomily, lasted eight years.

A fragmenting country further complicates the task for the peacemakers. Southerners in the port city of Aden are seeking to resurrect a separate state. Further east, Gulf states, led by the United Arab Emirates, have struck at al-Qaeda’s build-up in Hadramawt, fearful of a spillover into their own states, which have large Yemeni populations. Recent bombings in the Saudi cities of Medina, Jeddah and Qatif underscore the reach that the jihadists already have. This is a war whose consequences will be felt for many years.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21702782-west-abetting-vast-loss-life-worse-russians/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Water in the West Bank

Nor yet a drop to drink

Palestinians go thirsty, despite sitting on an underground ocean

Jul 30th 2016 | SALFIT | From the print edition

The hard way

IYAD QASSEM is trying to run a coffee shop without water. He reuses the stuff in his sink, which quickly fills with muck, and in the shishas that Palestinians puff on his patio. It would be a difficult task, if he had many customers: but it seems people who haven’t showered in a week lose interest in sipping tea in 35°C heat. “The café is empty because everyone is worried about the situation. It’s getting impossible to run a business,” he says.

Tens of thousands of Palestinians in Salfit and the surrounding villages are suffering through a months-long drought. Summer shortages are nothing new on the parched hills outside Nablus, in the northern West Bank. But this season is particularly bad. Taps slowed to a trickle before the Ramadan holiday, and few expect relief before the winter rains.

Israelis once obsessed over the level of their largest natural reservoir, the Sea of Galilee. As The Economist went to press, it was just 11cm above its “red line”, the point at which Israel stops pumping water to avoid ecological damage. Yet this no longer causes public concern, for most of Israel’s water is artificially produced. About a third comes from desalination plants that are among the world’s most advanced. Farmers rely on reclaimed water for irrigation. Israel recycles 86% of its wastewater, the highest level anywhere; Spain, the next best, reuses around 20%.

None of these high-tech solutions helps the Palestinians, though, because they are not connected to Israel’s water grid. They rely on the so-called “mountain aquifer”, which lies beneath land Israel occupied in 1967. The 1995 Oslo Accords stipulated that 80% of the water from the aquifer would go to Israel, with the rest allocated to the Palestinians. The agreement, meant to be a five-year interim measure, will soon celebrate its 21st birthday. During that time the Palestinian population in the West Bank has nearly doubled, to almost 3m. The allocation has not kept pace.

The settler population has doubled too, and they face their own shortages. In Ariel, a city of 19,000 adjacent to Salfit, residents experienced several brief outages this month. Smaller settlements in the area, which are not hooked up to the national grid, have dealt with longer droughts. Palestinians have suffered far more, however. On average they get 73 litres per day, less than the 100-litre minimum recommended by the World Health Organisation.

Walid Habib spends 300 shekels ($75) each week to fill the tanks on top of his house in Salfit—a huge sum in the West Bank, where the average monthly wage is about $500. The water, drawn from wells drilled by the Palestinian Authority, is trucked in each morning on the winding mountain road. Supplies are limited, and residents do not always get their weekly deliveries. “We have a sea underneath us in Salfit, but we can’t even take a shower,” he says. “It’s pathetic.”

Down the hill at a taxi company, workers have no water to brew tea. A more urgent problem is the office bathroom—dry toilets do not flush. “We’ve probably spent more on Dettol this summer than on gasoline,” jokes a dispatcher.

The situation is even worse in Gaza, which relies almost entirely on a fast-shrinking coastal aquifer; what remains is polluted from years of untreated sewage and agricultural run-off. The stuff that comes out of Gazan taps is already brackish and salty. UN experts think that aquifer will be irreversibly damaged by 2020.

Israel’s water authority sells the Palestinians 64m cubic metres of water each year. It says they cause their own shortages, because up to a third of the West Bank’s water supply leaks out of rusting Palestinian pipes. A joint water committee is supposed to resolve these issues, but it has not met for five years. Predictably, each side accuses the other of causing the deadlock. Palestinians also find their own government neglectful: the administrative capital Ramallah is well-supplied as the hinterlands go thirsty. Blame is never in short supply, even if water is. “When you don’t have water, it destroys everything,” says Mr Habib, sipping on a cup of the stuff—bottled, of course.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21702716-palestinians-go-thirsty-despite-sitting-over-underground-ocean-nor-yet-drop/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




France’s response to terrorism: Loss of faith

How Germans handle terror: Pure reason

A shock for NATO: Defend me maybe

Catholic youth in Poland: Cross purposes

Charlemagne: Correspondence club





Articles Sections Next

France’s response to terrorism

Loss of faith

The French are growing impatient with lofty calls to persevere against terror

Jul 30th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



NO TARGET is too soft for killers inspired by Islamic State. On July 26th in Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray, a small town in Normandy, two knife-wielding terrorists entered a church. They took hostage the 85-year-old priest celebrating mass and the tiny congregation, two nuns and two parishioners. They slit Father Jacques Hamel’s throat as he knelt before the altar. Police shot and killed the terrorists; one other hostage was critically injured. The jihadists’ “barbaric attack on a church”, as the prime minister, Manuel Valls, put it, recast France’s conflict with terror as a primitive war of religion.

The murder added to the nation’s sense of siege. Less than two weeks had elapsed since the horror of Nice, when a man of Tunisian origin killed 84 people by driving a lorry through a crowd celebrating Bastille Day. The mood of defiant solidarity forged after last year’s Charlie Hebdo and Bataclan attacks in Paris is eroding.

Within a few hours of the latest attack, the president, François Hollande, appeared at the scene, flanked by his stolid interior minister, Bernard Cazeneuve, to express his dismay at the “desecration of democracy” and to promise to use all means necessary to defeat those who have declared war on France and its values. While warning that the threat of new atrocities remains high, he called for national unity and almost prayed (though he is an atheist) that the terrorists not succeed in their aim of fomenting division.

For many French, these once-reassuring words are growing wearisome. Single attacks, however terrible, can unite a shocked nation, but France has suffered at least 14 terrorist assaults in the past two years, in which at least 240 people have been killed and over 600 injured. Moreover, the attacks have been widespread: eight of the 12 mainland regions of France have been hit. Intelligence services say many more plots have been foiled.

Protégez-nous

Ten months before a presidential election, a mood of anger and frustration over the state’s failure to keep people safe is growing. Adel Kermiche, one of the Normandy knifemen, was twice arrested last year while trying to travel to Syria and had been detained for ten months. Prosecutors argued that he posed a sufficient threat to remain in jail, but in March a judge ordered that the 19-year-old be put under house arrest and wear an electronic tag for surveillance. The tag was switched off for a few hours every morning—during which time Mr Kermiche committed murder.

The public finds such decisions incomprehensible. Crowds in Nice booed Mr Valls at a memorial service last week. Mr Cazeneuve is also under pressure. Police responsible for video surveillance in Nice claimed his office tried to meddle in their report on the July 14th attack, by allegedly demanding that they confirm the videos showed enough well-armed national police to guard the crowds. Mr Cazeneuve denies making any such demands, and says he will sue those who made the accusations. But he has not yet explained a request last week from SDAT, an anti-terrorism agency under his interior ministry, for the Nice authorities to destroy the video footage. Supposedly this was to prevent leaks, lest extremists used the film for propaganda. Many suspect a cover-up.

All of this is casting doubt on Mr Hollande’s future. Three days before the murder of Father Hamel, Ifop, a pollster, found that 65% of respondents lacked confidence in his handling of terrorism. He had promised to end France’s state of emergency, imposed after the Bataclan attacks, over criticism that its provisions are undemocratic. Instead, after the outrage in Nice, he extended it: polls show most voters crave a stronger crackdown.

Nicolas Sarkozy, a former president and the leader of the centre-right Republican party, jumped on the law-and-order bandwagon. “We must be merciless…the legal quibbling, precautions and pretexts for insufficient action are not acceptable,” he said. He demanded that the government enact a list of security measures, including either holding all Islamist suspects in detention or electronically tagging them to prevent potential attacks.

The leader of the xenophobic National Front, Marine Le Pen, blamed the attack on France’s entire political establishment: “All those who have governed us for 30 years.” Mr Hollande, whose polling numbers are abysmal, is said to be so pessimistic that he may announce he will not stand in next year’s election. If the attacks continue, Ms Le Pen seems sure to reach the second round. Voters are growing insistent that someone stop the bloodshed.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21702746-french-are-growing-impatient-lofty-calls-persevere-against-terror-loss-faith/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

How Germans handle terror

Pure reason

In the face of a rash of attacks, Germans are staying remarkably calm

Jul 30th 2016 | BERLIN | From the print edition

Germans, not panicking

ASK some Germans how people should react to terrorism and most would probably agree with the historian Herfried Münkler that the best attitude is heroische Gelassenheit: heroic calmness. Let other countries declare wars on terrorism and near-permanent states of emergency, they say; Germany’s dark history has taught it not to over-react. Sceptics used to reply that talk was cheap coming from Germany, which had been spared major incidents of the sort that have struck America, France, Turkey and other countries. That changed in the space of one week this month, when Germany suffered four very different attacks.

First, on July 18th, an Afghan refugee stabbed and axed four passengers on a train and another on a platform. Four days later a German teenager of Iranian descent went on a rampage in a shopping centre in Munich (pictured), injuring more than 30 people and killing nine before shooting himself. Two days after that, a Syrian refugee hacked a pregnant woman to death with a machete—“relationship troubles”, the police said. Elsewhere that night another Syrian refugee tried to enter a concert with a backpack of explosives. When he was barred, he blew himself up, injuring 15 others.

Germans grew more jittery with each round of breaking news. There was a brief panic during the initial hours of the Munich rampage, as rumours spread on social media that three killers were on the loose rather than just one. Munich’s 2,300 police were inundated with 4,300 emergency calls, almost all of them false.

But Munich quickly recovered its poise. Under the hashtag #OffeneTuer (“#OpenDoor”), residents offered to accommodate anyone stranded for the night by the lock-down. Munich’s police spokesperson, Marcus da Gloria Martins, laboured tirelessly to sort fact from fiction. Mr da Gloria Martins, who wrote a thesis on crisis communication, ultimately became the country’s hero of the week. On a television talk show, he appealed to the audience and media: “Give us the chance to report facts. Don’t speculate, don’t copy from each other.” It was the biggest applause line of the night.

Most politicians heeded his advice, distinguishing carefully between the issues at play in different killings. The week’s worst disaster, in Munich, had nothing to do with Islamism. The 18-year-old gunman, David Ali Sonboly, had been bullied and suffered from depression, and had prepared his rampage for a year. He had read “Why Kids Kill” by Peter Langman, an American expert on school shootings. In 2015 he visited Winnenden, a town in Germany where a school mass shooting took place in 2009. He executed his attack on the fifth anniversary of the massacre by Anders Breivik on the Norwegian island of Utoya.

Mr Sonboly’s case opened many debates. He had played “Counter-Strike”, a violent computer game also favoured by other shooters. Should such games be banned? The consensus seemed to be no; that would curtail liberty and be unfair on the majority of players who never become violent. Should Germany deploy its army in domestic emergencies such as this? Some, including Bavaria’s interior minister, Joachim Herrmann, said yes. Others pointed to Germany’s Nazi-era history and remained wary.



In charts: Terror in western Europe

Mr Sonboly had used a contraband Glock 17, the type of gun also preferred by the killers at Utoya and Winnenden. Should Germany’s gun laws be tightened? No, the consensus suggested; Germany already has some of the strictest laws in the world. Mr Sonboly had bought his gun illegally from Slovakia through the “dark net”, an encrypted portion of the internet. The weapon had been disabled for use as a stage prop; Mr Sonboly or someone else later restored it to shoot live rounds.

Public discussion of the other three attackers was equally mature. All were refugees from war-torn countries and probably traumatised. Two of them—the axeman on the train and the backpack bomber at the concert—acted in the name of Islamic State (IS). The former, an unaccompanied minor from Afghanistan, was only 17 years old. The latter, a Syrian nicknamed Rambo at his refugee centre, had been denied asylum and was to be deported to Bulgaria. He had already been in psychiatric treatment and twice tried to commit suicide.

Some worried that IS might have smuggled in terrorists amid the refugees who have arrived in Germany in recent years—about 1m last year alone. Germany is investigating 59 such cases, said Thomas de Maizière, the interior minister. (There are 708 other investigations into possible Islamist terrorist plots, involving more than 1,000 suspects.) But he cautioned that the vast majority of refugees are peaceful victims, rather than perpetrators, of terror. Most Germans agreed that refugees, especially the young and traumatised, should receive better counselling and supervision.

Only a few tried to make hay of the tragedies. During the Munich rampage, André Poggenburg, a leader of the anti-immigrant Alternative for Germany party, tried to blame the open-door refugee policy of chancellor Angela Merkel—even before anyone knew who was shooting. “Our sympathy for the wounded and the bereaved, our disgust for the Merkelites and leftwing idiots who bear responsibility!” he tweeted. He earned immediate condemnation on social and broadcast media, followed by ridicule once it emerged that the shooter was German. Then the country went on being heroically calm.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21702718-face-rash-attacks-germans-are-staying-remarkably-calm-pure-reason/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

A shock for NATO

Defend me maybe

Donald Trump casually undermines the world’s most important alliance

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS a single remark in an interview with the New York Times, but it rattled the strongest military alliance the world has ever seen. On July 20th Donald Trump declared that should the Baltic states be attacked by Russia when he is president, he would come to their aid only if he felt they had met their “obligations”. That would contravene Article 5, the bedrock of NATO’s founding treaty, which holds that an attack on one member is an attack on all. NATO’s secretary-general, Jens Stoltenberg, soon pushed back: although he did not wish to interfere in an American election, he said, “solidarity among allies is a key value for NATO.”

Russia’s threat to the Baltic states is not notional. Under Vladimir Putin, Russia is fast modernising its armed forces, building a hard-hitting, flexible military that can be deployed at short notice into what it calls its “near abroad”. Russian war games regularly simulate attacks on Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland. The 2009 Zapad exercises included rehearsing the use of tactical nuclear weapons.

Russia does not want to reconquer the Baltics. But it might want to use the hybrid-warfare tactics it employed in Ukraine (such as disinformation, political subversion, cyber-attacks and the use of special forces without insignia) to demonstrate that the West is reluctant to defend its most vulnerable allies. If, for example, Russia sent forces into a Russian-speaking area of Estonia, NATO would be faced with an existential dilemma: to fight back and risk nuclear war, or to capitulate and destroy its own credibility.

Recognising the danger, NATO has tripled the size of its rapid-response force to 40,000, established a spearhead force that can be deployed within hours and, at its Warsaw summit earlier this month, agreed to put multinational battalions into the four front-line states. The Obama administration is quadrupling spending on America’s military presence in eastern Europe next year. But the deterrent value of all this depends on the world believing that America cares about Europe, and that NATO can make decisions fast. It is faith in these that Mr Trump has undermined.

The three Baltic states are model allies. Latvia and Lithuania are on course to reach the alliance’s target of spending 2% of GDP on defence. Estonia has always hit the 2% mark. Yet Newt Gingrich, tipped as a possible secretary of state in a Trump administration, dismisses it as a “suburb of St Petersburg”. As Toomas Hendrik Ilves, Estonia’s president, pointed out, no Americans have died for Estonia, but Estonians have already died for America: its forces fought enthusiastically in Afghanistan and Iraq—and suffered the highest casualties, per head, of any alliance member.

Mr Trump is right that many European countries spend too little on defence. But to suggest ignoring treaty obligations is reckless. The whole point of a deterrent is that if it is credible, you don’t have to use it. If Mr Trump wins, America’s allies everywhere may feel they are on their own.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21702771-donald-trump-casually-undermines-worlds-most-important-alliance-defend-me-maybe/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Catholic youth in Poland

Cross purposes

As the global church trends liberal, the Polish church is not following

Jul 30th 2016 | KRAKOW | From the print edition

Tough crowd

THE window over the main door of the Bishop’s Palace in Krakow is known as the Pope’s Window. It was from here that John Paul II, born Karol Wojtyla, used to address his followers when visiting the city where he had served as archbishop during the communist regime. This week, a different pontiff is occupying the window. Pope Francis is in Poland for the church’s World Youth Day festival (actually a week, between July 25th and 31st), which is expected to draw over 1m visitors. Although the more conservative pope died in 2005, it is not clear whose is the greater presence. Asked by Polish television on Monday night about security at the event, a government official said there was a “pact with Holy Father John Paul II” to protect it.

Although Krakow is full of flags and outdoor stages, the Polish church itself is not so lighthearted. Catholicism is Poland’s dominant religion, and the church’s political ally, the nationalist Law and Justice party (PiS), has been running the country since November. Whereas Francis has suggested that perhaps gay people are not all wicked, PiS’s leaders insist that sexual deviation of all kinds is a threat to the nation. The pope’s visit is highlighting many Poles’ desire for priests who will listen, rather than judge. Yet it also shows the gap between a reformist pontiff and a Catholic country that has taken an illiberal turn.

Cultural politics in Poland do not fit a neat model of young liberals versus old conservatives. Over two-thirds of young Poles describe themselves as believers, though they go to church less than their parents do. True, the number of young atheists has doubled in a decade, and most young people think premarital sex is fine. But only one in five supports abortion on demand. Prejudice towards gay people lingers, too. In Krakow, one Youth Day volunteer calls homosexuality an “illness”.

The young are more hostile to refugees than their parents: over 80% of Poles aged 18-34 oppose taking them in, compared with 52% of those over 65. They are also more in favour of border controls within the EU. Many of the teenage pilgrims in Krakow say they fear a wave of “Islamisation” or “secularisation” from western Europe. (Oddly, they sometimes conflate the two.) The Pope is “great on faith but not on politics”, says a young street sweeper from Nowa Huta, an industrial area of Krakow.

Indeed, PiS came first among 18- to 29-year-olds in the elections last October. Beata Szydlo, the prime minister, has refused to take in refugees, citing security concerns. “Political correctness, abandoning the Christmas tree so as not to irritate Muslims—this has emboldened terrorists, too,” she said in a recent interview with wSieci, a conservative weekly.

Poland’s clerics have been at best lukewarm towards refugees. When Francis called on parishes to take them in last year, one Polish bishop likened them to “crusaders”, adding that “multi-culti has failed.” Whereas the Pope preaches openness, Polish clerics warn against “gender ideology” (a catch-all term for tolerance of sexual minorities) and in-vitro fertilisation. PiS has decided to suspend state funding for IVF.

Meanwhile, Pope Francis has become an icon for liberal Poles, Catholic or not. Slawomir Sierakowski, head of Krytyka Polityczna, a club of intellectuals, calls him the “leader of the left”. Many hope he can change the church. Polish Catholicism speaks a language of “homophobia veiled in a layer of mercy”, says Aleksandra, a young member of “Faith and Rainbow”, a group of Polish LGBT Christians. At the group’s hang-out on the sidelines of World Youth Day, a rainbow flag and a Polish flag fly side by side.

Poland’s religious landscape remains dominated by John Paul II, whom many still call “our pope”. Still, the unpretentious Francis, who planned to travel through Krakow by tram, is a breath of fresh air. On July 27th he urged a crowd to “take in people fleeing wars and hunger”, and called for “a climate of respect between all circles in society”. Even if Francis cannot soften Poles’ attitude to refugees, he may be able to help them talk to each other.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21702770-global-church-trends-liberal-polish-church-not-following-cross-purposes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

Correspondence club

Advice for the British and German leaders on navigating the Brexit mess

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



DEAR THERESA,

At your first cabinet meeting you said that your government would not be “defined by Brexit”. Good luck with that. Britain’s tortured relationship with the European Union has felled most recent Conservative prime ministers, and none faced a task remotely as daunting as the one that confronts you. Disentangling Britain from the EU will be like extracting one glue-slathered octopus from a basket of 27 other ones. It could go horribly wrong.

To avoid that, Charlemagne offers some unsolicited advice. You begin with a reservoir of relief (not goodwill, mind) among your fellow European leaders. Disaster would now be looming had an outlandish Brexiteer such as Boris Johnson muscled his way into Downing Street. You earned respect in Brussels during your six years as home secretary. But that also means that while your EU counterparts may ignore the boosterish bluster emitted by some of your more excitable cabinet colleagues (such as Liam Fox, the new trade secretary), they will expect better from you.

So choose your battles carefully. Do not, for example, dither endlessly on Article 50, the legal device which sets a two-year timetable for quitting the EU. The EU is sick of crises and wants as smooth an exit path for Britain as possible. You will need friends if you are somehow to maintain British banks’ access to the EU market while limiting the right of European workers to move to Britain. Your government is not supposed to conduct trade talks with third parties before Britain has left the EU, but your partners may wink at Mr Fox’s globetrotting if you have earned their trust.

Do your homework on other countries’ domestic politics, for they will complicate your talks. One year from now, for example, your French interlocutor might be not François Hollande but the more obstreperous Nicolas Sarkozy (or even the ghastly Marine Le Pen). Italy might have tumbled into political and financial chaos. So listen to your diplomats. Tour the capitals. If you can bear it, address the European Parliament; MEPs must approve whatever post-Brexit deal you strike, and they adore the attention. And a tip for EU summits: do not say one thing to your fellow leaders inside the room and then the opposite in public. As Mr Cameron can attest, they really, really hate that.

You must expect a fair bit of scrutiny yourself. Some in the EU fear you have staffed your court with jokers and knaves (many were incredulous at your decision to appoint Mr Johnson foreign secretary). Prove them wrong. Ignore advisers gleefully predicting another euro crisis that Britain can exploit; placing bets on imminent disaster is not the way to win friends. And immediately fire anyone who speaks of using Britain’s “security surplus” as a bargaining chip. Britain backs EU and NATO military missions on their merits, not because they may help win sweet trade deals.

Some decisions must be made quickly, including whether temporarily to opt in to Europol, the EU police agency that Britain has done so much to support. You should, if only to figure out how to maintain access to its databases after Brexit. Foreign policy should prove a little easier. Britain’s diplomatic expertise, military might and aid budget are valued in Europe, and few in Britain see much point in cutting all foreign-policy ties. (Ignore those who do.) Finally, keep your eyes on the prize. The next two years will involve hard talks, late nights and tough calls. If they go badly, what follows could be far worse.

LIEBE ANGELA,

Three British prime ministers have come and gone during your time in the chancellery. Your renowned reserves of patience will be needed to manage the fourth. Mrs May’s rapid ascent to power masks deep dysfunction in her government and party. Howls of betrayal will begin as soon as the Brexit talks do. The ministers she has sacked are brooding on the backbenches, some waiting to exploit her slim majority. The weakness of the opposition Labour Party—which rivals your coalition partner, the Social Democrats, for uselessness—further liberates Tory mischief-makers.

Your trickiest customers could be the “soft Brexiteers”, who will seek complex trade-offs between market access and migration rights that could set awkward precedents for other EU members. (The headbangers would be perfectly happy with the sort of clean break that would make life easier for everybody else.) Do not read too much into Mrs May’s eyebrow-raising appointments: she has party rifts to heal. It may be woeful to see Mr Johnson, a man of no known principles, occupy a great ministry of state. But look on the bright side: he is ideally placed to display the ideological flexibility the Brexit negotiations will demand.

How should you approach the talks? The idea, popular among your advisers, of letting Britain stew in its own juice is not absurd. Spiralling bond yields did more than any political pressure to rid you of Silvio Berlusconi during the euro crisis, after all. And the signs are that the economic pain from Brexit will fall squarely on Britain. A nasty recession, you might think, would encourage Mrs May to seek as broad a trade deal with the EU as possible, even if that means special treatment for its migrants.

Do not take this line of thinking too far. Plenty of people in Britain, to put it bluntly, are prepared to make their country poorer to regain control over borders and law-making. Just look at the referendum result. German exporters have already leant on you to keep tariffs in whatever post-Brexit settlement emerges as low as possible. But they are not your only concern.

For once again, it has fallen to you to hold Europe together after the body blow of Brexit. From terrorism to refugees to Italian banks, there is much to disturb your sleep. An early lesson in what not to do was provided by your foreign minister, who invited his counterparts from the five other founding EU countries (France, Italy and Benelux) for a brainstorm in Berlin just after the referendum. Other governments were furious. Happily, you quickly distanced yourself from this anachronistic nonsense.

But the foreign ministers were right about one thing: this is no time for “mere reflection” inside the EU. No one thinks you and the French are about to get over your differences on how to run the euro. But the EU could do with an eye-catching initiative or two. What about leaning on France to scrap the European Parliament’s much-hated second seat in Strasbourg? Perhaps Paris could be placated with the European Banking Authority, which will have to leave its London home.

Dramatic gestures are not your style, of course, particularly before your presumed re-election bid next autumn. But after you have won your fourth, and presumably final, term, you can afford to loosen up a bit. Britain’s departure will roil the EU, and there is nothing you can do to stop it. But a bit of fresh thinking for the rest of the club would not go amiss.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21702773-advice-british-and-german-leaders-navigating-brexit-mess-correspondence-club/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




The impact of free trade: Collateral damage

Northern Ireland after Brexit: Frontier spirit

Women in politics: The struggle continues

Commuter hell: Going south

Brexit and public services: Somebody call a doctor

Drug-testing at music festivals: Cocaine or concrete?

Bagehot: Rage against the dying of the light





Articles Sections Next

The impact of free trade

Collateral damage

Britain is unusually open to trade but unusually bad at mitigating its impact

Jul 30th 2016 | BLACKBURN | From the print edition



“LANCASHIRE invented the world,” Iain Trickett’s grandfather told him. The old man was half right. During the industrial revolution the county in north-west England pioneered machinery that churned out manufactured goods by the ton; other countries copied it. Traces of that past glory linger on. In a factory in Blackburn highly skilled workers produce top-of-the-range jackets and jeans for companies including Community Clothing, of which Mr Trickett is general manager. Boxes destined for London’s fanciest shops are stacked up by the door.

There are other local success stories, including an old maker of wallpaper-printing equipment down the road in Accrington whose machines now print electrical devices (see article). But they are the exception. Manufacturing employment in the Blackburn area has dropped by one-third in the past decade. The town centre seems to have more pawnbrokers and betting shops than restaurants or bars. “There’s nothing for young people around here,” says Maureen, a local resident, over a lunchtime game of bingo in a giant gambling complex near the train station.

The travails of Blackburn and places like it have led many to ask whether globalisation does more harm than good. Britain is hardly alone in this. Yet the debate in Britain is overwhelmingly focused on the effects of immigration, particularly from the EU. Usually overlooked—unlike in other rich countries, notably America—is the effect of trade. As Britain embarks on a round of trade negotiations ahead of Brexit, the issue is likely to become central.

Economists agree that foreign trade has afforded big benefits to Britain overall. Trade with the EU since joining it in 1973, for instance, has increased Britain’s GDP by 8-10%, according to Nick Crafts of Warwick University. More recently, as countries like Vietnam and China have become manufacturing giants, consumers have enjoyed cheap imported goods. Philip Hammond, the chancellor, was in Beijing this week to suss out a post-Brexit trade deal.

However, mounting evidence suggests that the gains from free trade are not shared equally. A body of research on the American economy shows that import competition from poor countries can depress the incomes of the low skilled, at least in the short run, says John Van Reenen of the London School of Economics (LSE). One paper concluded that competition from Chinese imports explains 44% of the decline in employment in manufacturing in America between 1990 and 2007.

Britain’s economy is about twice as exposed to foreign trade as America’s. After averaging around 1% of GDP for half a century, Britain’s trade deficit in goods soared from the year 2000 and is now about 7% of GDP. China’s accession to the World Trade Organisation in 2001 played an important part in this. Britain’s growing appetite for imported goods coincided with a collapse in manufacturing employment.

Formal studies back up the circumstantial evidence. João Paulo Pessoa of the LSE looked at the period 2000-07 and found that British workers in industries that suffered from high levels of import exposure to Chinese products earned less and spent more time out of employment than those in other industries. As people fare badly in the labour market, social problems arise: another study found that a one standard-deviation increase in import competition worsened rates of mental illness by 1.2 percentage points.

Open argument

Unfortunately, the pain tends to be concentrated geographically. An index compiled by Italo Colantone and Piero Stanig of Bocconi University shows that almost no part of the country is more vulnerable to competition from Chinese imports than Blackburn (see map). Northampton, with its shoe industry, is similarly exposed; cheap steel imports have left places such as Port Talbot vulnerable. In the past decade the number of over-25s unemployed for more than one year has increased much faster in areas where manufacturing makes up more than 20% of the local economy than in areas where it makes up less. It has coincided with a rise in regional inequality: during the same period the ratio between output per person in Britain’s three richest sub-regions and the three poorest increased by a quarter.



On the ground, the result is clear to see: swathes of the country feel left out of Britain’s generally healthy economic growth. Areas highly affected by Chinese import competition (which is probably a decent proxy for import competition from anywhere) were particularly prone to vote for Brexit, according to Messrs Colantone and Stanig’s calculations. Houses with fluttering St George’s flags pepper the landscape around Blackburn.

It does not have to be this way. The large overall gains from free trade mean it should be possible to compensate its losers. That means upgrading the skills of the workforce in places like Blackburn—as is the norm in Germany, which has a sophisticated system of apprenticeships. America’s “trade adjustment assistance” programme funds training and support for workers displaced by foreign competition. The EU’s “globalisation adjustment fund” does something similar. Britain can (for now at least) apply for its funds.

But it hasn’t. Officially the government has “concerns about whether it is an appropriate use of money”; a member state drawing on the fund is also supposed to stump up some of its own cash. But the government’s preferred programme, its so-called “rapid response service”, is feeble. It is supposed to provide training and support when there are mass redundancies. But it is a murky operation: there are almost no data on what it does. According to a House of Commons report, it “does not appear to be being monitored.” In 2008 its budget was a pitiful £6m ($8m). Nor does its response seem very rapid: your correspondent sent an e-mail requesting assistance for a fictitious Blackburn firm a week ago and has received no follow-up.

Data from the OECD, a club mostly of rich countries, suggest that even after accounting for Britain’s low unemployment rate, for years it has been a stingy spender on “active” labour-market policies (ie, those that seek to improve the skills of the unemployed, not just let them languish). One paper estimated that British spending on active policies, adjusted for GDP, was about one-fifth that of Germany. Only about 15% of those on unemployment benefit receive any sort of training. Those displaced by free trade thus get little help towards becoming the model employees of tomorrow. Firms in Blackburn looking for good workers often turn to eastern Europeans, Mr Trickett sighs.

Britain has benefited enormously from its embrace of free trade. But its failure to share the proceeds means that in too many places, such as Blackburn, the effect has been underwhelming. Until this is corrected, don’t expect arguments about globalisation to go away any time soon, Brexit or no Brexit.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21702791-britain-unusually-open-trade-unusually-bad-mitigating-its-impact-collateral-damage/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Northern Ireland after Brexit

Frontier spirit

Uncertainty about the border cheers unionists and dismays republicans

Jul 30th 2016 | BELFAST | From the print edition



“WE BELIEVE in the union,” declared Theresa May in her first speech on the steps of Downing Street on July 13th: “the precious, precious bond between England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.” The new prime minister, an Englishwoman, has since visited all three neighbouring countries; on July 25th she landed in Belfast for the last, and perhaps trickiest, of these trips.

Mrs May and her counterparts in Belfast and Dublin must soon decide what to do about the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic. In recent years it has become almost invisible, the ugly watchtowers, heavy army presence and long traffic queues of the past now no more than an unpleasant memory. But after Brexit the border will become a frontier of the European Union. That has raised the prospect of tighter controls on people and goods travelling between north and south—and even between Northern Ireland and mainland Britain.

During the referendum campaign Mrs May, who backed Remain, said it was “inconceivable” that Brexit would not lead to changes to Irish border arrangements. But in Belfast this week she had warmer words, reassuring locals—a majority of whom opposed Brexit—that “nobody wants to return to the borders of the past”. Nor, it seems, will there be passport checks for those travelling to mainland Britain. The following day the Irish prime minister, Enda Kenny, claimed that he and Mrs May had agreed after talks in London that there should not be a “hard border” between Ireland and the north.

Yet the border may have to be harder than it is now. If Britain eventually opts out of the EU’s free-movement rules and single market, Northern Ireland could become a back door into Britain for undocumented migrants and untaxed goods, unless new checks are imposed. Some of the harder-line Brexiteers in Mrs May’s Conservative Party are already reportedly agitating to pull out of the EU’s customs union, a move which would give Britain greater leeway in negotiating post-Brexit trade deals but which could force the imposition of customs checks on goods travelling between Northern Ireland and the south.

In the zero-sum game of Northern Irish politics, talk of a harder border has dismayed nationalists while boosting unionists. Many of the latter had been apprehensive about what Brexit might mean for the treasured union with Britain. But Mrs May has given them a few reasons to be cheerful. She politely but firmly opposed the idea of a second referendum on Scottish independence, something which Northern Irish unionists fear could cause further fraying of the United Kingdom.

And she appointed as her new Northern Ireland secretary James Brokenshire, most of whose ministerial career has been in security and counter-terrorism—a background which suits the traditional unionist emphasis on a firm approach. His undersecretary is Kris Hopkins, a former soldier who once said he felt “absolute revulsion and anger” when Martin McGuinness, now Northern Ireland’s deputy first minister and leader of Sinn Fein, the former political wing of the Irish Republican Army, walked into a conference event.

By contrast, things look gloomy for nationalists, and particularly for Sinn Fein. The party had come to hope for ever-closer links with Europe, together with a gradual weakening of the bond between Northern Ireland and Britain. But with Brexit, at a stroke the entire course of politics has gone off in a different direction. Nationalists overwhelmingly voted to Remain but now with dismay find that Northern Ireland’s ties to the EU are being undone.

Sinn Fein’s electoral march had already faltered in recent years, as the concessions it used to extract from London became rarer. Its leverage via IRA violence has gone. And its links with Britain’s Labour Party are worth less with Labour on the rocks (see article). With Brexit tilting the balance of power further towards the unionists, nationalists need a new gameplan.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21702793-uncertainty-about-border-cheers-unionists-and-dismays-republicans-frontier-spirit/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Women in politics

The struggle continues

Women lead in Westminster, Holyrood and Stormont, but equality is still far off

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



THERESA MAY’S appointment as Britain’s second female prime minister has led to predictable comparisons with Margaret Thatcher. Yet around Britain, female leaders have become the norm. In Scotland, the heads of the three biggest parties are women. So is Northern Ireland’s first minister. Wales is the only country of the UK where a man is in charge—and he faces a female leader of the opposition. It is a “historic moment”, says Meryl Kenny of the University of Edinburgh.

Yet despite these gains, women are still under-represented. Last year 191 women were elected to the House of Commons, making up only 29% of MPs. Northern Ireland’s share is about the same; Scotland and Wales do a little better, with 35% and 42% respectively. Britain ranks only 48th in the world for the proportion of women in its parliament (Rwanda leads the way).

The rate of change increased after Labour adopted women-only shortlists in the mid-1990s (see chart). And the lack of female Conservative MPs (only 21%) belies how the party has been evolving. In 1992, when it was riding high, it had only 20 women in the House of Commons. However, partly because of the efforts of Women2Win, a pressure group co-founded in 2005 by Mrs May, 49 female Tories were elected in 2010 and 68 in 2015. Gillian Keegan, a Tory candidate, says the aim is to double this number again.



But there are fears that things will get harder for women. For a start, as a recent report on diversity in Parliament by Sarah Childs of Bristol University contends, the lack of working-class representation in Westminster “has become a more high-profile political concern over the last decade”. Parties want to reconnect with working-class men; this could come at the expense of promoting women.

This could be particularly true of the Labour Party, where Jeremy Corbyn’s class-based politics have trumped Tony Blair’s identity politics. This is one reason for the ruptures in Labour. Women MPs feel that they have been “disproportionately affected” by heightened levels of personal abuse within the party, as 44 of them wrote in a letter to Mr Corbyn on July 21st. Owen Smith, who is challenging Mr Corbyn for the leadership, has promised that women would make up half his shadow cabinet.

Some express concern that the problem is broader than this. Demos, a think-tank, has documented how social media have become a conduit for abuse against women in public life. Labour MPs have helped to found a “Reclaim the Internet” campaign. They fear that online “trolling” is forcing women to reconsider whether it is safe even to enter politics, let alone aspire to the cabinet.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21702796-women-lead-westminster-holyrood-and-stormont-equality-still-far-struggle/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Commuter hell

Going south

Passengers fume at useless train firms. They should blame the government too

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition

Letting off steam

FOR months Jamie Rickers has regularly crammed like a sardine into his Southern Rail train from Sanderstead to London Victoria; for months delays have made him late for work; and for months he has questioned the value of paying £2,724 ($3,590) a year for a “shit” service. “The only way it would change,” he says, “is if everyone on this train turned around and said: ‘I’m not paying any more’.” Alas Mr Rickers, who checks his watch as the train crawls along, lacks the time to start a revolution.

Thus far public anger has mainly scorched Southern itself. Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR), the company which controls Southern, has certainly made a mess of things. Just as guards went on strike in April over the introduction of driver-only trains, it cut back on employee benefits such as free travel for family members. Staff sickness rates promptly doubled and drivers stopped volunteering to work overtime on Sundays.

Cue meltdown. In July Southern withdrew 15% of its services until further notice. Protests broke out in Brighton. Police had to drag an irate passenger away from a “meet the manager” session in London. Those who did make it onto trains could while away the journey playing “Southern Rail Tycoon”, a facetious online game that rewards players for each service they cancel.

Behind the spoof lies a sense that the company is profiting from passengers’ misery. GTR has indeed failed to fulfil the terms of its £8.9 billion contract, which runs from 2014 to 2021. But it is hardly profiteering. In June its expected profit margin over the seven years was cut in half, to 1.5%.

Nor is it the only party at fault. Signalling failures and other snafus by Network Rail, which maintains most of Britain’s track, explained half the delays in June. “All roads [in this dispute] lead back to the Department for Transport [DfT],” says Stephen Joseph of the Campaign for Better Transport, a pressure group. The DfT is right to push for driver-only trains, given that underemployed guards help to make Britain’s railways much less efficient than many in Europe. But it was unwise to force the issue when huge infrastructure projects were under way. And its contract with GTR is too soft, allowing the company to rely on drivers working overtime and, worst of all, specifying only featherweight financial penalties for cancelling services. Amid the chaos the firm has had to cough up just £2m, or 0.02% of its contract fee.

Caroline Lucas, the Green MP for Brighton Pavilion, wants to nationalise the franchise; polls suggest most passengers do too. But upgrading the track and training more drivers—the main obstacles to a less awful service—will take just as long whoever runs the trains. More broadly, privatisation has been no disaster: since the process began in 1994, annual passenger journeys have increased by 130%, to 1.7 billion. Train operating companies were subsidised only until 2010; last year they paid £802m to the Treasury.

When the Southern franchise comes up for renewal in 2021, the government should stiffen fines and require more drivers. For now, it must hope that the track upgrades finish soon and ease congestion, before a passengers’ revolution begins.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21702795-passengers-fume-useless-train-firms-they-should-blame-government-too-going-south/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit and public services

Somebody call a doctor

Immigration is said to stretch services. But reducing it may strain them more

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



MANY of the 52% of Britons who voted to leave the European Union did so because they wanted to reduce immigration. Since the June referendum, however, the implications of such a policy have started to dawn. As well as keeping British businesses ticking over, European migrants fill jobs in the country’s public services: one in ten doctors and one in 25 nurses is EU-born, for instance. Thousands more work in low-skilled public-sector jobs, from bus drivers to street sweepers and school caterers. “We are reliant on foreign labour to deliver public services more cheaply,” says Jonathan Clifton of IPPR, a think-tank. What will happen if that stream of labour dries up?

There are 3m EU-born migrants in Britain. The government has indicated that they will be allowed to stay, as long as Britons abroad get the same treatment. The question is how the country will treat new arrivals. Last year net immigration from around the world topped 330,000, of whom more than half came from outside the EU. Non-Europeans’ entry is determined by a points system based on criteria such as education and salary, whereas Europeans are free to enter Britain at will. If Britain opts out of the EU’s free-movement rules, EU citizens might be subjected to the points system, or something like it.

The minimum requirement for non-EU work visas is a salary of £20,800 ($26,900)—due to rise to £30,000 next year—and a graduate-level job. Last year only 19% of EU migrants employed in Britain were in graduate-level jobs earning more than £20,000. Indeed, only one-quarter of all jobs in Britain meet the conditions for the most common non-EU work visa. In some migrant-heavy industries, almost no workers would qualify: in “agriculture, forestry and fishing” only 4% would; in “distribution, hotels and restaurants” 6% would. Few of those toiling in unskilled public-sector jobs—waste disposal or cleaning, say—would meet the criteria. “That would have a significant impact on public services across the board,” says Bob Price, leader of Oxford City Council.

Many worry that the National Health Service (NHS), whose junior doctors are in revolt over a new contract that they consider miserly, might find it harder to attract staff. Britain is already 24th out of 27 in the EU for the number of doctors per person. Many of its home-grown medics are leaving in search of better deals in Australia and Canada. Carlos Vargas-Silva of the Migration Observatory at Oxford University thinks that, if necessary, the government may relax criteria for visas in the NHS. Most doctors would anyway satisfy the current non-EU visa conditions, and nurses are on a “shortage occupation list” which means the usual requirements do not apply. “It is hard to see any scenarios where there would be limitations on medical professionals,” says Mr Vargas-Silva.

Less politically sensitive services might struggle. One in 20 people employed in adult social care—which includes old folks’ homes and social work, for instance—is EU-born, a total of about 75,000 people. The sector is already acutely understaffed: last year there were 70,000 unfilled vacancies. Even before the Brexit vote, a report by Independent Age and the International Longevity Centre, two NGOs, estimated that, by 2020, this figure could rise to 200,000, or 14% of the workforce required.

Support for Brexit was strongest among pensioners, around 60% of whom voted to Leave. Those who did so in order to limit migration may find, too late, that they were the ones who needed it most.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21702650-immigration-said-stretch-services-reducing-it-may-strain-them-more-somebody-call/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Drug-testing at music festivals

Cocaine or concrete?

Revellers get the chance to see if their illegal drugs are what they claim to be

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition

Good clean fun

BACKSTAGE at many of Britain’s summer music festivals, suspicious pills and powders seized from tents are analysed by lab technicians. Usually it is to advise on-site doctors and police on what symptoms to look out for in people who become unwell. But this year, for the first time, festival-goers have been given the chance to get their illegal drugs tested before they take them.

At the Secret Garden Party, a Cambridgeshire bash on July 21st-24th, a non-profit organisation called The Loop manned a tent where partygoers could drop off their drugs anonymously, before returning later for the results. As police turned a blind eye, technicians analysed nearly 250 drug samples, mostly of ecstasy, cocaine and ketamine.

Or at least, that was what they claimed to be: in reality the bags of “MDMA crystal” being sold for £50 ($66) per gram turned out to be brown sugar; some suspiciously hard, grey pills were made of concrete; and several samples of “cocaine” and “ketamine” were in fact ground-up anti-malaria tablets. Even the real drugs varied dangerously in potency: the strongest ecstasy pills were five times as potent as the weakest.

Festival drug-dealers are a particularly dodgy bunch, says Fiona Measham, a professor of criminology at Durham University and co-director of The Loop. Ripping people off in their home town carries the risk that “if they bump into them again they’d get battered. At a festival they can disappear into the crowd.”

But does the testing encourage more drug use? It is too early to say, but there is some evidence that it does the opposite. After getting their results back, only half of those at the Secret Garden Party said they would take the drugs; one-quarter said they would throw them away. Of the remainder, some said they would track down the dealer to remonstrate. “Customer satisfaction” may become a higher priority, says Ms Measham.

The Loop will next take its tent to Kendal Calling, a festival in the Lake District which begins on July 28th. Five other festivals have made inquiries. Those held on private land, as the Secret Garden Party is, may be more open to the idea than festivals in public places. Last year a plan to bring drug testing to Parklife, a shindig in a park in Manchester, was vetoed by the city council.

The programme also represents a test of the new government. In 2013, as home secretary, Theresa May dismissed a proposal to pre-test drugs at a nightclub in Manchester, arguing that “if somebody has purchased something that the state has deemed illegal, it’s not then for the state to go and test it for you.” Yet so far the Home Office has made no criticism of The Loop’s project. That is perhaps the most encouraging result of the weekend.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21702624-concrete-posing-ecstasy-brown-sugar-mdma-crystals-illegal-drugs-often-are-not-what-they/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

Rage against the dying of the light

Owen Smith bears Labour’s last hope of salvation. It is slim

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



THERE is a Welsh style of political speech that owes more to the pulpit than the podium. It was born in the nonconformist Valleys, where mysticism, mining and Methodism mingled and produced a distinctively emotional and poetic religious culture. At its heart is hwyl, a hard-to-translate Welsh term implying the stirringly sentimental, bardic and gutsy. On the preacher’s lips it means cerdd dafod (rhythm, or “tongue craft”) and cynghanedd (harmony). It has marked the speech of three of Britain’s most acclaimed modern political orators, all sons of provincial Wales: David Lloyd George, Nye Bevan and Neil Kinnock. Of the latter’s first speech as Labour Party leader one reporter admiringly wrote that he “hwyled and hwyled and hwyled.”

Perhaps it was the choir-like backdrop of supporters waving placards, or the misty red-and-purple lighting illuminating the organ pipes and columns, or the inscribing around the rim of the vaulted ceiling: “And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying behold the tabernacle of God is with men…”. But as Bagehot watched Owen Smith at the Emmanuel Centre, a church in Westminster, he detected hints of that preacherly register.

The MP challenging Jeremy Corbyn for the Labour leadership grew up in Barry and calls Bevan his political hero. Mr Smith is a good speaker: he lilts, alliterates, leans on his vowels and is visual (describing the prolix Mr Corbyn’s “flapping lips”). He uses repetition, decrying “the weak, weak, weak way in which we contested that [Brexit] referendum” in a fashion redolent of Mr Kinnock during his battle with hard-left entryists in the 1980s (“A Labour council, a Labour council…”).

Optimists on Labour’s centrist wing see in Mr Smith further similarities to Mr Kinnock, who took over from the unelectably left-wing Michael Foot, fought both Trots and Margaret Thatcher and bequeathed to Tony Blair, his successor-but-one, something that could be moulded into a party of government. In Mr Corbyn, they see a worse version of Foot and in Theresa May a kind of Thatcher. The latest ICM poll puts Labour 16 points behind her and shows that one in three voters who backed Labour last year prefer Mrs May as prime minister. This helps to explain why most of Mr Corbyn’s MPs have turned against him, forced the current contest and backed Mr Smith.

The former shadow-welfare secretary is about as conciliatory as Labourites come. He is one of the peacenik social democrats who considered Mr Blair too Atlanticist and market-liberal, who reckon Labour can win elections in a consumerist, post-Thatcher country on a platform of more redistribution and state interference, but who also recognise the importance of credibility and presentation. Both Mr Kinnock and Ed Miliband, Mr Corbyn’s predecessor, hail from this segment of the party. Neither won power but both kept Labour vaguely competitive.

With his crisp shirts and trendy glasses, Mr Smith looks more like a prime minister than either. But he is also farther to the left: on July 27th he unveiled a programme of punitive tax rises, spending hikes and clamps on Britain’s liberal labour market. At his London rally he pledged a War Powers Act that would limit the government’s ability to intervene militarily without Parliament’s blessing. If anyone can build a bridge between those Labour members who still care about winning elections and those Corbynites who are having doubts about their gormless Svengali it is Mr Smith.

And still he struggles. For all his orotund pandering, in London he spoke to a half-empty hall. From the back your columnist looked out on a canyon of empty pews. Moreover, those applauders in the front few rows cheered most enthusiastically when he attacked Mr Corbyn. In other words: these were sensible social democratic types who already opposed Labour’s current leader. Despite his leftward elasticity, Mr Smith does not seem to be winning over the waverers. Polling concluded on July 18th found that members would back Mr Corbyn over his challenger by 56% to 34%. On Facebook the former has 774,000 followers, 767,000 more his rival. Corbynites tar their opponent as an evil capitalist who has committed the sins of working in pharmaceuticals and once saying something positive about Mr Blair.

The valley of the shadow of death

Bagehot wishes Mr Smith success in Labour’s leadership contest. But it concludes on September 24th and the Welshman is losing. Mr Smith’s best hope now is to make the race about Brexit, one of the few subjects that drives a wedge between Mr Corbyn, a Eurosceptic, and his often younger, internationalist supporters. The Labour leader’s droopy performance during the referendum campaign, in which he backed Remain only half-heartedly, contributed to the dismal result and exposes him for the conservative he is: a left-wing Little Englander, an abrasively nostalgic memorabilia junkie, the left’s answer to the Duke of Edinburgh. If Mr Smith, who has backed a second referendum, is to beat his opponent, he has to draw the lefties’ attention to this.

Many moderates supporting him reckon he will flunk the vote. Thousands of idealists joined the party last summer and too few recognise the mess Mr Corbyn has made of the job. “I used to think splitting the party was a terrible idea. I don’t any longer” says one Labour strategist. If the singsong MP for Pontypridd loses, moderate MPs are preparing to declare independence and form their own parliamentary group. In order to replace Mr Corbyn’s rump party as the official opposition, such a splinter needs to carry the majority of Labour MPs. So perhaps the real value of Mr Smith’s campaign will be to lose and thus persuade his fellow soft-leftists that the party is indeed lost; that even with an impeccable lefty alternative, Mr Corbyn’s fans will not abandon their man. In other words: it may be that Mr Smith’s bid serves primarily to let MPs quit with honour, having not given up without a fight. They will not have gone gentle into that good night.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21702792-owen-smith-bears-labours-last-hope-salvation-it-slim-rage-against-dying-light/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




Pope Francis: Hearts, minds and souls





Articles Sections Next

Pope Francis

Hearts, minds and souls

Despite his popularity, the pontiff’s efforts to reshape his church face stiff resistance

Jul 30th 2016 | VATICAN CITY | From the print edition



CARDINAL ROBERT SARAH (pronounced Sar-AH, with the accent on the last syllable) has never been afraid to speak out. Such was his defiance of his native Guinea’s dictator, Ahmed Sékou Touré, that he was at the top of a list of candidates for assassination found when the strongman died in 1984. Since coming to Rome in 2001 he has emerged as standard-bearer-in-chief of the traditionalists: Roman Catholics who prize doctrinal certainty over adapting to changing times. Many in the church’s higher reaches would like to reverse some of the innovations that followed the Second Vatican Council, which closed in 1965 (indeed, they often claim its intentions were misinterpreted).

As the head of the department overseeing the church’s charitable activities, Cardinal Sarah brought Caritas, its main development agency, under tighter Vatican control and in 2011 jettisoned its liberal-minded director, Lesley-Anne Knight. At a recent synod, or meeting of bishops, called by the pope to discuss issues that split liberals and traditionalists relating to the family and sexual orientation, he vigorously opposed change. On July 5th he went further, openly defying Pope Francis. The issue was one of immense symbolic importance for Catholics. At a conference in London Cardinal Sarah, who now heads the Vatican’s liturgy department, asked priests to resume celebrating mass facing east, with their backs to the congregation, as they had done before the Second Vatican Council.

Seldom do Catholic leaders clash so publicly. The Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster, Vincent Nichols, wrote to the priests of his diocese reminding them that an instruction “approved by the highest authority in the church” told them to face the congregation whenever possible. The pope saw Cardinal Sarah on July 9th, after which the Holy See said the cardinal’s words, which went against that settled position and the pope’s known wishes, had been wrongly interpreted.

It was the latest sign that conservative resentment of Francis is developing into open resistance. Traditionalists hanker for the papacy of his predecessor, Benedict XVI, who retired to a life of prayer three years ago. On May 20th, in another seemingly subversive pronouncement, Archbishop Georg Gänswein, who doubles as Benedict’s secretary and the head of Francis’s household, said the papacy was in fact dual, with an active member (Francis) and a contemplative one (Benedict).

This week hordes of young Catholics are converging on Krakow in Poland to celebrate their church’s World Youth Day. It is the kind of event at which the genial, informal Francis excels (the picture shows him greeting the faithful in St Peter’s Square in Rome). It is also one that allows him to shore up his position with popular acclaim. A global opinion poll published in March found that his admirers outnumbered his detractors by more than four to one. Last year in America, 86% of Catholics said they had a favourable impression of him. Even more approved of the direction in which he was taking the church.

So far, Francis’s popularity has shielded him from the traditionalists. But that popularity may be diminishing. Attendance at papal events in Rome last year was less than half that in the year of his election. This may have other causes, notably fear of terrorism. But it could also reflect growing doubts, not just among conservative Catholics, but among liberal ones.

Suffering little children

When Francis became pope, liberalisers’ hopes were high that he would make change in four areas: by instigating a financial clean-up of the Vatican, long criticised for lacking transparency and aiding tax evasion; by tackling the long-running scandal over clerical child-abuse; by breaking the grip of traditionalists—notably, with regard to the position of women in the church; and by decentralising the church’s administration. How has he fared?

The pontiff’s most unambiguous success has been in handling the Vatican Bank. The clean-up began under Benedict. But Francis has pursued it with vigour. In May it was revealed that two members of its supervisory board had resigned. Not long ago that would have been widely reported; instead it passed almost unnoticed. The journalists who cover the Holy See, like the diplomats accredited to it, mostly accepted the official explanation that the two had quit in a disagreement over management policy. It was a measure of how successfully the pope, who has also created a new financial super-department, headed by an Australian cardinal, George Pell, has defused the ticking bomb of the Vatican’s offshore financial status.

When it comes to child abuse by priests, however, the pope’s actions have been far more disappointing. “I don’t understand Francis,” says Kieran Tapsell. “He’s done some fantastic things. But he has this blind spot.” Mr Tapsell, a retired Australian lawyer and ex-seminarist, is the author of “Potiphar’s Wife”, a study of the scandal’s legal background and, in particular, the relevance of the “pontifical secret”. This requires bishops not to disclose information on serious offences allegedly committed by priests. It was only in 2010 that Benedict ruled that bishops could report suspected child abuse to the civil authorities—but only where required to do so by local laws. Since victims of child abuse commonly wait until adulthood before telling anyone, most revelations concern crimes committed many years ago. And very few countries require reports of such historical cases to be passed to the police.

In June the pope announced new rules that provide for the removal of bishops who cover up evidence of serious crimes by priests, including sex abuse. But Mr Tapsell dismisses it as “pure PR: Francis is saying that if bishops don’t [report to the civil authorities], they will be punished. But canon law says that if the pontifical secret applies they are obliged to cover up—and can be punished for not covering up.”

Regarding the position of women in the church, the early signs were more promising. Last year Francis shut down a hostile investigation, launched under Benedict, of American nuns suspected of promoting radical feminism. In May, he announced an inquiry of his own—into the possibility of ordaining women as deacons (a lower rank than that of priest which, unlike the priesthood, is open to married men).

However, the last such exercise, which reported in 2002, led nowhere. Some campaigners now pin their hopes on women being chosen to fill senior positions in a new Vatican department for the laity, the family and the church’s anti-abortion activities. But Francis has not so far used the room for manoeuvre he could enjoy. For example, though under canon law only the ordained (and therefore only men) can be cardinals, that is a relatively recent innovation (a layman last became a cardinal in 1858). If the pope wanted to, he could change the rules and propose some heads of the women’s orders as cardinals.

Man of the people

Lucetta Scaraffia, a columnist for the Vatican daily, L’Osservatore Romano, was among a handful of women invited to take part in last year’s synod. She is a “bit disappointed” by Francis’s failure to act, she says. But, noting that his motivations are always deeply spiritual, she believes he is trying to develop a new theology on which to base an enhanced role for women. She points to an announcement last month that, in line with the pope’s “express wish”, the annual celebration of St Mary Magdalene is to become a proper feast day. That puts the most prominent female disciple of Jesus on a level with his apostles. Indeed, the Vatican’s statement went further, adopting St Thomas Aquinas’s description of the woman who announced the resurrection to Jesus’s followers as “the apostle of the apostles”.

The sex-abuse scandal and the role of women in the church both featured in the talks that led to Francis’s election. But the most insistent demands from those of his fellow cardinals who serve among congregations as pastoral archbishops were for measures to involve them in decision-making; and for a shake-up of the Vatican bureaucracy, known as the Roman Curia, and new curbs on its powers.

Here, too, there have been some encouraging signs for those who hoped for change. Francis has weakened the Curia’s grip partly by the simple expedient of ignoring it at critical junctures. According to insiders, he broke with protocol by not consulting the Secretariat of State, which acts as both foreign and interior ministry, before a historic (and, say critics, ill-advised) meeting in February with the Russian Orthodox Patriarch, Kirill. For his first press interview he bypassed the house paper, L’Osservatore Romano, and went to the Jesuit periodical Civiltà Cattolica (he is a Jesuit himself). And when he released his latest encyclical, or letter on doctrine, Amoris Laetitia (The Joy of Love), the job of presenting it went not to the Vatican’s official theological supremo, Gerhard Müller, but to a pastoral cardinal, the Archbishop of Vienna, Christoph Schönborn.

The pope has not, however, managed to make the Curia more international (indeed, he has appointed Italians to several key posts). He has not imposed a term of office on its officials. Nor has he established a counterweight to it, though he clearly intended to. Soon after his election Francis created a Council of Cardinal Advisers. At first, only one member was drawn from the Curia. Its brief was no less than to advise the pope on “the government of the universal church” and to draw up plans for reforming its central administration.

Almost three years on the council, which now includes three curial members, is still meeting. It has contributed to a reorganisation of the central bureaucracy (the latest reform will put all the Vatican’s media operations into a single department) and its members plan to submit to Francis a comprehensive proposal for a new constitution for the Curia. But as it deliberates, some wonder whether Francis may be cooling on the “sound decentralisation” he advocated in his first encyclical, Evangelii Gaudium (The Joy of the Gospel).

The difficulty is that this goal clashes with another dear to the pontiff’s heart: that of doctrinal liberalisation. The debates at the synod in 2014 and last year revealed a hierarchy more divided than he had perhaps imagined, and more conservative than he would have liked. More than half of all Catholics now live in developing countries and prefer, particularly in Africa, a muscular, no-nonsense Christianity. Among other affirmations of traditionalist attitudes, the synod watered down proposals for a more inclusive approach to gay people, and balked at endorsing communion for remarried Catholics.

By grace and good works

The synod has only consultative powers, so, at least in principle, Francis can simply ignore it. To some extent, he has done. Amoris Laetitia was his response to the synodal deliberations, and it takes a notably liberal line on divorced and remarried Catholics: “It is possible that in an objective situation of sin,” he wrote, “a person can be living in God’s grace…while receiving the church’s help to this end.” In a footnote that outraged traditionalists, he added that “this can include the help of the sacraments.” He might not have been able to go further without splitting the church.

Robert Mickens, editor of “Global Pulse”, a Catholic online publication, worries that the spirit of tolerance and inclusiveness the pope has fostered could be reversed by his successor unless Francis puts new structures in place. But he suspects that the pope “is trying to buy time to change attitudes. He has always said that if we just change structures without making conversions, we won’t get anywhere.”

Francis may not be in a position to play a long game. He will be 80 later this year. It may be possible only in his pontificate’s final stages to answer the central question: as one long-time observer puts it, “Is he clever and guileful? Or is he blocked?”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21702749-despite-his-popularity-pontiffs-efforts-reshape-his-church-face-stiff/print





Articles Sections Next





Business




Verizon buys Yahoo: Does it ad up?

Rare diseases: Fixing fate

Corporate governance: Change, or else

Telecoms: Hans free

Electric cars in China: Charging ahead

Companies’ green strategies: In the thicket of it

Schumpeter: Not-so-clever contracts





Articles Sections Next

Verizon buys Yahoo

Does it ad up?

The telecoms giant has made a bold, risky bet on the future of advertising

Jul 30th 2016 | SAN FRANCISCO | From the print edition



“POETIC” is how Marissa Mayer, the boss of Yahoo (pictured), described the sale. Others, remembering better times at Yahoo, see little that is artful about the decline and fall of the 22-year-old internet company. On July 25th, Verizon, a telecoms giant that is also America’s biggest mobile operator, announced it would buy Yahoo’s main internet business for $4.8 billion (a price that does not include the firm’s properties in Asia or its portfolio of patents). The sum is paltry compared with Microsoft’s offer of $45 billion in 2008, which Yahoo’s management turned down, arguing that the firm was worth far more.

Four years ago, when Ms Mayer, an early Google executive and an engineer, arrived to try to reverse the fortunes of Yahoo, the firm’s Silicon Valley headquarters brimmed with optimism. For more than two decades, Yahoo had been torn between its identity as a media company that made content and a technology company that provided tools for people to use online. It seemed that Ms Mayer could be the leader to settle on a single identity and direction (see timeline).



Instead, she spent on everything and hoped something would work. Early on came the purchase in 2013 of Tumblr, a social network and blogging platform, for $1.1 billion, even though, according to an insider, it was about to run out of cash. Yahoo has since written down most of the purchase price. To beat out Google she inked a pricey, five-year deal with Mozilla, owner of Firefox, a browser; Yahoo became Firefox’s default search engine at an annual cost of more than $375m. As for Yahoo’s own core business, revenues are falling by a tenth each year as consumers and advertisers migrate from desktop computers and the internet firm’s products. Its gross profits fell by 44% between 2012 and 2015 and its costs, including those of an overstaffed headquarters, rose sharply.

Verizon’s shareholders must hope that the firm absorbs the lessons of Yahoo’s decline alongside its assets. But investors who know it well are near unanimous that this week’s deal may not fare all that much better than some of its target’s past ones, says Jonathan Chaplin of New Street Research in New York. Certainly, Verizon makes no claim to be able to restore Yahoo to its former glory. Rather, it reckons Yahoo could help buttress its main business of selling mobile-phone subscriptions. This has slowed now that most people have smartphones, which are falling in price.

“Yahoo brings viewers; viewers bring advertising; advertising brings top-line growth,” is how Fran Shammo, Verizon’s chief financial officer, sums up the firm’s thinking. Last year it spent $4.4 billion on AOL, another former dotcom darling. With both Yahoo and AOL it will achieve much-needed scale: in America it will command the second-most visited set of web properties. Only Google beats it now (see chart).



Scale makes sense because buyers of digital ads want to spend money where they can find large audiences. Every last percentage point of growth in global online advertising last year (outside China) went to Google and Facebook, notes Brian Wieser of Pivotal Research, which tracks digital ads, among other things. The two giants together control over half of the US mobile-advertising market, compared with Yahoo’s 2.4% and Twitter’s 3.4%.

Google and Facebook have invested heavily in technology that allows them to sell digital ads in an efficient, automated fashion. Verizon is hoping to take them on. Advertising is going through (yet another) digital transformation, meaning that marketers are not only spending more money online but also using technologies to buy ad space more efficiently, targeting their message to the specific people they are interested in. AOL has a smoothly functioning new platform for this, but Yahoo underinvested. Verizon reckons it will be able to use AOL’s technology to sell a lot of Yahoo’s inventory of ads to marketers.

All the same, Verizon will be taking on rivals whose main business is advertising, and in which they each have more than a decade of experience. It will need to move nimbly, not something telecoms firms are known for. Another reason why Verizon may struggle to challenge Facebook’s and Google’s duopoly has to do with new plans from the telecoms regulator. Internet-service providers and mobile carriers like Verizon know more about their customers than do Google and Facebook. They know their billing addresses, their precise location at any moment and all their online habits, says Harold Feld of Public Knowledge, an advocacy group.

So Verizon is now betting it will be able to muster data about all of its 113m retail subscribers and bombard them with targeted ads as they browse apps or websites owned by Yahoo and AOL. Advertisers are much taken with the possibility. For example, McDonald’s, a fast-food chain, could choose not to advertise to people who have visited a store recently and instead go after those who prefer Burger King. This kind of “geo-targeting”, as it is known, has long held promise but eluded advertisers.

But the Federal Communications Commission has proposed rules that could challenge this vision. The regulator may soon require that mobile-phone subscribers opt in to any sort of advertising by outside parties instead of automatically allowing it. Many, of course, would opt out. Investors in telecoms firms have paid insufficient attention to the discussions in Washington, DC, thinking them too wonky to worry about, says Craig Moffett of MoffettNathanson, a research firm.

Watching people’s physical whereabouts may already be a step too far for consumers, and could spark an immediate backlash over privacy. Verizon has recently had a run-in with privacy advocates over its use of “zombie cookies”, which allowed it to track its customers’ online browsing even when they opted out; it then shared the data with other firms. The company had to pay a small fine earlier this year.

Verizon’s deal does have one thing on its side: low expectations. Any success it has with its purchase of Yahoo is all upside, says Mr Chaplin. By contrast, during her reign, Ms Mayer was dogged by unreasonably high expectations, along with near-constant scrutiny. Verizon has the freedom to say next to nothing about how its advertising business does in the near term. Such relative invisibility may allow it to press on with the radical surgery, such as slashing headcount, that Yahoo has needed for years but never received.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21702779-telecoms-giant-has-made-bold-risky-bet-future-advertising-does-it-ad-up/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Rare diseases

Fixing fate

New medical cures may mean changes in drugmakers’ business models

Jul 30th 2016 | MILAN | From the print edition



WHEN families leave the genetic institute at the San Raffaele Hospital in Milan, they are still anxious. Later, many will come to see the day their children received gene therapy as a blessed new start. Youngsters who had been sentenced to short lives, full of suffering caused by faulty DNA, get better and thrive. Cures for rare genetic diseases, both for children and adults, were once no more than a dream, but now they are set to become commercial reality.

Gene therapies take sections of correct DNA and insert them into cells, often using viruses. Once inside the cell, the new DNA produces the protein that was formerly missing and the fault is fixed. Last week America’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA) handed out “breakthrough” designations—intended to hasten the approval of important new treatments—to two gene therapies. One, made by Pfizer, a giant drugmaker, and Spark Therapeutics, a biotech company, is for haemophilia B, a rare bleeding disorder. The other, made by a specialist gene-therapies firm, AveXis, is for a severe neuromuscular disease. Money is pouring into the area: this week a gene-therapy biotech firm, Audentes, raised $75m in an initial public offering.

Although only a handful of gene therapies have been approved around the world, the number in development has doubled since 2012, according to analysts at Datamonitor Healthcare. Spark Therapeutic’s SPK-RPE65, which restores vision by treating an inherited retinal condition, is most likely to be the first to receive full approval in America.

But most genetic diseases are extremely rare. Take Strimvelis, a therapy that GSK, a British drug company, has approval to market in Europe. The treatment, developed at the San Raffaele, cures ADA-SCID, an immune disease that is often fatal in the first year of life. Annually, just 15 patients are diagnosed with it across Europe. Developing financially viable therapies for such tiny markets will be extremely difficult.

So far GSK has not said how it will price Strimvelis, but the industry is watching the decision keenly. Martin Andrews, the firm’s head of rare diseases, says there is little point in bringing a medicine to market that nobody can afford, so the price has to be set as low as possible. But his firm also has to make a return on its investment, he points out. The lessons from Glybera, the first gene therapy to be sold in Europe, still loom large. It cures a genetic condition that causes a dangerously high amount of fat to build up in the blood system. Priced at $1m, the product has only been bought once since 2012 and stands out as a commercial disaster.

Some suggest the costs of expensive therapies like this might be spread over many years. Another idea is to pool the risk of having to pay for them among health insurers. Andrew Chadwick-Jones, a partner at Oliver Wyman, a consulting firm, says the pharmaceutical industry would like to move to an “outcome-based system” for many drugs, in which firms can show that high prices still reduce overall health-care costs. Health providers may find that cures are cheaper in the long run than existing treatments for chronic and life-shortening conditions, so they may be willing to pay prices that allow the drug firms to make a profit.

Mr Andrews predicts that eventually, larger numbers of patients will generate far more creative thinking by pharmaceutical companies. GSK is looking at automation as a way of reducing the cost of gene-therapy treatments. Keith Thompson, boss of the Cell and Gene Therapy Catapult, an accelerator funded by the British government, says there is a “global race” to see who can do this better and faster. His group is building a manufacturing centre that aims to help supply gene therapies to the drugs industry. Industrialising the process will take years. But a new chapter in medicine, and perhaps in the pharmaceutical business model, has begun.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21702785-new-medical-cures-may-mean-changes-drugmakers-business-models-fixing-fate/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Corporate governance

Change, or else

As anger over big business mounts, a handful of bosses push for reform

Jul 30th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



BASHING big business used to be the preserve of politicians on the left. But so unpopular are America’s corporate titans—ranking below even newspapers (see chart)—that attacks on them were as much a feature of this month’s Republican convention as they were of the just-concluding Democratic bash. Unsettled by this hostility and harbouring some concerns of its own, about things like the accuracy of reported results and the structure of public companies and markets, the business community is responding.

Hence the release, on July 21st, of a report labelled “Commonsense principles of corporate governance”, containing 77 suggestions compiled by 13 of America’s most prominent chief executives during a year of secret meetings. The group was convened by Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase and Warren Buffett of Berkshire Hathaway, and included the likes of GE and GM, as well as Vanguard and T.Rowe Price, two fund managers with reputations for being forthright.

Their recommendations, like the report’s title, may lack the catchiness of populist policies. But they represent a sober take on some big issues—how big companies should be led, how they should communicate with their shareholders, and how large investment firms should fulfil their own responsibilities.

The most controversial recommendation seemed innocuous: for corporate accounts to follow generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Startups often recoil at this, because they believe that GAAP reporting, which counts their high, initial fixed costs, penalises them. So too, with far less merit, do clever chief financial officers who have learned to make adjustments and tweaks that often highlight successes and disguise failures. For similar reasons, the report discouraged companies from providing earnings “guidance”, since making predictions about future numbers created pressure to fiddle the actual results.

Much of the report is devoted to the role of directors, in theory the apex of a company but in reality often an assembly of dim bulbs with bright names that serve as an appendage of the CEO. The report counsels that directors should be “shareholder oriented”, with diverse backgrounds and skills, undistracted by excessive other commitments. Opportunities should exist for critical issues to be discussed without the chief executive. The board should be able to speak with senior employees and outside consultants. Pay for board members and senior executives must be linked to the company’s success through share grants or the equivalent.

Corporate shareholders were also taken to task. They should, the report said, take direct responsibility for voting on proxy motions, rather than delegating their ballots away to advisory firms; weigh in on issues tied to long-term value creation; and have access to company management and its board. They should, in sum, be active in their ownership even if, as in the case of index funds, they take a passive approach to what they own.

None of the bigwigs’ suggestions are particularly exceptional. They may not soften the hearts of those who are fundamentally opposed to business. But any attempt to meet concerns that companies are feckless and undeserving of trust is worthwhile. More such initiatives might mean that four years hence, rather than facing a storm of criticism, there might even be a convention willing to give a cheer.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21702553-faced-mounting-criticism-big-business-bosses-offer-some-sensible-governance-reforms/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Telecoms

Hans free

Ericsson’s boss, Hans Vestberg, departs and his firm’s troubles continue

Jul 30th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition

Would an outsider do better?

“THE pace of technological change will only increase,” Hans Vestberg told a group of visitors to Ericsson’s headquarters in Stockholm a few months ago, adding that his company had to learn from “innovators”. Though Ericsson is a colossus, with two-fifths of the world’s mobile-phone traffic passing through its networks, he talked of needing a new business model to take on rising digital rivals—providers of software and database services, such as Google and Microsoft. His observations were shrewd, but someone else will have to find ways of putting them into practice. Mr Vestberg lost his job on July 25th.

He ran the firm for six years but repeated efforts to cut costs failed. Ericsson’s revenues from selling and installing telecoms networks, its core business, face long-term decline. More bad news came this week when Standard & Poor’s, a rating agency, said it was worried about the firm’s earnings prospects. Its two main competitors, Nokia (which has completed a merger with Alcatel, of France) and Huawei Technologies, of China, are far more efficient.

More important, Mr Vestberg, who has spent his whole career at Ericsson, failed to produce a radical plan beyond building networks. Shareholders bemoaned low investment in new areas. Since the price of infrastructure, its core business, is going down, Ericsson should invest more in software and services, or management systems for networks, says Rolv-Erik Spilling, a veteran of Nordic telecoms now involved in startups.

Ericsson claims that close to half its sales come from services (though much comes from installing networks). It spends plenty on R&D. But its innovations have brought too few benefits. The firm’s shares have flatlined for most of a decade. Bengt Nordstrom, an analyst at Northstream, a telecoms consulting firm, blames cautious leadership by what he calls “general practitioner” bosses. Ericsson should now pick a leader more inspired by technical or digital matters, and thus better placed to meet competition from Google and other new rivals. The challenge for Mr Vestberg’s successor is not only to cut costs, but to find a new purpose. If Ericsson cannot, worries Mr Nordstrom, the company’s continued existence could soon come into question.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21702775-ericssons-boss-hans-vestberg-departs-and-his-firms-troubles-continue-hans-free/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Electric cars in China

Charging ahead

China’s dirty race for clean vehicles

Jul 30th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition



AFTER a decade of halting progress, electric cars are zooming ahead in China. Last year the number of registrations of new electric vehicles overtook that in America, making the Middle Kingdom the world’s biggest market (see chart). The category includes electric-only cars as well as plug-in hybrids that can also run on petrol. Analysts expect the market to grow by nearly 50% a year for the rest of this decade.

Unfortunately, the growth is mostly due to state largesse. The government doles out generous subsidies to local makers of electric vehicles (EVs), to parts suppliers and to those who buy the final products. Favoured Chinese firms also benefit from friendly procurement contracts, such as one that the government of Shenzhen, a southern city, handed out this week to BYD, a big EV manufacturer based there, for hundreds of electric buses. It could be worth 1.5 billion yuan ($227m).

Last year alone China shovelled over 90 billion yuan in subsidies into the industry, which it calls “strategic”. This has led to queues of EVs on the streets, mostly of poor design and quality. China has yet to produce an EV manufacturer that can compete at the level of America’s Tesla Motors.

Nor does China hold back from directly hobbling foreign firms. In June, it denied battery certifications to South Korea’s LG and Samsung, while granting them to inferior local suppliers. Protectionism, says a car-industry analyst who prefers to comment anonymously. Desperate to stay in the market, Samsung said this month it will spend 3 billion yuan on a stake in BYD.

At least the government is encouraging other Chinese firms, including the country’s tech giants, to innovate in the field. Tencent, a gaming and social media firm, is developing internet-connected EVs with Taiwan’s Foxconn. Alibaba, an e-commerce firm, is providing data and cloud-computing services to Kandi Technologies, a local EV-maker that is popularising the sharing of the vehicles.

One smaller upstart is NextEV, which is backed by Sequoia Capital, a Californian venture fund. It is in the midst of raising $1 billion and plans to launch a Chinese-backed sports car this year to challenge Tesla. NextEV’s chairman, William Li, has a clear view on state help. “Subsidies can’t make drivers love EVs.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21702786-chinas-dirty-race-clean-vehicles-charging-ahead/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Companies’ green strategies

In the thicket of it

However faddish and fuzzy, the idea of sustainability is here to stay

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



WITH all due fanfare, on September 10th last year Dow Jones, a financial-news provider, declared Volkswagen to be the world’s most sustainable carmaker in its flagship sustainability index. Just weeks later it removed the firm. The news that 11m of VW’s diesel vehicles had been fitted with software to cheat emissions tests somewhat dented its credentials—and that of corporate sustainability itself.

After a couple of decades of worthy initiatives, acting to implement sustainable practices in a meaningful way is still far harder than gushing about it. “Sustainability is just being slightly less awful,” admits Chris Davis, who keeps the Body Shop, a cosmetics firm, on the right side of greenery. The hardest part is still getting businesspeople to understand that sustainability is not just a cost or a constraint, says Philippe Joubert, formerly an executive at Alstom, a French engineering firm, and now a sustainability adviser.

No accepted steps exist for going green, so sustainable approaches often end up bogged down in endless questionnaires and targets. And a lack of standard practices gives some firms leeway to cut corners. One dodge to give the appearance rather than achieve the reality of reducing pollution, for example, is to pick a particularly fume-laden year as a baseline, according to Peter Williams, an expert on sustainability data at IBM, a computing firm. Firms can ignore difficult areas, such as their heavy use of chemicals, entirely.

Many firms pursue a goal of carbon neutrality: they cut their output as much as possible and then pay to reduce emissions via special schemes. One example is Bain, a consulting firm, which boasts of offsetting the air miles it racks up through carefully monitored wind-power schemes in India and forestry programmes in Brazil. But the green projects into which many polluting firms pour money often lack robust certification or oversight, leaving their environmental credentials much flimsier than the glossy annual reports which describe them.

“Total chaos” surrounds environmental reporting by companies in America, according to Jean Rogers of the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board, a specialist body (one of many). There is no recognised standard for calculating total carbon impact, admits the Carbon Trust, another group. Taking into account the impact of a manufacturing process is one thing, but working out how a telecoms device pollutes over its life or the energy wasted from draughty office buildings is another. Tallying a firm’s overall environmental impact is extremely hard.

There is no getting away from the subject, however. Last year the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals were adopted. Many investors increasingly fret over environmental risks, and are demanding policies that lessen them. Consumers care more, too, as a rash of examples attests. Demand from businesspeople for courses on sustainability is rising.

They may learn that many of the most effective green initiatives are often measures that any well-run company should embrace. Over a decade to 2015, Walmart, the world’s biggest retailer, saved as much as $1 billion annually by doubling the efficiency of its American vehicle fleet by changing its routes. Veolia, a French conglomerate with businesses ranging from energy to waste, has found a way to extract valuable rare metals, such as palladium, from street sweepings. And Nike’s Flyknit technology, which allows sports shoes to be woven, not sewn together from pieces, cuts waste by four-fifths and earned revenues of about $1 billion in 2014. These are the sort of un-faddish ideas that could give corporate greenery a better reputation.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21702784-however-faddish-and-fuzzy-idea-sustainability-here-stay-thicket-it/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

Not-so-clever contracts

For the time being at least, human judgment is still a better bet than cold-hearted code

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



BUSINESS could be such a breeze—if it weren’t for those pesky humans. Imagine contracts that enforce themselves and are not subject to interpretation by, for instance, rent-seeking lawyers. Or envisage autonomous corporations, made up of bundles of automatic agreements, which could send their investors dividends whenever profits reach a certain, specified level and not just when the board of directors has had a good lunch.

Such “smart contracts” are all the rage among futurist backers of the blockchain, the technology that underpins bitcoin, a digital currency. In simple terms, these are pieces of software that represent a business arrangement and execute themselves automatically under pre-determined circumstances. As well as making businesses more efficient, some see them as a way to bypass human decision-making altogether. Faster than you can say “techno-Utopia”, however, the idea has collided with reality.

Automating contractual relationships is an old dream. The term “smart contracts” was coined in 1994 by Nick Szabo, an American computer scientist and legal scholar. But the concept remained obscure for lack of the right technology. Then, in 2008, along came bitcoin and the blockchain, a special kind of peer-to-peer database that provides a secure, public and trusted record of transactions. It enables new data to be added and prevents historical data from being tampered with. But the potential of the blockchain goes much further than ensuring the same bitcoin are never spent twice. It also allows users to “bake in” information, including the precise instructions needed for smart contracts.

Bitcoin’s blockchain proved to be less than ideal for executing business rules. Enter Vitalik Buterin, a 22-year-old Russian-Canadian programming prodigy, and his crew of libertarian coders. Last year they launched Ethereum, a new type of blockchain meant as a platform for smart contracts. The aim was as much political as it was technological. Ethereum would allow developers to program not only smart contracts, but entire “Decentralised Autonomous Organisations” (DAOs)—entities that, like bitcoin, do not need centralised management and operate beyond the direct control of self-interested institutions such as governments.

The Ethereum coders immediately pressed ahead with just such an application and created, in April, a sort of venture-capital fund without venture capitalists, called the DAO. Everyone could join it by transferring digital coins (called “ether”, Ethereum’s equivalent of bitcoin) to a smart contract which represents the fund, which gave them the right to participate in votes on investment proposals. It attracted ether at one point worth more than $200m. But then somebody hacked the DAO through flaws in its code, and took about $50m. The stolen funds could only be fully withdrawn after four weeks. So to recover the money in time Ethereum’s community last week agreed to change the rules, allowing the original owners to withdraw their contributions.

The DAO debacle could reflect teething problems. On average, software comes with between 15 and 50 defects per 1,000 lines of code. That number is estimated to be at least twice as high for Ethereum’s contracts because the system is immature. This means that, as one blogger put it, the contracts are “candy for hackers”.

But the affair also points to more serious problems with the very concept of smart contracts. A blockchain is meant to be immutable. Once contracts are set in cryptographic stone, the whole idea is that they cannot be changed, even though updates are usually how software matures. The Ethereum community resorted to changing its blockchain in this instance because the DAO was considered too big to fail: it had attracted 14% of all the ether in circulation. But that creates more problems: if code is law, so are bugs in the code—and correcting them may itself mean a breach of contract. Some are now speculating whether the DAO hacker will sue to recover his loot.

There are other reasons why smart contracts may never become as pervasive as their fans hope. Imagine a contract that gets data from elsewhere and then takes action—an agricultural-insurance policy, say, that retrieves weather data and pays out automatically if there has been no rainfall. Simple as that sounds in theory, the nature of the blockchain again gets in the way. It is controlled collectively by many of its users, so they all have to keep identical copies of the contract and there is as yet no way around this. So which duplicate of the contract should try to fetch the data? To avoid such confusion, trusted parties, known as oracles, could supply the data to a blockchain, but that would undermine the goal of agreements free of human caprice.

Fans of smart contracts should curb their enthusiasm. Rather than creating “a new breed of human organisation”, as the now dissolved DAO promised, the best uses of the technology are for now more mundane: escrow, automatic transfer of funds and the like. Sophisticated smart contracts will emerge within old-style organisations long before they replace them—on private blockchains maintained by groups of companies, such as banks. The furthest along in using smart contracts, Symbiont, a startup, for instance, has built a trading platform for “smart securities” such as syndicated loans and catastrophe-insurance swaps.

Flawed humans v buggy code

If smart contracts can be made to work, how automated should business ultimately become? So far, IT has mainly replaced paper processes. Smart contracts mean a different order of automation: economic transactions are put on auto-pilot. True believers want them to do away entirely with intermediaries, from banks to governments. But they should be careful what they wish for. If smart contracts spread widely, you would take away much of the flexibility that smooths the economy’s functioning. Real-world institutions can adjust when things go wrong. For many years to come, and perhaps for ever, human institutions, flawed though they are, will be a smarter bet than relentless, bug-ridden code.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21702758-time-being-least-human-judgment-still-better-bet-cold-hearted/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Japan’s economy: Three-piece dream suit

Buttonwood: Putting it all on red

The Federal Reserve: Staying its hand

Road taxes in Europe: Not easy being green

Private share sales: Trading places

Free exchange: A hire power





Articles Sections Next

Japan’s economy

Three-piece dream suit

Abenomics may have failed to live up to the hype but it has not failed. And the hype was necessary to its success

Jul 30th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



JAPAN is not, by nature, a boastful country. Its opportunities for bombast have shrunk along with its population. And its economic pride has suffered many years of deflation, a form of macroeconomic self-deprecation, in which firms and workers continuously discount what they do. In some fields, however, Japan still allows itself some swagger. It is, for example, happy to describe itself as a “robotics superpower”. In a speech early this year Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, praised a “dream robot suit” made by Cyberdyne as a prime example of the country’s technological advances. The robotic exoskeleton can add strength and stamina to healthy limbs and restore movement to enfeebled ones. As a symbol of Japanese ingenuity in overcoming debility, the suit’s appeal to Mr Abe is easy to understand.

Since returning to office in 2012 Mr Abe has strapped Japan into an economic exoskeleton of his own. Dubbed “Abenomics”, his three-piece dream suit includes monetary easing, fiscal pragmatism and structural reform. He claimed it would repel deflation, repair the public finances and revive productivity. Over time, he later boasted, the combination of stronger growth and higher prices would lift Japan’s nominal GDP (which includes the effects of inflation) to ¥600 trillion ($5.7 trillion). Economic resurgence was also meant to bolster Japan’s national security and global standing.

His bold vision has not been fulfilled. Inflation remains well below target. The economy is too weak to sustain a further increase in a controversial consumption tax. This week Mr Abe promised another fiscal jolt, of ¥28 trillion, although the true dimensions of fresh spending may be smaller. It may be combined with more quantitative easing from the Bank of Japan (BoJ), which was meeting as The Economist went to press. Structural reforms have advanced haltingly. In the run-up to an election for the upper house of the Diet, on July 10th, in which Mr Abe scored a sweeping victory, his party dropped mention of the need for monetary easing.

Many observers, particularly foreign ones, say Abenomics is dead. As they see it, Mr Abe used his monetary and fiscal powers not to boost productivity, but to buy popularity, allowing him to advance his nationalist aim of revising Japan’s American-written pacifist constitution, a legacy of military defeat over 70 years ago. In the autumn of 2015, Mr Abe pushed through laws allowing the army, known as the Self-Defence Force, to come to the aid of the country’s allies if under attack, a freedom the constitution formerly denied it.

Impugning Mr Abe’s motives is too cynical. His commitment to economic revival was no doubt sincere, even if he also saw it as a precondition for national greatness. Disdain for Abenomics is also forgetful, failing to recall the grimness of late 2012, when deflation seemed inescapable, the yen was export-sappingly strong and the Nikkei 225 stockmarket index, now above 16,000, languished below 10,000 (it peaked at nearly 39,000 in 1989).

Compared with past efforts to revive Japan, Abenomics has achieved a great deal. It has defeated core deflation (excluding energy prices); lifted companies’ profits and dividends; expanded employment, especially among women and the old; and sprinkled Japan with a light dusting of gentle reforms that may hold the promise of more radical future ones. In early 2013, for instance, few believed that Japan would sign the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an ambitious free-trade agreement among 12 countries: it did (though the TPP’s fate now rests on American politics). Against the will of the country’s powerful business lobby Mr Abe introduced a corporate-governance code and guidelines to oblige shareholders to be more active.

Potent potion

Abenomics may have fallen short of the hype that accompanied it. But to break Japan’s deflationary mindset, some bombast was required. When Mr Abe and his Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) returned to power in December 2012, he had already signalled his intention to ease monetary policy and thereby to weaken the yen. In April 2013 his pick as governor of the BoJ, Haruhiko Kuroda, broke decisively with the central bank’s defeatist past. He set an inflation target of 2%, backed up by asset purchases of impressive scale and scope.

Financial markets at first responded strongly to these signals. The currency fell and the stockmarket leapt. It did not take long for tourists to flock to cheaper Japan, taking advantage too of newly loosened visa rules. Last year around 20m came, mostly high-spending Chinese visitors.

Companies felt emboldened to charge a little extra for their wares. By September 2015, two-thirds of the items in Japan’s inflation index were increasing in price. It was around then that Kagome, the country’s biggest condiment firm, raised the price of its ketchup for the first time in 25 years. After falling for two decades, Japan’s consumer prices (excluding energy and fresh food) have risen gently for 32 months in a row (see chart 1). Under Abenomics Japan’s nominal GDP has grown at its fastest for 18 years.



Compared with its deflationary past, Japan’s mild inflation is a remarkable achievement. Compared with the central bank’s promise, it is a failure. The BoJ now says it will not reach its 2% inflation target (which includes energy prices) until the 2017-18 fiscal year, or around three years late. The BoJ anticipated that its easing would spur borrowing and spending, including capital expenditure. Business expansion would add to employment. Strong hiring would drive up wages, in turn pushing up prices. Reality has not matched up to the textbook. The economy’s two most significant limbs—consumption and investment—have proved less bionic than hoped.

Rather than inflation rising to the BoJ’s target, many economists now fear it will fall. The bank already owns over a third of government bonds and is projected to own around 55% by December 2018, according to Marcel Thieliant of Capital Economics. Having created vast sums of money to buy assets, this year it imposed a negative interest rate on some of the money that banks deposited with it. This decision has backfired, many believe, damaging consumer confidence, bank profitability and money-market turnover. And, they point out, the yen is extremely unlikely to fall by 30% again. Indeed, in the wake of European bank scares and Brexit, it has strengthened, hurting share prices.

Other trends will, however, work in the central bank’s favour. The number of workers has increased by more than 1.5m under Abenomics, despite a decline of 3.5m in the working-age population (see chart 2). Many people have taken on part-time work for modest wages, dragging down average pay, but increasing collective spending power. Total wage income (earnings multiplied by the number of employees) in March-May was over 2% higher than a year earlier, in nominal terms.



Japan’s workers tend to base their wage claims on today’s cost of living rather than on the central bank’s promises of future inflation. Now that energy prices have stopped falling and core prices are creeping up, unions should in theory strengthen wage demands. Future inflation may thus turn on the outcome of a race between the falling expectations of financial markets and the rising expectations of workers.

The BoJ can still influence this race. There are plenty of assets left to buy. Pension funds and life-insurance companies may be reluctant to sell their government bonds, but at some price they will do so. And the bank may get more bang for its buck by buying larger quantities of riskier assets, including corporate bonds and equities, via exchange-traded funds.

But the bank’s hasty imposition of a negative interest rate on some bank reserves was not a success. Market participants initially struggled to transact at negative rates and banks have been reluctant to pass them on to depositors, despite the harm to their margins. The policy is beginning to bed down, however. Banks are competing fiercely for mortgage borrowers, which should eventually increase housing demand and put more money in the pockets of borrowers. And even if banks stop short of inflicting negative rates on retail savers, they may impose them on corporate deposits.

If Mr Kuroda’s monetary-regime shift was not as decisive as hoped, fiscal policy has proved unexpectedly powerful—albeit unhappily so. An increase in the consumption tax in April 2014 caused large and lasting damage to household spending and housing investment. The BoJ’s monetary easing could not offset it, as many economists had hoped it would. A second tax rise has been twice postponed.

Instead Mr Abe has opted for more fiscal stimulus. Can the country afford it? Its public debt is 250% of GDP. But the government also holds voluminous financial assets, reducing its net debt to about 130% of GDP. Thanks to rock-bottom interest rates, its net interest payments, as a percentage of GDP, are the lowest in the G7.

How is this possible? When governments borrow too much, they crowd out private borrowing. The result is high interest rates or inflation. Japan has neither. In Japan, public borrowing is not crowding out private investment. On the contrary, Japan’s government borrows so much only because the private sector refuses to borrow or spend enough, preferring to hoard financial assets instead. If the government were to cut back, Japan would suffer from a disastrous shortage of demand.

Until private spending picks up, fiscal stimulus will be both necessary and cheap: the government will find willing takers for any additional debt. And the central bank could always purchase and hold the government’s additional bonds, replacing debt (which must be repaid) with money (which need not be). That combination could be unusually powerful, resembling a “helicopter drop” of newly printed money. Mr Kuroda recently ruled the option out, but might again change his mind.

Not-so-golden hoarders

Further stimulus would not be necessary if corporate Japan did its bit. Its caution is a source of barely concealed frustration at the Kantei, Mr Abe’s office. His government is among the most pro-business in the world, yet firms have not responded with large increases in either wages or investment.

Companies could not hoard money if investors demanded it back. Mr Abe has tried to make owners more assertive, introducing codes on corporate governance and for Japanese institutional investors. In 2012 only two-fifths of leading companies had independent directors; now nearly all of them do. These moves have made a difference. Firms’ return on equity rose from 5.8% in 2012 to 8.2% in 2014, according to Kathy Matsui of Goldman Sachs. The government may go further, perhaps imposing a tax on retained earnings.

Mr Abe’s irritation with Japan Inc is reciprocated by the country’s firms. His government promised rapid and sweeping reforms of the economy and society, covering the labour market, immigration, education, electricity, agriculture, the role of women, medicine and welfare spending. Japanese bosses welcome all or most of this. But Mr Abe’s team raised expectations to the highest pitch in private meetings with foreign investors. In one encounter with hedge-fund chiefs, Yasuhisa Shiozaki, the labour minister, is said to have promised stringent standards of corporate governance and bank lending—so stringent that even household names like Japan Airlines, the national flag carrier, would be shut down.

These expectations have not been met. Progress has been incremental, at best, prizing breadth over depth. Mr Abe has chosen not to follow the model of a former prime minister, Junichiro Koizumi, who chose one cause—post-office reform—and pursued it doggedly. Instead, his method has been to make partial progress on multiple fronts, says a government official.

Voters seem to share his instincts, handing Mr Abe repeated election victories. Thanks to high employment and a cohesive society, Japan feels little sense of urgency. The growing ranks of the underprivileged—single mothers, young irregular workers, the elderly and children living in poverty—are not yet large or vocal enough to demand change. Japanese seem to prefer kaizen, or continuous improvement, to kaikaku, a pejorative word for reform.

One casualty of his caution is labour reform. Two years ago officials planned to allow large companies to fire staff provided they offered sufficient severance pay. For Japan it would have been an abrupt departure from the traditional norm of lifetime employment. The media said it would “chop off the heads of people”. In the run-up to an election in December 2014, Mr Abe stopped discussion of the bill.

The reform’s supporters now doubt it will ever come. However, senior officials signal in private that Mr Abe plans to press ahead, starting with two bills early next year. Firing with severance pay would be the first, followed by a delayed bill allowing well-paid, white-collar workers to be paid by performance rather than the number of hours they clock up.

In tackling the lowly status of women in the workplace, Mr Abe has shown more mettle. “Womenomics” was not a natural policy for Mr Abe, who surrounds himself with ultraconservatives, points out Yuriko Koike, an LDP lawmaker who is now the favourite to become the governor of Tokyo. Traditional housewives are the backbone of LDP election campaigns, preparing coffee and rice balls. No one wants to upset them, she says.

Like a highly qualified female graduate obliged to bring the tea, Mr Abe’s womenomics policy has suffered numerous humiliations. As soon as he spoke of allowing women to “shine”, the frequency of public sexist comments by LDP politicians shot up. A scheme offering ¥300,000 to small companies that promoted women to supervisory roles attracted no takers.

Lower down the ranks, women face a financial disincentive to rise. Married people earning less than ¥1.3m a year are eligible for health care and a pension through their spouse. Those earning less than ¥1m are exempt from income taxes and social-security taxes. In some workplaces, new hires can tick a box indicating they do not wish to earn more than these sums. They can then limit their hours accordingly. There is little sign that the LDP has gathered the will to change the rules.

To help working parents, the government has created 200,000 extra places in nurseries and set a target of 500,000 by the end of next year. Reports of “maternity harassment” (in which employers bully, demote or fire pregnant employees) have increased dramatically, because people are newly aware of its illegality.

Foreigners needed

Allowing unskilled foreign workers to settle permanently remains taboo for Japanese politicians, who fear the public’s xenophobia. But the public may be more open-minded than they think. In January, Mr Abe lauded the country’s unlikely victory over South Africa in the 2015 rugby world cup. Japan’s heroes included players called Broadhurst, Hesketh and Wing.

Foreigners are filling other jobs too. Thanks to the strength of labour demand, there were almost 908,000 foreign workers last year, up by over 15% from the year before. Japan needs hardworking housekeepers and homebuilders. It also needs high-flying tech leaders, says Takeshi Niinami, who sits on the council for economic and fiscal policy. In this year’s growth strategy, the government proposes to give skilled foreigners permanent residency, with a waiting period of as little as three years, compared with five before 2012.

Mr Abe once also promised to make Japan a far easier place to do business. He aimed at moving it to third (among rich countries) in the World Bank’s rankings on this score. Instead it has slipped from 21st in 2015 to 24th. Even Cyberdyne was once a victim of bureaucratic inertia. The company’s bionic leg brace was not certified as a medical device until February this year, about eight years after regulators were first approached. Back then, the same certificate covered both medical devices and drugs. The firm was thus obliged to describe the side-effects of drinking its exoskeleton (to appease regulators, it said what would happen if you licked it). But the Abe government has tried to streamline regulations and improve co-ordination among ministries, the company says. Cyberdyne is now struggling to keep up with demand for its products.

The force of demand will also govern Japan’s immediate future. A healthy appetite for labour has already increased the number of foreign workers by a third since Mr Abe came to power, even though he could go much further in reforming rules on immigration. The same economic force has created jobs for an extra 1.2m women, despite the limitations of the womenomics campaign. And if demand is strong enough, market forces will begin to improve conditions for irregular workers.

It used to be said that Abenomics had reflated Japan but not reformed it. Now, thanks to the yen’s recent strength, even the reflation is in doubt. But as long as monetary and fiscal policy work in tandem, demand should be resilient. Mr Abe’s bold macroeconomic efforts may then achieve some of what his structural reforms have so far fallen short of achieving. Abenomics has underperformed its targets but outperformed the past. And its next, surely more humble, three years could then improve on its first boastful ones.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21702756-abenomics-may-have-failed-live-up-hype-it-has-not-failed-and/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

Putting it all on red

The rules encourage public-sector pension plans to take more risk

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



IMAGINE two kinds of investment funds, both of which have the same aim: to provide pensions for their employees. You might think that they would invest in a similar way. But when it comes to American pension funds, you would be wrong. It turns out that public funds have a rather different, and more aggressive, approach to risk from private ones (and indeed from their counterparts in other countries).

As a recent paper* by Aleksandar Andonov, Rob Bauer and Martijn Cremers shows, that different approach is driven by a regulatory incentive—the rules that determine how pension funds calculate how much they must put aside to meet the cost of paying retirement benefits. Usually, the bulk of a pension fund’s liabilities occur well into the future, as workers retire. So that future cost has to be discounted at some rate to work out how much needs to be put aside today.

Private-sector pension funds in America and elsewhere (and Canadian public funds) regard a pension promise as a kind of debt. So they use corporate-bond yields to discount future liabilities. As bond yields have fallen, so the cost of paying pensions has risen sharply. At the end of 2007, American corporate pension funds had a small surplus; by the end of last year, they had a $404 billion deficit.

American public pension funds are allowed (under rules from the Government Accounting Standards Board) to discount their liabilities by the expected return on their assets. The higher the expected return, the higher the discount rate. That means, in turn, that liabilities are lower and the amount of money which the employer has to put aside today is smaller.

Investing in riskier assets is thus an attractive option for a public-sector employer, which can tap only two sources of funding. It can ask its workers to contribute more, but since they are well-unionised that can lead to friction (after all, higher pension contributions amount to a pay cut). Or the employer can take the money from the public purse—either by cutting other services or by raising taxes. Neither option is politically popular.

Unsurprisingly, therefore, the academics found that American public pension funds choose a riskier approach. Theory suggests that as pension funds mature (ie, more of their members are retired), they should allocate their portfolios more conservatively, because the promised benefits need to be met sooner and funds cannot risk a sudden decline in the value of their assets. That is the case with private-sector pension funds, but public funds take more risk as they mature—putting more money into equities, alternative assets (like private equity) and junk bonds.

Public pension plans have also increased their allocation to risky asset classes as interest rates and bond yields have declined. Again, this does not make sense in theory. The expected return on both risk-free and risky assets should decline in tandem. But a fall in ten-year Treasury-bond yields of five percentage points has been associated with a 15-point increase in public funds’ allocation to risky assets.

The academics also look at the trustees, the people who make the investment decisions. They find a relationship between the riskiness of a fund’s assets and the proportion of political trustees (such as state treasurers) and worker trustees elected by scheme members. Neither group will want to see contributions rise in the short term. So it makes sense that both groups bank on achieving higher investment returns, leaving any scheme shortfall to be cleared up later.

Some people might argue that this is all for the good. Pension schemes have long-term liabilities and thus should take more risks. If public funds take more risk and earn higher returns, that is saving both their employees and taxpayers money. Alas, the academics find that, even if you allow for their asset-allocation decisions, public pension funds underperform their benchmarks by more than half a percentage point a year. This underperformance is greatest in the alternative-asset categories such as private equity. Even if their asset allocation might have beaten a bond-only portfolio, the overall strategy isn’t working. For example CalPERS, the Californian state pension fund, has underperformed its targeted 7.5% return over the past 3, 5, 10 and 20 years.

The paper demonstrates convincingly that American accounting regulations have created perverse incentives for public pension funds. And that can mean only one thing. The rules need to change.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

* “Pension fund asset allocation and liability discount rates”, March 2016





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21702623-rules-encourage-public-sector-pension-plans-take-more-risk-putting-it-all/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Federal Reserve

Staying its hand

A strengthening economy creates a dilemma for the central bank

Jul 30th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition



BY MOST measures, America’s economy is flourishing. Unemployment is only 4.9%. From April to June payrolls swelled by a healthy 147,000 per month, on average. Consumer confidence is strong and sales of new homes are higher than at any time since 2008. Financial markets have mostly shaken off their early-year worries about Chinese growth and their summer blues over Brexit. Second-quarter growth, due to be revealed after The Economist went to press, was expected to rebound after an underwhelming start to 2016 (mirroring last year). Yet on July 27th, the Federal Reserve opted to hold interest rates in the target range of 0.25%-0.5% for the fifth consecutive meeting. What explains the central bank’s hesitation?

One answer is that inflation, according to the measure the Fed targets, is just 0.9%, well below the central bank’s 2% goal. But Janet Yellen, the head of the Fed, has long argued that price rises will pick up as the effect of cheap oil and a strong dollar dissipates. Core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices (and usually prefigures the headline measure), is 1.6%. And competition for workers is pushing up wages. The median annual pay rise is 3.6%, according to the Atlanta Fed—almost the same as it was in July 2006. That suggests slack in the economy is disappearing (see chart).

A more subtle problem also lies behind the Fed’s inertia: it is hard to tell how loose monetary policy really is. That depends on the “natural” interest rate, the level which would, in theory, cause inflation to neither rise nor fall. If rates are much lower than this, then the Fed is providing foot-to-the-floor stimulus. But if they are only slightly below it, the Fed is merely giving the economy a gentle push.

The latter looks more likely. A recent estimate by the San Francisco Fed put the natural rate in real terms (subtracting inflation) at 0.4%. If the Fed were hitting its 2% inflation target, the natural nominal rate would be 2.4%. With inflation at 0.9%, today’s rates look only modestly stimulatory.

Several factors are holding down the natural rate. One is weak productivity growth. In the previous economic expansion, in the 2000s, productivity growth averaged 2.5% a year. Since the financial crisis, it has averaged just 0.9%. Another cause is an ageing population, which, by reducing the capacity of the economy to produce, deters investment. Economic pessimists say these forces and others are causing a “secular stagnation”.

The Fed’s rate-setters are becoming more open to this possibility, says David Mericle of Goldman Sachs, a bank, having previously preferred to describe the drags on growth merely as “headwinds”. Since December, their median estimate of where rates will settle in the long run has fallen from 3.5% to 3%. James Bullard, the president of the St Louis Fed, recently abandoned a hawkish position to argue that the economy is now in a low-rate “regime” which is likely to persist. Markets, too, expect low rates to continue (a ten-year Treasury bond yields just 1.5%).

The Fed did say, in its post-meeting statement, that short-term risks have “diminished”. The strength of the consumer means there is a chance of a rate rise this year; markets put it at about 40%. But had the Fed a clearer view of the long-term picture, rates would probably be higher by now. When visibility improves, some abrupt steering may be necessary.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21702764-strengthening-economy-creates-dilemma-central-bank-staying-its-hand/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Road taxes in Europe

Not easy being green

Why fuel taxes are the best way to encourage sales of greener cars

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



THE world’s policymakers agreed at the Paris climate-change talks last December to try to limit greenhouse-gas emissions so global temperatures rise by no more than 2°C from pre-industrial levels. To succeed, they need, among other things, to encourage people to buy cleaner cars and lorries. Around 23% of carbon-dioxide emissions come from transport, of which three-quarters stem from road vehicles, according to the International Energy Agency.

Governments have tried to get drivers to go for greener vehicles. Some have raised the cost of driving by taxing petrol and diesel. Others have taxed the ownership of dirty cars by raising their annual registration fees, or dangled rebates on purchases of greener ones.

Which is the most efficient approach? A new paper by Anna Alberini and Markus Bareit compares policy changes in Switzerland’s 26 cantons to changes in new car sales in each area between 2005 and 2011 as a natural experiment. The least efficient policy was the annual rebate for owning a green car. The authors found this was much less effective than raising the annual registration fees on dirty cars, which had the bonus of raising revenues.

But even that was inefficient. Every tonne of carbon saved by the purchase of greener cars cost the consumer SFr810 ($815), over seven times the government’s estimate of the economic cost of higher emissions. Higher fuel taxes were more effective: the authors found a 16% increase in petrol duty had the same effect as a 50% increase in registration fees.

Ms Alberini says that drivers seem to see road taxes as less important than fuel efficiency, in part because refilling their cars frequently reminds them of the cost. Second, as the annual registration fee is levied regardless of distance driven, there is no incentive to drive less once it has been paid. The study mirrors other findings. In a paper published last year, Reyer Gerlagh of Tilburg University and several co-authors found higher annual road taxes on gas-guzzlers have no, or even an adverse, effect on emissions.

Higher fuel taxes are, alas, unpopular. Many European countries have preferred to subsidise the purchase of cleaner cars than tax dirty ones. Good politics is rarely good news for the environment.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21702762-why-fuel-taxes-are-best-way-encourage-sales-greener-cars-not-easy-being/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Private share sales

Trading places

Psst! Wanna buy some unicorn shares?

Jul 30th 2016 | New York | From the print edition



FOR tech startups, paying employees with shares makes sense. Young companies can reduce their bills and so preserve their capital; workers receive a payout which, although deferred and uncertain, is potentially far more valuable than their salary. But there is a hitch: tech firms are taking much longer to list. Their average age at initial public offering (IPO) has risen from four years during the dotcom bubble in 1999-2000 in America to 11 today. That leaves many workers pining for a payday. Inevitably, another bunch of tech startups is trying to develop a solution.

In the past, the only means of selling unlisted shares was via an informal broker, who could take months to find a buyer and charge a fee worth 30-40% of the transaction. More recently, demand for Facebook’s pre-IPO shares gave rise to a first wave of secondary markets; SharesPost and SecondMarket were the two largest players.

But the number of American unicorns—private firms valued at more than $1 billion—has since jumped, from 28 in 2013 to 96 today. New secondary-market players, such as EquityZen and Equidate, have emerged, closing deals within weeks and charging about 5% to each side. They are catching on: EquityZen has handled stakes in 40 companies this year, more than double 2014’s figure.

Unicorns have mixed feelings about the platforms. Many accept that their employees cannot always wait for an IPO to finance a wedding, the purchase of a house, or private education. At least half of America’s 25 biggest unicorns have given permission for secondary trades. Some even approach the marketplaces to help staff sell. However, since outsiders sometimes interpret share sales by employees as a sign of trouble, many firms reserve the right to buy back employees’ shares before they are offered elsewhere.

Regulators are paying attention to this growing market. Last year, the Securities and Exchange Commission closed Sand Hill Exchange for selling retail investors complicated derivatives linked to private shares. Now the private-company stockmarkets accept only “accredited” (ie, wealthy) investors. The big question is whether the talk of a unicorn bubble proves correct. Equidate is making some of its data available to the public, and giving investors real-time updates on share values. Tech employees might face a reality check when turning shares into cash.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21702763-psst-wanna-buy-some-unicorn-shares-trading-places/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

A hire power

Workers benefit when firms must compete aggressively for them

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



JOSEPH SCHUMPETER gave the name “creative destruction” to the process by which new and innovative firms displace stodgy ones, thereby driving long-run economic growth. The Schumpeterian sort of economic reinvention is out of fashion at the moment. Unhappy workers are casting their lot with populist politicians, who are in turn looking to rein in the disruption caused by everyone from tech unicorns in Silicon Valley to sellers of cut-price steel in China. Economists understandably worry that this backlash will lead to sweeping new regulations, taxes and protections for firms and workers. But red tape and tax are not the only things that can gum up the economy’s operation. Evidence increasingly suggests that some of what looks like sclerosis across rich countries is in fact rooted in the unequal distribution of gains from growth.

When old industries are swept aside by new ones, economists reckon that the resulting gains ought to be large enough to make everyone better off, including the displaced workers. Living standards should rise as new, better and cheaper goods and services become available. Just as importantly, as people change the kinds of goods and services they purchase, new industries should expand to hoover up jobless workers. In a well-functioning economy, firms ought to provide plenty of labour demand: new job openings to coax workers out of unemployment or away from jobs in declining cities and sectors.

This process is far from automatic, however. It can depend on the geographic distribution of income growth, for instance, as recent research reveals. A paper by Terry Gregory and Ulrich Zierahn, of the Centre for European Economic Research in Mannheim, and Anna Salomons, of Utrecht University, examines the effect of technological change across 238 European regions between 1999 and 2010, focusing on the propensity of new technologies to push workers out of jobs doing routine sorts of work and into jobs that cannot be done as easily by computers and robots. They estimate that the direct displacement of workers by technology reduced employment across Europe by nearly 10m jobs during the period studied (see chart). Yet technological change also created new opportunities. Automation of some jobs reduced costs, squashing prices and leading to increased product demand. That, in turn, led to the creation of nearly 9m jobs in newly efficient firms in Europe. Those gains, the authors reckon, ought to have spilled across local labour markets as the extra wages and profits were spent at restaurants and shops.

This “multiplier” effect is potentially the most potent of all. But its contribution depends on where the profits generated by the new technology are earned. The authors calculate potential new employment growth from this multiplier would be close to an extra 12m jobs (or about half of total European job growth over the period) on the assumption that all profits were retained within Europe. Yet if they assume that all profits flow abroad, growth in labour demand is far more modest: net job creation shrinks to less than 2m. Only when profits are recycled locally does automation lead to lots of opportunities for displaced workers.

Analysis of the American economy suggests the distribution of economic power matters as well. In a new paper Mike Konczal and Marshall Steinbaum of the Roosevelt Institute, a left-leaning think-tank, examine the worrying decline of business dynamism in America. Since 2000, the share of employment in the oldest and largest firms has grown at the expense of employment in younger and smaller establishments. The startup rate of “transformational” firms—the young, fast-growing companies that represent new kinds of businesses—has declined. The trend seems to be linked to a change in the habits of American workers, especially the young adults for whom early-career job changes are an important contributor to long-run success. They have become less likely to switch jobs and move to new cities.

It is possible that regulations keep Americans from jumping to new jobs or places, thereby jamming the process of economic reinvention. Some research has indicated that the growth of occupational licensing, which makes it harder to enter many service-sector industries, constrains labour mobility. Other work points to high housing costs—a consequence of overly strict land-use rules—as a force repelling workers from productive places. But Messrs Konczal and Steinbaum reckon these explanations cannot fully account for America’s doldrums.

If red tape were the main constraint on the economy, then workers who do successfully move from one job to another are likely to be moving to one that pays them a lot more. And places with lower levels of economic turnover ought to enjoy higher wage growth, as firms struggle to attract scarce workers. But job changes seem not to provide much of a wage fillip, the authors find, suggesting that people are staying put because other firms are uninterested in hiring new workers and feel little pressure to offer high wages. Similarly, places in America where dynamism is very low tend to suffer unusually weak growth in pay.

Too comfortable for comfort

Messrs Konczal and Steinbaum argue that firms do not need to compete for workers because, increasingly, they do not need to compete at all. America’s corporate world has grown top-heavy, thanks to the dominance of large firms and a wave of mergers. Reduced competition keeps profits high; in recent years, profit as a proportion of GDP has lingered near the highest level in half a century. In a more competitive market, upstart firms would hire labour and pressure big firms to use their cash for job-creating investments. If wages grew faster than profits, that might further raise labour demand, as workers spend their gains in the local service economy. Red tape no doubt prevents some firms from making growth-boosting investments. But bigger gains might come from creating an economy in which firms found themselves needing to compete to attract workers.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21702754-workers-benefit-when-firms-must-compete-aggressively-them-hire-power/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Economics brief




Financial stability: Minsky’s moment





Articles Sections Next

Financial stability

Minsky’s moment

The second article in our series on seminal economic ideas looks at Hyman Minsky’s hypothesis that booms sow the seeds of busts

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



FROM the start of his academic career in the 1950s until 1996, when he died, Hyman Minsky laboured in relative obscurity. His research about financial crises and their causes attracted a few devoted admirers but little mainstream attention: this newspaper cited him only once while he was alive, and it was but a brief mention. So it remained until 2007, when the subprime-mortgage crisis erupted in America. Suddenly, it seemed that everyone was turning to his writings as they tried to make sense of the mayhem. Brokers wrote notes to clients about the “Minsky moment” engulfing financial markets. Central bankers referred to his theories in their speeches. And he became a posthumous media star, with just about every major outlet giving column space and airtime to his ideas. The Economist has mentioned him in at least 30 articles since 2007.

If Minsky remained far from the limelight throughout his life, it is at least in part because his approach shunned academic conventions. He started his university education in mathematics but made little use of calculations when he shifted to economics, despite the discipline’s growing emphasis on quantitative methods. Instead, he pieced his views together in his essays, lectures and books, including one about John Maynard Keynes, the economist who most influenced his thinking. He also gained hands-on experience, serving on the board of Mark Twain Bank in St Louis, Missouri, where he taught.

Having grown up during the Depression, Minsky was minded to dwell on disaster. Over the years he came back to the same fundamental problem again and again. He wanted to understand why financial crises occurred. It was an unpopular focus. The dominant belief in the latter half of the 20th century was that markets were efficient. The prospect of a full-blown calamity in developed economies sounded far-fetched. There might be the occasional stockmarket bust or currency crash, but modern economies had, it seemed, vanquished their worst demons.

Against those certitudes, Minsky, an owlish man with a shock of grey hair, developed his “financial-instability hypothesis”. It is an examination of how long stretches of prosperity sow the seeds of the next crisis, an important lens for understanding the tumult of the past decade. But the history of the hypothesis itself is just as important. Its trajectory from the margins of academia to a subject of mainstream debate shows how the study of economics is adapting to a much-changed reality since the global financial crisis.

Minsky started with an explanation of investment. It is, in essence, an exchange of money today for money tomorrow. A firm pays now for the construction of a factory; profits from running the facility will, all going well, translate into money for it in coming years. Put crudely, money today can come from one of two sources: the firm’s own cash or that of others (for example, if the firm borrows from a bank). The balance between the two is the key question for the financial system.

Minsky distinguished between three kinds of financing. The first, which he called “hedge financing”, is the safest: firms rely on their future cashflow to repay all their borrowings. For this to work, they need to have very limited borrowings and healthy profits. The second, speculative financing, is a bit riskier: firms rely on their cashflow to repay the interest on their borrowings but must roll over their debt to repay the principal. This should be manageable as long as the economy functions smoothly, but a downturn could cause distress. The third, Ponzi financing, is the most dangerous. Cashflow covers neither principal nor interest; firms are betting only that the underlying asset will appreciate by enough to cover their liabilities. If that fails to happen, they will be left exposed.

Economies dominated by hedge financing—that is, those with strong cashflows and low debt levels—are the most stable. When speculative and, especially, Ponzi financing come to the fore, financial systems are more vulnerable. If asset values start to fall, either because of monetary tightening or some external shock, the most overstretched firms will be forced to sell their positions. This further undermines asset values, causing pain for even more firms. They could avoid this trouble by restricting themselves to hedge financing. But over time, particularly when the economy is in fine fettle, the temptation to take on debt is irresistible. When growth looks assured, why not borrow more? Banks add to the dynamic, lowering their credit standards the longer booms last. If defaults are minimal, why not lend more? Minsky’s conclusion was unsettling. Economic stability breeds instability. Periods of prosperity give way to financial fragility.

With overleveraged banks and no-money-down mortgages still fresh in the mind after the global financial crisis, Minsky’s insight might sound obvious. Of course, debt and finance matter. But for decades the study of economics paid little heed to the former and relegated the latter to a sub-discipline, not an essential element in broader theories. Minsky was a maverick. He challenged both the Keynesian backbone of macroeconomics and a prevailing belief in efficient markets.

It is perhaps odd to describe his ideas as a critique of Keynesian doctrine when Minsky himself idolised Keynes. But he believed that the doctrine had strayed too far from Keynes’s own ideas. Economists had created models to put Keynes’s words to work in explaining the economy. None is better known than the IS-LM model, largely developed by John Hicks and Alvin Hansen, which shows the relationship between investment and money. It remains a potent tool for teaching and for policy analysis. But Messrs Hicks and Hansen largely left the financial sector out of the picture, even though Keynes was keenly aware of the importance of markets. To Minsky, this was an “unfair and naive representation of Keynes’s subtle and sophisticated views”. Minsky’s financial-instability hypothesis helped fill in the holes.

His challenge to the prophets of efficient markets was even more acute. Eugene Fama and Robert Lucas, among others, persuaded most of academia and policymaking circles that markets tended towards equilibrium as people digested all available information. The structure of the financial system was treated as almost irrelevant. In recent years, behavioural economists have attacked one plank of efficient-market theory: people, far from being rational actors who maximise their gains, are often clueless about what they want and make the wrong decisions. But years earlier Minsky had attacked another: deep-seated forces in financial systems propel them towards trouble, he argued, with stability only ever a fleeting illusion.

Outside-in

Yet as an outsider in the sometimes cloistered world of economics, Minsky’s influence was, until recently, limited. Investors were faster than professors to latch onto his views. More than anyone else it was Paul McCulley of PIMCO, a fund-management group, who popularised his ideas. He coined the term “Minsky moment” to describe a situation when debt levels reach breaking-point and asset prices across the board start plunging. Mr McCulley initially used the term in explaining the Russian financial crisis of 1998. Since the global turmoil of 2008, it has become ubiquitous. For investment analysts and fund managers, a “Minsky moment” is now virtually synonymous with a financial crisis.



Minsky’s writing about debt and the dangers in financial innovation had the great virtue of according with experience. But this virtue also points to what some might see as a shortcoming. In trying to paint a more nuanced picture of the economy, he relinquished some of the potency of elegant models. That was fine as far as he was concerned; he argued that generalisable theories were bunkum. He wanted to explain specific situations, not economics in general. He saw the financial-instability hypothesis as relevant to the case of advanced capitalist economies with deep, sophisticated markets. It was not meant to be relevant in all scenarios. These days, for example, it is fashionable to ask whether China is on the brink of a Minsky moment after its alarming debt growth of the past decade. Yet a country in transition from socialism to a market economy and with an immature financial system is not what Minsky had in mind.

Shunning the power of equations and models had its costs. It contributed to Minsky’s isolation from mainstream theories. Economists did not entirely ignore debt, even if they studied it only sparingly. Some, such as Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and Ben Bernanke, who would later become chairman of the Federal Reserve, looked at how credit could amplify business cycles. Minsky’s work might have complemented theirs, but they did not refer to it. It was as if it barely existed.

Since Minsky’s death, others have started to correct the oversight, grafting his theories onto general models. The Levy Economics Institute of Bard College in New York, where he finished his career (it still holds an annual conference in his honour), has published work that incorporates his ideas in calculations. One Levy paper, published in 2000, developed a Minsky-inspired model linking investment and cashflow. A 2005 paper for the Bank for International Settlements, a forum for central banks, drew on Minsky in building a model of how people assess their assets after making losses. In 2010 Paul Krugman, a Nobel prize-winning economist who is best known these days as a New York Times columnist, co-authored a paper that included the concept of a “Minsky moment” to model the impact of deleveraging on the economy. Some researchers are also starting to test just how accurate Minsky’s insights really were: a 2014 discussion paper for the Bank of Finland looked at debt-to-cashflow ratios, finding them to be a useful indicator of systemic risk.

Debtor’s prism

Still, it would be a stretch to expect the financial-instability hypothesis to become a new foundation for economic theory. Minsky’s legacy has more to do with focusing on the right things than correctly structuring quantifiable models. It is enough to observe that debt and financial instability, his main preoccupations, have become some of the principal topics of inquiry for economists today. A new version of the “Handbook of Macroeconomics”, an influential survey that was first published in 1999, is in the works. This time, it will make linkages between finance and economic activity a major component, with at least two articles citing Minsky. As Mr Krugman has quipped: “We are all Minskyites now.”

Central bankers seem to agree. In a speech in 2009, before she became head of the Federal Reserve, Janet Yellen said Minsky’s work had “become required reading”. In a 2013 speech, made while he was governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King agreed with Minsky’s view that stability in credit markets leads to exuberance and eventually to instability. Mark Carney, Lord King’s successor, has referred to Minsky moments on at least two occasions.

Will the moment last? Minsky’s own theory suggests it will eventually peter out. Economic growth is still shaky and the scars of the global financial crisis visible. In the Minskyan trajectory, this is when firms and banks are at their most cautious, wary of repeating past mistakes and determined to fortify their balance-sheets. But in time, memories of the 2008 turmoil will dim. Firms will again race to expand, banks to fund them and regulators to loosen constraints. The warnings of Minsky will fade away. The further we move on from the last crisis, the less we want to hear from those who see another one coming.

LATER IN THIS SERIES:

• The Stolper-Samuelson theorem

• The Keynesian multiplier

• The Nash equilibrium

• The Mundell-Fleming trilemma



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economics-brief/21702740-second-article-our-series-seminal-economic-ideas-looks-hyman-minskys/print





Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Printed electronics: On a roll

Air pollution: Breathtaking

The ancient atmosphere: Time capsules





Articles Sections Next

Printed electronics

On a roll

Printing with conventional rotary presses will create cheaper electronics

Jul 30th 2016 | Accrington | From the print edition



MAKING things with 3D printers is an idea that is being adopted by manufacturers to produce goods ranging from false teeth to jet engines. Conventional printing, though, has not remained idle. Machines that have their origins in the high-speed rotary presses that apply words and images to large reels of paper, like the ones which turn out the physical versions of this newspaper, have started making other things as well.

The extent of this transformation can be seen at a factory in Accrington, a town in one of Britain’s former industrial heartlands, Lancashire. Here, Emerson & Renwick, founded in 1918, has expanded beyond its formative business of making wallpaper-printing equipment. The latest piece of kit to which the finishing touches are being added is part of the firm’s Genesis range. It is about the size of a shipping container and is designed to coat and print electrical devices. Like a conventional printer it does so on long rolls of material, called webs. Then, just as printed pages are cut by guillotines from such webs for binding into newspapers, magazines or books, these printed items are cut out and used in products ranging from solar cells to display screens to batteries. One customer wants to print some of the main components of a new generation of smartphones.

Roll-to-roll printing of this sort is quick and efficient. Some of the fastest web-offset presses, in which an inked image is transferred to another roller and thence to the surface being printed, can churn out more than 20 newspapers a second. Flexographic presses, which use a flexible relief image on a cylinder to print things such as packaging, can belt along at 500 metres a minute. These methods have already been adapted to print basic electronic circuits, by replacing conventional graphic inks with conductive inks that can carry an electric current. Scientists and engineers, however, have loftier ambitions than these. They are developing ways to print not just circuits but also sophisticated electronic devices, such as thin-film transistors, using the mass-production capabilities of roll-to-roll processes.

Transistorised, at half the price

The machine in Accrington is one such offering. It puts sequential coatings onto webs of material such as plastic film, flexible glass and metal foil. Some coatings conduct. Some insulate. Some are semiconductors. Some emit light. Emerson & Renwick produces special carts, each the size of a large oven, which are wheeled into the printing system to configure it for different applications. Some carts contain equipment that accelerates ions from a plasma onto a source material, in order to spatter molecules from that source onto the web. That allows printing at the atomic scale. Others perform a similar trick using a beam of electrons. Others still employ chemically reactive gases to etch features such as holes and channels less than 50 nanometres (billionths of a metre) across into the coatings, for electrical connections. To avoid contamination, all of these processes take place in a vacuum.

As exotic as the Genesis machine may seem, though, many of its underlying technologies are, according to Colin Hargreaves, Emerson & Renwick’s boss, similar to those found in a conventional graphics press. In particular, careful management of the web through its winding, tension and control is essential. A break in the web, as any newspaperman knows, brings production to a time-consuming and expensive halt. When printing electronics with such exacting processes in a vacuum, a web-break is potentially catastrophic as it could damage a whole reel.

Printing electronics requires special formulations of ink. Often, these are made with silver, which is a better conductor even than copper. But silver is expensive. An alternative, being worked on by Tawfique Hasan and his research group at Cambridge University, is to include flakes of graphene in such inks. Graphene is a form of carbon made from sheets a single atom thick. The result, Dr Hasan claims, can be manufactured and printed for a fraction of the cost of silver ink and is conductive enough for many applications, such as disposable biosensors used to test samples from patients, and packaging that can track and authenticate a product. Graphene ink could also be used to make electrodes for printed batteries.

Dr Hasan and his colleagues have demonstrated flexographic printing of conductive graphene ink at more than 100 metres a minute. They are working in collaboration with Novalia, a firm in Cambridge that has produced several printed touch-sensitive products, including a musical keyboard and interactive posters. They have also established a company called Inkling Cambridge to commercialise the formulation and develop other electronic inks, coatings and paints.

One idea they are exploring is “smart” wallpaper. In addition to graphene ink, this would use either organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) or quantum dots—crystals of semiconducting material just a few atoms across. Both of these emit light when excited by electricity, so wall coverings printed with such materials could be used to illuminate rooms.

Elsewhere, Taiwan’s Industrial Technology Research Institute plans to open a roll-to-roll line in 2017, to make OLED lighting panels for display screens, decorative lighting, signage and exterior car lights. These will be printed on rolls of plastic film or ultra-thin flexible glass. The institute says its system will incorporate seven separate processes, including coating, baking and etching, into a single roll-to-roll machine. At the moment, each process requires a different apparatus, and the products have to be made one at a time, or in batches.

Another use for printed electronics of this sort is solar energy. Several groups are working on making thin-film solar panels in this way. Such panels, being cheap and lightweight, could readily be attached to walls and roofs, and even built into roofing tiles. In this context, a family of crystalline materials called perovskites is attracting particular interest for roll-to-roll printing. Whereas the best conventionally made silicon-based solar panels convert the energy in sunlight into electricity with an efficiency of just over 20%, researchers at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, in California, think they can push that to 31% using perovskites. And being small, crystalline grains, perovskites make ideal ingredients of ink.

Inkjet printing is also getting a roll-to-roll makeover, according to David Bird of the Centre for Process Innovation (CPI), a British government-backed organisation that helps companies commercialise new technologies. Inkjet printers are not particularly fast, but they are parsimonious, for they spray ink only where it is needed. Moreover, they are flexible and easily customised. To alter what is being printed requires only a software reload, rather than the changing of a printing plate. And lack of speed is relative. The CPI’s inkjet machine can, for example, print copper circuits onto rolls of plastic at a rate of 17 metres a minute. These circuits are used for things like sensors and radio antennae. Electronics can be made with 3D printers, too. These produce objects by depositing successive layers of material. Like inkjet printers, 3D printers are flexible, but they build things one at a time or in small batches and are mostly used to print larger objects.

As Dr Bird points out, printing of any sort at speed demands good quality control. Single-sheet or batch production permits an error to be spotted before it is repeated, but high-speed roll-to-roll systems can churn out a lot of waste if there is any delay in identifying problems. Cameras can be used to detect errors in printed text or graphics, but they are not much cop at spotting faults in microscopic layers of transparent material whizzing past on a web—not least because there may be nothing to see. To help resolve this for the CPI’s machines, researchers at the University of Huddersfield, across the Pennines from Accrington, in Yorkshire, have come up with a method that builds up a three-dimensional model of the web’s surface using reflected light, and can raise the alarm if it detects any depressions that might indicate an uncoated spot.

A new meaning of “computer printer”?

How far printed electronics will go remains to be seen. At present such products tend to be used as components rather than complete systems. The technology is a long way from being able to roll-print powerful computer chips, which contain several billion transistors squeezed onto a tiny piece of silicon. These processors are currently made in batches in costly semiconductor fabrication plants.

Using roll-to-roll systems to print lots of transistors in the form of a processor is nevertheless an attractive proposition. In many applications these processors need not be very powerful. But they won’t be wimps. Ma Zhenqiang of the University of Wisconsin-Madison and his colleagues recently fabricated a flexible transistor that operates at 110 gigahertz—making it fast enough to use in almost any electronic application. To make this transistor Dr Ma used an electron beam to etch shapes just ten nanometres wide in a mould that was then employed to form the transistor’s circuitry in an ultra-thin flexible silicon membrane. As the mould can be reused, Dr Ma reckons his method could easily be scaled up for roll-to-roll processing. Printed media may be going out of style, then, but it looks as if their electronic replacements will still require the presses to roll.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21702741-printing-conventional-rotary-presses-will-create-cheaper-electronics/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Air pollution

Breathtaking

Air-quality indices make pollution seem less bad than it is

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



SMOKING a whole packet of cigarettes in a day once or twice a year would certainly make someone feel ill, but probably would not kill him. Smoking even one cigarette every day for decades, though, might do so. That is the difference between acute and chronic exposure, and it is a difference most people understand. What they may not understand is that the same thing applies to air pollution.

On a day-to-day basis, the forecasts most cities offer turn red only when pollution levels rise to a point where they will cause immediate discomfort. That makes sense, for it lets people such as asthmatics take appropriate action. But it might also lead the unwary to assume, if most days in the place he inhabits are green, that the air he is breathing is basically safe. This may well not be the case. In London, for example, a study published last year by researchers at King’s College suggested air pollution shortens the city’s inhabitants’ lives by nine to 16 months.

To investigate the matter, The Economist crunched a year’s worth of data collected from May 2015 onwards in 15 big cities. They were gathered by Plume Labs, a firm based in Paris, which uses them to produce a commercial air-quality app. The three pollutants of most concern in rich countries are nitrogen dioxide (NO2, a brownish gas emitted by car exhausts, and particularly by diesels), ozone (a triatomic form of oxygen that irritates lungs) and soot-particles smaller than 2.5 microns across (which makes them tiny enough to get deep into the lungs). These pollutants can cause a variety of medical difficulties, including asthma, heart disease, lung cancer and stunted lung growth in children.

As the chart shows, levels of NO2 in London and Paris are routinely higher than World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines about what constitutes a long-term hazard, known as the annual average limit—and that goes, too, for particulate matter. In London, during daytime, the concentration of NO2 exceeded the WHO’s limit by 41%, on average, over the 12 months examined. In Paris, where the national index said air quality was “good” or “very good” four days out of five, our analysis found that at least one of the three main pollutants exceeded the WHO’s limit at some point almost every day.



A further problem is that setting day-to-day limits is a local matter. So, not only do they rarely take long-term risk into account, they also vary from place to place. In Britain’s index a concentration of NO2 up to five times the WHO’s annual average limit counts as “low”. America is more conservative. It draws the line at two-and-a-half times the WHO limit. Worse, in some cases there is no pretence of objectivity. The website of Belgium’s BelATMO index, for example, warns that this is “a qualitative representation” of air quality that “has little scientific meaning”.

Cities also vary in the way they present pollution data. Most do so on a scale of ten or 100, which is then segmented into four to six bands labelled low, moderate and so on. Some places draw the line between “low” and “moderate” at the level at which pollution starts to cause immediate health effects, reserving the red band for smog that severely affects most people. Others divide the scale into equal chunks, each representing the same additional daily risk of dying or being admitted to hospital because of pollution.



INTERACTIVE: From CO2 to GHG, which countries have the highest emissions?

Official indices also fail to capture patterns of variation within a day. These can be important—and people might be able to modify their behaviour if they understood them. Our analysis suggests, for example, that Parisians who head out for work at 9am and return at 6pm could reduce their average daily commuting intake of NO2 by 16% by travelling both ways an hour earlier. Going two hours earlier would cut the intake by 28%.

Weekly cycles also exist. Parents in Brussels and Paris might be wise to schedule their children’s indoor activities, such as swimming lessons, on Saturdays and outdoor stuff like football practice on Sundays. That is because, during daytime hours, the concentration of NO2 in those cities was, on average, about 20% lower on Sundays. In Amsterdam it was 16% lower. In all three places, fine-particle pollution also fell on Sundays, as did ozone in the summer months.

The best pollution advice of all to people in these cities, though, is: move to America. In New York, levels of NO2 were 20% below the WHO limit, and that is pretty typical of places in the United States, where diesels are less common than in Europe. As the inscription under the Statue of Liberty has it, “Give me your...huddled masses, yearning to breathe free.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21702743-air-quality-indices-make-pollution-seem-less-bad-it-breathtaking/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The ancient atmosphere

Time capsules

A new way to chart the rise of oxygen

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



OXYGEN makes up a fifth of the atmosphere (20.9%, to be precise), but that has not always been so. For the first 2 billion years of Earth’s existence, before photosynthetic organisms became common, there was no chemically uncombined oxygen in the air at all. Even after that, the gas remained scarce for hundreds of millions of years. By 575m years ago, however—which was when animals whose dimensions are measured in centimetres rather than microns appear—there must have been enough oxygen around to support their respiration. The usual guess is that the gas’s levels began to rise about 700m years ago. But a guess it is.

Now, Nigel Blamey of Brock University, in Ontario, Canada, has brought some evidence to bear on the question. His study, just published in Geology, is the first to measure directly the composition of samples of air from this ancient time. They were trapped in rock salt from the Officer Basin in south-western Australia, laid down by the evaporation of seawater between 830m and 800m years ago.

Previous estimates of oxygen’s past abundance have been made indirectly. In particular, the gas’s appearance in the atmosphere is dated to 2.5 billion years ago because that is when fossil stromatolites (small, rocky knolls built by photosynthesising bacteria; modern versions are pictured above), and also rocks called banded-iron formations, become common. Banded-iron formations, as their name suggests, are full of rust. Rust is formed by the reaction of iron with oxygen.

Dr Blamey thought he could do better than such indirect evidence. He chose rock salt (“halite”, to give its geological name) because its crystals often trap tiny pockets of the brine it is precipitating from, and this brine contains dissolved air. Such inclusions have been used to study the calcium, magnesium and potassium present in ancient seawater. Dr Blamey suspected they might also be employed to glimpse past atmospheres. The risk was that the composition of the trapped gas might change over the millennia. So he did a series of experiments to make sure that it does not.

First, he studied nitrogen, oxygen and argon concentrations in the cavities of modern halite, choosing crystals that had formed between two and seven years ago in New Mexico and Australia. The gas in these matched today’s atmosphere, so the actual process of trapping does not seem to affect its composition. Then Christophe Lecuyer, a colleague at the University of Lyon, in France, collected 6m-year-old halite from a mine in Sicily and 100m-year-old halite from a mine in Cretaceous rocks in China. The air in the Sicilian samples more or less matched modern air—which agrees with other evidence that the atmosphere has not changed a great deal in the past 6m years. The Chinese samples, by contrast, suggest oxygen made up 25.8% of the Cretaceous atmosphere. Again, this agrees with the palaeontological consensus, which is that the air the dinosaurs breathed contained more oxygen than does today’s.

Now convinced the method worked, Dr Blamey and his colleagues applied it to the Australian samples. These indicate that the air around when they were laid down was 10.9% oxygen. While this is only half modern values, it is five times more than predicted—suggesting the rise of oxygen to levels similar to today’s began a good deal earlier than had been believed.

This has implications for theories about the evolution of animals. The need to respire means abundant oxygen is a necessary precondition for large animals to come into existence. Many palaeontologists, however, have gone further, and seen it as a sufficient one. They think of unicellular creatures straining, as it were, on an evolutionary leash, waiting for there to be enough of the gas to support the big bodies multicellularity can create. Yet, though a few multicellular animals do predate 575m years ago, all those discovered so far are microscopic. It therefore looks as if sufficient oxygen was available to support big bodies for hundreds of million of years before evolution took advantage of it.

Why oxygen levels rose when they did is a separate question, and one Dr Blamey’s result does not address directly. But his method’s precision means that if other halite deposits of appropriate age can be found and tested, it might be possible to build a detailed graph of the gas’s rise—and that, in turn, may lead to explanations that currently elude the field’s practitioners.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21702742-new-way-chart-rise-oxygen-time-capsules/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




American foreign policy: Playing it long

The Olympic games: Fanfare

American fiction: Mean girls

Jazz in the 21st century: Playing outside the box

Johnson: Liberal blues





Articles Sections Next

American foreign policy

Playing it long



A new book argues that Barack Obama’s grand strategy has made America stronger both at home and abroad. Not everyone will agree

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



The Long Game: How Obama Defied Washington and Redefined America’s Role in the World. By Derek Chollet. PublicAffairs; 247 pages; $26.99 and £17.99.

WHEN Barack Obama comes to write his memoirs they will no doubt be an elegantly persuasive account of the ideas that guided his presidency. Until then “The Long Game”, Derek Chollet’s apologia for what he sees as Mr Obama’s distinctive approach to grand strategy, is likely to be the closest that anyone will come to understanding the thinking behind a foreign policy that has many critics.

Having served in senior positions in the State Department, the National Security Council and the Pentagon, Mr Chollet has been close to the action throughout the Obama years. His contention is that the foreign-policy establishment in Washington (of which he admits to having been a “card-carrying member for over two decades”) has underestimated the extent of Mr Obama’s achievement. Policymakers at home lambast Mr Obama for having overlearned the lessons of Iraq, for his extreme caution and aversion to the use of America’s hard power in support of global order and for an unwillingness to shoulder the burdens of leadership, which has dismayed allies and emboldened foes.

Meanwhile, detractors on the left have been horrified by his cold-blooded use of drones to kill America’s enemies, his commitment to a costly nuclear modernisation programme and his bombing of more countries than George W. Bush. So which is he, asks Mr Chollet: a woolly-headed liberal idealist or an unsentimental realist?

The answer, of course, is neither. Mr Chollet argues that Mr Obama is misunderstood because he likes to play what the author calls the “long game”. The book portrays the president as trying to be Warren Buffett in a foreign-policy debate dominated by day traders. He has an unwavering view of what is in America’s long-term interests and refuses to be forced by impatient demands for action to intervene in ways that may be temporarily satisfying but have little prospect of success at acceptable cost.

To this end, Mr Chollet argues that Mr Obama has formulated what amounts to a long-game checklist, a series of principles that should be applied to managing American power and making strategic choices. The first of these is balance: balance between interests and values, between priorities at home and abroad, between declared goals in different parts of the world, and between how much America should take on and how much should be borne by allies. And balance in the use of the whole toolbox—military power, diplomacy, economic leverage, development. Mr Chollet contrasts this with the lack of balance Mr Obama inherited from Mr Bush: a tanking economy, over 150,000 troops deployed in two wars and sagging American prestige.

The other key principles of the Obama checklist are: sustainability (avoid commitments that cost too much to stick with); restraint (ask not what America can do but what it should do); precision (wield a scalpel rather than a hammer); patience (give policies the time and effort to work); fallibility (be realistic about the chances of failure and modest about what you can achieve); scepticism (interrogate the issues and beware those peddling easy answers to difficult questions); exceptionalism (the recognition that because of its enormous power and attachment to universal values America has a unique responsibility to provide leadership in the world that cannot be ducked).

For Mr Chollet this mix of cautious pragmatism and cool realism finds an echo in the approach of two Republican predecessors, Dwight Eisenhower and the first George Bush, whose reputations have grown considerably since their departure from office. Mr Chollet reckons that this president’s foreign policy will look pretty good too once hindsight kicks in.

Maybe. But eminently sensible though the checklist appears to be, rather than setting the appropriate conditions for action, it can also be used as a way to do too little, too late. By and large, Mr Obama managed to get right his policies towards China (the “rebalancing” towards Asia was timely and has been quite effective) and Russia (the “reset” of the first term delivered some benefits; when Vladimir Putin annexed Crimea and opted for confrontation with the West, Mr Obama responded accordingly). But in Afghanistan, Iraq and, most of all, in Syria, the Obama doctrine—let us call it that—has had terrible consequences.

In Afghanistan, Mr Obama’s long-debated troop surge was fatally undermined when he announced that American forces would start to come home within 18 months. He repeated the error in May 2014, saying that the residual American force in Afghanistan would be fully withdrawn by the end of 2016. He has had to reverse that foolish promise. But by setting timetables for forced reductions unconnected to conditions on the ground, Mr Obama has given encouragement to the Taliban and left Afghan forces cruelly exposed.

Mr Obama’s decision to pull all American forces out of Iraq at the end of 2011 was even more disastrous. He used the excuse of the difficulty of negotiating a new status-of-forces agreement with the Iraqis to do what he wanted to do anyway. Had a few thousand American troops been left in Iraq, Mr Obama and his team would have known much more about the Maliki government’s subversion of the US-trained and US-equipped Iraqi security forces and would have had some leverage to prevent it. A direct result of Mr Obama’s insouciance was the emergence of Islamic State in 2014 as an organisation able to take and hold Iraqi cities.

In Syria the catalogue of errors is far too long to enumerate. But Mr Obama’s extreme reluctance to do anything to help the moderate rebels (while there still were some) and his failure to punish the regime for crossing his previously declared red line on the use of chemical weapons were turning points that contributed to the scale of the catastrophe. Mr Chollet is reluctant to blame Mr Obama, but he was among those arguing for the president to take a different course of action.

The one unambiguous policy success that Mr Obama’s long game can claim is the nuclear deal with Iran. Patient diplomacy and the building of international support for a crippling sanctions regime, combined with the credible threat of military action if all else failed, resulted in an agreement that has effectively dealt with worries about Iran getting a bomb for the next decade or so. If the deal holds, it will be the defining achievement of the Obama doctrine. But not every problem can be approached in the same painstaking, deliberative way.

The president is far from being the feckless wuss portrayed by his critics. But nor is he the master of grand strategy that Mr Chollet makes him out to be. His contempt for the interventionist excesses of his predecessor, his suspicion of arguments to “do more”, his arrogant disdain for military advice and his ingrained pessimism about the utility of hard power have had the effect of reducing America’s capacity to do good in a bad world. If Hillary Clinton succeeds him, she is likely to provide a modest but welcome corrective. If Donald Trump is the next president, Mr Obama and his long game, whatever its defects, will be sorely missed.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21702733-new-book-argues-barack-obamas-grand-strategy-has-made-america-stronger-both-home/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Olympic games

Fanfare

A sobering history of how the Olympic games evolved

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition

First of the big spenders

The Games: A Global History of the Olympics. By David Goldblatt. W.W. Norton; 516 pages; $29.95. Macmillan; £20.

IN 1892, Baron de Coubertin, a French educator and historian, called for the restoration of the Olympic games, hoping that they would promote peace and also help achieve his decidedly conservative political aims. De Coubertin considered the games a way to promote ideals of manliness. He argued that women’s sport was “the most unaesthetic sight human eyes could contemplate” and that the games should be reserved for men.

The Olympics have always been intertwined with politics, as David Goldblatt shows in an elegant and ambitious new study. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) has never wavered from its underlying conservatism. Taiwan preserved its place in the Olympics far longer than it did in the United Nations. Ludicrously, the IOC maintained the “hypocritical and ultimately forlorn” pretence of amateurism until 1988—even as Soviet athletes were amateurs in name only. And from 1928 until 1968, there were no women’s races of more than 200 metres because it made them look too tired. It took until 1984 for women to make up one-fifth of competing athletes.

If the Olympics have been a force for wider good, this has often been in spite of the IOC rather than because of it. In Mexico City in 1968, Tommie Smith and John Carlos, two African-American athletes who had just won medals in the 200 metres, gave the Black Power salute. Avery Brundage, the American president of the IOC, ordered the delegation to expel the athletes. They did. South Africa had been excluded from the Olympics in 1964 because of its apartheid policy, but in 1968 the IOC at first gave the nation the all-clear, before protests forced it to back down.

At every turn, the Olympics has allowed itself to be manipulated by governments, including appalling regimes. Ahead of the 1936 games in Berlin, the chairman of the American Olympic Committee concluded that there was no case for a boycott as there was no discrimination in German sport. Nazi Germany, which had initially been reluctant to play host, soon realised the huge potential benefits: it is estimated that more was spent on the Berlin games than all the previous Olympics combined. Adolf Hitler and the Nazi entourage attended every day. More recently, the IOC has allowed governments to hide their problems from view during the games—after Atlanta submitted its bid for the 1996 games, homeless people were even locked up—and to trample over the rights of their citizens. Construction before the Beijing games in 2008 forced more than 1m people out of their homes.

In crude financial terms, hosting is a disaster: the 2004 games in Athens cost the Greek government about $16 billion (about 5% of the government’s total debt) and the swimming complex remains unused. Mr Goldblatt reckons that, of the 17 Olympic tournaments held between the second world war and 2012, only the one in Los Angeles, in 1984, actually made a profit. Moreover, the idea that the games makes a host nation more athletic has no foundation. In Britain, fewer people do sport now than did before the Olympics in 2012. Little wonder, then, that a “Nolympics” movement has built up, made of protesters against hosting the games.

Another dark side of the sport can be seen in the way athletes, often at the behest of their national Olympic committees, have used performance-enhancing drugs. This kind of cheating began in the 1930s, if not earlier, though the IOC did not introduce drug testing until 1968. As the recent Russian doping scandal highlights, drug use remains all too prevalent. So far, this has not undermined the popularity of the games. In 1912 de Coubertin created a poetry contest and chose as the winner a poem he had written himself, which included the words, “O sport you are justice!” His view of the Olympics was never accurate; now the games seem more imperilled than ever.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21702736-sobering-history-how-olympic-games-evolved-fanfare/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

American fiction

Mean girls

A great summer read

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



The Girls. By Emma Cline. Random House; 355 pages; $27. Chatto & Windus; £12.99.

IN AN essay called “The White Album” Joan Didion once wrote: “Many people…believe that the Sixties ended abruptly on August 9, 1969.” Indeed for some, the night of the Manson murders, which were orchestrated by Charles Manson, a charismatic cult leader, and then violently acted out by his “family” of followers, marked the brutal end to a decade of peace and freedom. But to others, the murders were instead a symbol for 1960s America, emblematic of the Vietnam war, growing social unrest and the psychosis of the times.

Since then, people’s fascination with the Manson crimes has far from diminished. For Emma Cline, a young American writer born long after the killings, the legacy of the Manson murders hangs heavy in the air of her debut, “The Girls”. A compelling novel, it traces one teenage girl’s summer spent in a Californian cult (not unlike that of the Manson clan), exploring how the ties of sisterhood can inextricably unite—and divide—adolescent girls for ever.

Bought as part of a three-book deal reportedly worth $2m, “The Girls” has been hailed as one of the year’s most anticipated fiction releases. But be warned: Ms Cline’s retelling is far from a straightforward fictionalisation of the murders. The nuanced and deeply drawn character study of teenage ennui and anger charts how Evie Boyd, the 14-year-old protagonist, becomes dangerously entangled in the sisterhood of this cultish group. Ms Cline delves into the vulnerability and anxiety of a teenage girl, showing how Evie finds herself edging closer and closer to unthinkable violence all in an attempt to keep her newfound bond with “the girls” of the family.

In luminous prose, the novel maps Evie’s obsessive psyche, demonstrating her hunger to be accepted by the other girls, especially the family’s ringleader, Suzanne. With its beguiling tale of adolescent angst, played out against a retelling of one of the most infamous murders in American history, “The Girls” is a compelling and startling new work of fiction. Ms Cline brilliantly shows how far adolescent loneliness can push a girl in her desire to be loved.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21702738-great-summer-read-mean-girls/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Jazz in the 21st century

Playing outside the box

The new sound of summer

Jul 30th 2016 | LOS ANGELES, MONTREAL and NEW YORK | From the print edition

Hell of a wardrobe

“JAZZ isn’t dead,’’ Frank Zappa once said, “it just smells funny.” If he were around today, Zappa might point to the music of a London-based trio, The Comet Is Coming, with its curious scent. At the Montreal International Jazz Festival earlier this month, the fiery saxophone of Shabaka Hutchings, Dan Leavers’s pulsating synthesiser and Maxwell Hallett’s arresting percussion dazzled an audience with its mash-up of jazz and cosmic sounds. Halfway through the show, some entranced listeners rose from their seats and danced to a tune perfect for a rave. The trio calls its music “apocalyptic space funk”. More important, Mr Leavers adds, is the group’s goal: like a comet it “travels through distant galaxies exploring musical concepts”.

Jazz is evolving with the help of a new breed of musicians who are creating an innovative sound that challenges convention and defies categorisation. After originating from the streets and clubs of New Orleans in the late 1800s, the art form produced subgenres such as Dixieland, Afro-Cuban jazz, swing and bebop. Along the way, some purists scolded experimenters for straying from well-established categories. But rebels have always emerged to create new strains of improvised music.

Today’s nonconformists and mavericks, though well grounded in jazz’s history and repertoire, also incorporate elements of hip-hop, rock or classical music into their works. YouTube and streaming services such as Spotify can often wield more influence than radio in shaping a musician’s exposure to music. Original and unique voices now abound. Vijay Iyer, a pianist and composer who was DownBeat magazine’s top jazz artist of 2012, 2015 and 2016, shines in acoustic jazz settings but also excels at electronic music and collaborates with string quartets, film-makers and poets. Makaya McCraven, an experimental Chicago-based drummer, makes some recordings by stitching together pieces of past live performances. Snarky Puppy, a quirky Grammy award-winning instrumental ensemble, incorporates funk and electronica into the jazz in its music.

While New York and New Orleans remain established centres for jazz, new voices can emerge from just about anywhere. Maurin Auxéméry, a programmer for the Montreal festival, says that London has emerged as a hotbed for edgy jazz artists such as The Comet Is Coming. ADHD, a band from Iceland, found fans in faraway places by weaving rock influences into its compositions featuring saxophone, organ and guitar. Tokyo Chutei Iki from Japan created a buzz beyond Asia with its restless ten-person (or sometimes more) baritone saxophone-only group. Some occasionally wander into the audience while playing.

Other jazz musicians such as Michael League, the bandleader of Snarky Puppy, and Robert Glasper, a pianist, believe that the current movement is giving jazz a shot in the arm. “If you don’t want jazz to change, you are putting a pillow over its face, and it’s going to die,” says Mr Glasper, whose acclaimed recording, “Black Radio” became a marker for its genre-defying blend of jazz, rhythm-and-blues and rock. Mr Glasper was destined to fuse musical influences. Besides listening to acoustic jazz as a youngster, he grew up in America’s Bible belt, playing gospel music at Baptist churches in Houston, Texas. He also performed with Roy Hargrove, a Grammy award-winning trumpeter known for his boundary-crossing ways, and has recorded with Kendrick Lamar, a popular rapper. Herbie Hancock, who influenced Mr Glasper, was so impressed with his approach to music that he hired him to produce his next recording.

Meanwhile, some music experts wonder if jazz can survive: it represents only about 1.2% of recorded and streamed albums sold (compared with the 26.8% for rock and 22.6% for hip-hop and rhythm and blues combined), according to the 2016 Nielsen Music US Mid-Year Report. Yet audience exposure for jazz artists may be a better measure of its staying power. A case in point: Kamasi Washington, a burly, soft-spoken Los Angeles-based saxophonist (pictured on previous page) who sports dashikis and robes onstage, was unknown globally until his three-CD debut recording, “The Epic”, became a bestseller and critics’ favourite in 2015. This year Mr Washington, as well as a British trio, GoGo Penguin, performed before tens of thousands of people at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, which is usually reserved for rock, hip-hop and pop stars.

Beyond the mega-festivals, many more listeners are flocking to listen to jazz groups onstage. Snarky Puppy, which once performed in small venues, can now fill a 3,000-seat auditorium. Randall Kline, founder of SFJAZZ in San Francisco, which showcases a variety of jazz styles, says that traditional and cutting-edge shows regularly fill its concert venues and the organisation’s concert subscriptions have quadrupled in the past four years. The new jazz may smell a bit peculiar, but audiences find its aroma pleasing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21702735-new-sound-summer-playing-outside-box/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

Liberal blues

The many meanings of liberalism

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



AMERICAN politics reached one of its quadrennial high points this month, as the two major parties met to nominate their candidates for president. Amid the hoo-hah, one word was curiously in abeyance. “Liberalism” is disappearing in America—and elsewhere.

Once “liberalism” was the proud banner of the Democrats—and the bogeyman of Republicans. Pat Buchanan, an insurgent Republican conservative, declared a “cultural war” against “liberals and radicals” in a rousing convention speech in 1992. Frank Luntz, a Republican consultant, advised Republicans to use words like “liberal”, “sick”, “corrupt” and “traitors” together, to tarnish the Democrats.

Older liberals still embrace the term: Paul Krugman, an economist, blogs for the New York Times under the banner “The Conscience of a Liberal”, and Thomas Frank has written a book called “Listen, Liberal” chiding Democrats for losing sight of the working class. But the young American left increasingly prefers a different label. When Hillary Clinton introduced Tim Kaine, her choice for vice-president, in an e-mail, she knew the word eager activists wanted to hear: “Tim is a lifelong fighter for progressive causes.” “Progressive” is supplanting “liberal”, with Republicans perhaps now the last remaining users of the older word, as in their oft-repeated complaint about the “liberal media” or “liberal values”.

“Liberal” has meant many different things over the course of its career. The first political liberals under that name were Spaniards who, in 1814, opposed the king’s suspension of the constitution, and the word spread from Spain to France. But it put down especially deep roots in England, associated in philosophy with John Stuart Mill and in politics with the Liberal Party. James Wilson, The Economist’s founder, was a Liberal member of Parliament in the 19th century. This liberalism, the sort that this newspaper champions, emphasises individual freedom, free markets and a limited state.

But over time the word has headed elsewhere. In French- and Spanish-speaking countries, “liberal”, now often prefixed by “neo-”, is a fighting word used with exactly the opposite meaning to that which it has in America: to describe a heartless small-government economic philosophy, and a global order in which the World Bank and International Monetary Fund boss poor countries around, forcing them to adopt market-based economic policies. In America, liberalism’s association with big, not small, government began with Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal.

In some places, the word “liberal” seems to have no meaning at all. Japan’s ruling Liberal Democratic Party is a mildly conservative and nationalist one. Russia’s party of the same name is a nakedly fascist one. Britain’s ailing Liberal Democrats and Canada’s governing Liberal Party are among the few parties to have both the “liberal” name and liberal DNA.

“Liberal”, of course, shares an etymology with “liberty” and “liberation”. But many use the latter words, while not at all being liberal: Donald Trump, scowling in Cleveland, said that he plans “to liberate our citizens from…crime and terrorism and lawlessness.” This is classic law-and-order conservatism from a man no one would confuse with any sense of the word “liberal”.

With so much confusion over the “liberal” label, alternatives have arisen. Many liberal parties’ names are plain confusing: the Danish governing party is called “Venstre”, or “Left”, though it is in fact on the liberal centre-right. In other countries, like France, the liberal party has often taken another surprising name: “Radical”, an echo of the time when limiting government really was radical.

Since the 1960s, talk in Western countries of how to divide the economic pie has yielded in part to “post-industrial” concerns like the environment and women’s rights. Parties that focus on these now typically call themselves “green”, not “liberal”. Those who prioritise privacy and the right to be left alone by the state have hived off “libertarian” from the old shared root of “liberal” and “liberty”. To add a further twist, left-libertarians sometimes call themselves, tongue in cheek, “liberaltarians”.

If it is not easy to define “liberal”, it is easy to spot its rivals, authoritarianism and fundamentalism of all kinds. Whatever the confusion over the meanings of “liberal”, one of its elements has always been optimism. Even if the word itself fades, the faith behind it will not.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21702737-many-meanings-liberalism-liberal-blues/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Geoffrey Hill: The discomfort of words





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Geoffrey Hill

The discomfort of words

Geoffrey Hill, an English poet, died on June 30th, aged 84

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS, he said, like falling in love. When Geoffrey Hill was ten years old he was given a Victorian anthology of English poetry, an award to mark his punctilious attendance at the Sunday school of his local church. It was filled with the kind of high-flown, sentimental stuff he would later scorn. But for the child of a village policeman who had left school at 13, the poetry of past lives suddenly seemed a revelation—and led to his eventual vocation.

As with all vocations, or indeed love affairs, it was often difficult. Few seemed to understand him in the beginning. At Oxford University, his first year was miserable and he had few friends. He was often wracked with “savage melancholia” and what he later realised was obsessive-compulsive disorder. The history of the place, with its portraits of evil-looking old men, initially oppressed him. While other undergraduates cavorted through their time there he stood aloof, worrying at his poems. They did not come easily: he would work on a line for weeks, like a sculptor chipping away, bit by bit, at marble.

Statesmen have known visions. And, not alone,

Artistic men prod dead men from their stone:

Some of us have heard the dead speak:

The dead are my obsession this week

While other British writers such as Philip Larkin and Donald Davie tore into the 1950s with short, plain-speaking poems inspired by the staccato of jazz and modern life, he turned instead to the past: to the England of his grandmother, a working-class woman who spent her life making nails; to Robert Southwell and Edmund Campion, 16th-century Roman Catholic martyrs he longed to have known; and to Anglo-Saxon kingdoms buried deep beneath the soil of his beloved native Worcestershire.

Nature appeared too, but was rarely comforting: “An owl plunges to its tryst / With a field-mouse in the sharp night. / My fire squeals and lies still.” Religion played its part as well: for a modern poet, he was unashamed to show his fear of the fate of his soul. Death—whether in the form of the Holocaust or earlier, English, massacres—continued to obsess him.

This made him different as well as difficult. Some loved him for it: the first publisher of his poems, in a short pamphlet when he was 20, would wake up in the night to read his work again, marvelling at its strange beauty. Several critics spent decades championing and defending his poems and his criticism; to many, he was Britain’s greatest living poet. Others dismissed him as obscure, high-flaunting and, latterly, plain incomprehensible. Spending a life in seemingly dusty academia—teaching at Leeds, Cambridge, Boston and then back at Oxford, to be Professor of Poetry from 2010 to 2015—he could appear like a figure from another age, with his white beard and broad-brimmed hats. His heroes included John Milton and Alexander Pope and, as he aged, he appeared to resemble aspects of them more and more, with his biting invective and fondness for arcane words and complicated phrases.

Rancorous, narcissistic old sod—what

makes him go on? We thought, hoped rather,

he might be dead. Too bad. So how

much more does he have of injury time?

Even friends could feel wary of him, his dark eyes sometimes glowering with a toad-like stare before he broke into laughter. His sonorous voice, shaped by a childhood illness which made him deaf in one ear, could sound as if he was admonishing his listeners. At one reading in London he bellowed “SOD OFF!”; at another, he condemned the “anarchical plutocracy” he lived in, scorning the depravity of modern society and its politics. He saw the louche, camp comic Frankie Howerd as an influence. But when he taught at Leeds he was given the nickname “Chuckles” for his apparently unrelieved gloom.

As he got older, writing came more easily. Once he would have counted himself lucky to write seven poems in a year. In his 70s he could write seven or more a week. His first books had come out only after at least five or six years of agonised revisions; now he published one every two years. When his poems were gathered into one volume in 2013 it ran to just under 1,000 pages.

Refusal to reveal

Part of the reason for the change was his health: after a heart attack in the 1980s, time appeared ever more precious to him. He would work away on an exercise bike while reading murder mysteries and wrote laboriously in longhand journals. A second marriage in 1987 to Alice Goodman, a librettist turned Anglican priest 26 years younger, was a happier reason. She introduced him to livelier modern poets, such as Frank O’Hara; he trusted her judgment more than anyone else’s. Medication for his depression, first lithium and then serotonin, seemed to inspire him further—though, when pressed, he professed it was something of a mystery as to why he could suddenly write so much.

Perhaps it was better to keep it that way. Although his later poems seemed more autobiographical, he resisted any idea of a poet revealing himself in his work. Rather, poems should be like love, expressive of something greater and yet mysterious: “Crying to the end, ‘I have not finished’.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21702700-geoffrey-hill-english-poet-died-june-30th-aged-84-discomfort-words/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Merchandise trade

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21702744/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Economic data

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21702768-economic-data-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21702765-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21702767-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Merchandise trade

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition



The volume of world merchandise trade grew by an insipid 2.7% in 2015, the fourth year in a row that it had been below 3%. China’s slowdown and recession in places like Brazil weighed on trade. Between 1990 and 2008, trade grew twice as fast as world GDP on average; last year they were roughly similar. Statistics on trade value are gloomier still. In 2015 the value of merchandise trade in current dollar terms plummeted by 13% to $16 trillion, due largely to the strong dollar and plunging commodity prices. Although merchandise trade values seemed to stabilise in the first quarter of 2016 as dollar appreciation slowed and oil prices started to recover, the outlook is still subdued.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21702766-merchandise-trade/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Jul 30th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21702759-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

TE20160731

The world this week



Politics





Business





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



Globalisation and politics: The new political divide





Abenomics: Overhyped, underappreciated





Russian dirty tricks: Doping and hacking





The parable of Yahoo: From dotcom hero to zero





Air pollution: Cleaning up the data





Letters



On Republicans, Pokémon, blood-testing, Brazil, John Cleese, Italian banks: Letters to the editor





Briefing



Globalisation and politics: Drawbridges up





United States



The Democratic convention: Bridging the torrent





On the trail: Philly special





Putin, Trump and the DNC: Signal and noise





The PGA championship: Who’ll win?





Southern living: From crop to pop





Political parties: Defining realignment





Lexington: Able Kaine





The Americas



Brazil’s Olympics: Not yet medal contenders





Bello: Cash in bin liners, please





Asia



Defending South Korea: Of missiles and melons





Politics in Indonesia: Look who’s back





Murder in Japan: Still safe





Terror in Afghanistan: Unwelcome guests





Young aborigines: Australia’s Abu Ghraib





Politics in Taiwan: A series of unfortunate events





China



Flood control: Disgorging





Jiang Zemin: Jiang of Jiang Hall





Online media: Stop the virtual presses





Middle East and Africa



Zimbabwe’s president: Comrade Bob besieged





South Africa’s local elections: Young rivals





Nigeria’s struggling states: Running out of road





The Arab League: A new low





The Saudi bombardment of Yemen: Worse than the Russians





Water in the West Bank: Nor yet a drop to drink





Europe



France’s response to terrorism: Loss of faith





How Germans handle terror: Pure reason





A shock for NATO: Defend me maybe





Catholic youth in Poland: Cross purposes





Charlemagne: Correspondence club





Britain



The impact of free trade: Collateral damage





Northern Ireland after Brexit: Frontier spirit





Women in politics: The struggle continues





Commuter hell: Going south





Brexit and public services: Somebody call a doctor





Drug-testing at music festivals: Cocaine or concrete?





Bagehot: Rage against the dying of the light





International



Pope Francis: Hearts, minds and souls





Business



Verizon buys Yahoo: Does it ad up?





Rare diseases: Fixing fate





Corporate governance: Change, or else





Telecoms: Hans free





Electric cars in China: Charging ahead





Companies’ green strategies: In the thicket of it





Schumpeter: Not-so-clever contracts





Finance and economics



Japan’s economy: Three-piece dream suit





Buttonwood: Putting it all on red





The Federal Reserve: Staying its hand





Road taxes in Europe: Not easy being green





Private share sales: Trading places





Free exchange: A hire power





Economics brief



Financial stability: Minsky’s moment





Science and technology



Printed electronics: On a roll





Air pollution: Breathtaking





The ancient atmosphere: Time capsules





Books and arts



American foreign policy: Playing it long





The Olympic games: Fanfare





American fiction: Mean girls





Jazz in the 21st century: Playing outside the box





Johnson: Liberal blues





Obituary



Obituary: Geoffrey Hill: The discomfort of words





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Merchandise trade





Markets





