The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Special report: The Arab world

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week





Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



Rodrigo Duterte won the presidential election in the Philippines in a landslide victory over Mar Roxas, a former member of the cabinet of the outgoing president, Benigno Aquino. Mr Duterte had been the mayor of Davao, a city in the southern island of Mindanao, where he waged a controversial anti-corruption campaign. He once asserted that suspected criminals should be killed if need be. See article.

Bangladesh executed Motiur Rahman Nizami, who headed the country’s largest Islamist party. He was convicted for war crimes committed during the independence war against Pakistan in 1971, but critics claim his trial was not fair. See article.

A four-star general in North Korea who was thought to have been executed earlier this year has apparently resurfaced. In February South Korea reported that General Ri Yong-gil had been executed in a purge by the regime, but pictures from the North’s state media this week showed him in uniform with three stars, suggesting the lucky general had instead been demoted.

The White House announced that Barack Obama will visit Hiroshima, the first American president to do so. He is going to the Japanese city to promote his goal of reducing stockpiles of nuclear weapons.

On the refugee front line

Werner Faymann stepped down as the chancellor of Austria. He had been in power since 2008, but faced criticism from within his party, the Social Democrats, for the country’s increasingly hard line on refugees. The far-right Freedom Party is ahead in the polls in the run-off for the federal presidency, a mostly ceremonial role. See article.

Ahead of new elections in Spain on June 26th, Podemos, a far-left movement, announced that it would form a parliamentary pact with United Left, the former communist party. “We want to agree on a government for progressive change,” said Pablo Iglesias, the leader of Podemos.

After weeks of protests against France’s controversial new labour laws, François Hollande, the president, forced through the reforms without a parliamentary vote. See article.

The Italian parliament voted in favour of civil unions for gay couples. Italy was the last big Western democracy not to have any legal recognition of same-sex partnerships.



Sadiq Khan, a British-born Muslim of Pakistani descent, won London’s mayoral election with over 50% of the vote. The battle between the Labour man and his Conservative rival was marred by a pernicious attempt to link Mr Khan to Islamic extremism. Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential candidate, said he would make an “exception” for the mayor to his proposed ban on Muslims entering America. Mr Khan dismissed the offer. See article.

In other elections in Britain, the Conservatives surged to replace Labour as the second party in Scotland behind the nationalist SNP, which lost its majority rule. In Wales the right-wing anti-Europe UK Independence Party claimed seven seats, their first ever in the Welsh Assembly. In England Labour avoided the drubbing that was expected in council elections. It still lost seats, though not as many as the ruling Tories.

After making a gaffe by naming two fantastically corrupt” countries before an open microphone (and the queen), David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, used the ensuing publicity to promote an anti-corruption summit being held in London. One of his proposals is a crackdown on foreign ownership of British property held by shell companies using illegally acquired money.

Back with a vengeance

At least 90 people were killed in three separate car-bomb attacks in Baghdad. The worst hit a crowded market-place in Sadr City, a strongly Shia area of the Iraqi capital.

In a possible sign of reconciliation, the warring sides in Yemen agreed to a prisoner swap, to take place in the next three weeks.

The World Health Organisation said that an outbreak of yellow fever has killed 277 people in Angola since December. An article in the Journal of the American Medical Association warned that the mosquito-borne disease could spread to other continents. See here and here.

Crunch time

Brazil’s Senate voted to impeach the country’s president, Dilma Rousseff, on charges that she manipulated fiscal accounts. While the impeachment trial is being conducted the vice-president, Michel Temer, will take over as president. If the Senate votes to convict Ms Rousseff by a two-thirds majority, Mr Temer will serve out her term. See article.

Panama said that it will temporarily close its border with Colombia to bar Cuban migrants from crossing over. Some 3,500 Cubans attempting to migrate to the United States are stuck in Panama after Costa Rica blocked them from proceeding further.



A forest fire forced 90,000 people to flee their homes in Fort McMurray, which serves as the base for oil firms that work the tar sands in the western Canadian province of Alberta. The fire covered more than 220,000 hectares and forced some firms to suspend production, prompting economists to lower their projections of Canada’s GDP growth for the second quarter of 2016. See article.

She’s got it, but…

Hillary Clinton lost another primary to Bernie Sanders in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination. Her defeat in West Virginia is the latest in a state where black and Hispanic voters, the mainstays of her support, form only a small part of the electorate, raising questions about Mrs Clinton’s wider appeal. See article.

In Minneapolis ten potential jurors in the trial of three Somali-Americans accused of conspiring to join Islamic State and commit murder were allowed to step down after telling the judge they could not be impartial in the case. One of the jurors said she felt “uncomfortable” being in the same room as the accused, who were arrested by the FBI.

A survey of American military personnel found that Donald Trump was the preferred presidential candidate among people on active duty. Support for him was twice that for the Democratic front-runner, Hillary Clinton. On a negative note for both, over a fifth said they would rather not vote in November if the choice was between the two.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21698718-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Saudi Arabia replaced Ali al-Naimi as oil minister. He had been in the job for 20 years and was instrumental in refusing to cut oil production, even as prices fell, in order to protect the kingdom’s market share. His successor, Khalid al-Falih, is chairman at Aramco, the state oil company, which is expected to launch an IPO this year. See article.

The disruption to the oil industry caused by last year’s plunge in the oil price was described as a “double-edged sword” by Emirates Airline, which reported its annual earnings for the year to March 31st. Cheaper fuel helped Emirates, which is based in Dubai, to increase net profit to $1.9 billion, but its chairman said the turmoil in oil markets was proving a “bane” for business confidence.

Nissan agreed to take a 34% stake in Mitsubishi Motors for $2.2 billion. The alliance between the two Japanese carmakers will give Nissan access to Mitsubishi’s extensive market in Asia, and help shore up Mitsubishi as it contends with the fallout from admitting that it had cheated on fuel-efficiency tests since at least 1991. Mitsubishi’s share price, which has slumped by half since mid-April, soared on news of the deal.

The hard shoulder

Takata, a Japanese maker of air bags linked to at least ten deaths in America after rupturing in cars, reported an annual loss of ¥13 billion ($109m). It had only recently estimated a profit. But America’s road-safety agency has recalled up to another 40m cars fitted with the air bags in addition to the 29m that may pose a risk.

Credit Suisse reported another quarterly net loss, of SFr302m ($304m) for the first three months of the year. The Swiss bank is restructuring to refocus on its private bank and away from the more volatile business of investment banking. It cheered markets by reporting signs of progress in that regard, such as SFr14 billion in net new money inflows to wealth management. Tidjane Thiam, the chief executive, said the bank had managed to steer relatively unscathed through “some of the most difficult markets on record” in the first quarter.

Lending Club, an online peer-to-peer lender, saw its share price plummet by 35% when Renaud Laplanche, its founder and chief executive, abruptly resigned. This came after the company acknowledged, among other things, that a sale of $22m of loans to an investment firm had contravened agreed criteria. An audit committee found that the dates on the loans had been changed by a “senior manager” at the company. See article.

A court case to determine the mental competence of Sumner Redstone, the 92-year-old media tycoon who owns controlling stakes in CBS and Viacom, was thrown out. The case was brought by a former girlfriend whom Mr Redstone had cut out of his will and stopped from making decisions about his health care. The judge threw out the case when Mr Redstone said he wanted his daughter to look after him. But the ruling did not touch on his mental fitness to perform his business duties, which worries investors.

The proposed $6 billion merger of Staples and Office Depot collapsed, when a judge sided with the Federal Trade Commission in finding that combining the two stationery suppliers would lead to higher prices for companies that buy their office products in bulk.

Voters in Austin rejected a ballot measure sponsored by Uber and Lyft that would have overturned city rules requiring fingerprint-based background checks for their drivers. The two app-based taxi firms say the system they use is more efficient. After losing the vote the pair decided to halt operations in the Texan city, which some derided as sour grapes. In New York, Uber agreed that negotiations over terms for drivers could be conducted through a new union-associated guild.

The European Commission blocked CK Hutchison, a telecoms company based in Hong Kong, from buying O2, a mobile-phone operator in Britain that is owned by Telefónica of Spain. The commission said the £10 billion ($14.4 billion) deal would reduce customer choice and result in higher prices. CK Hutchison, which already owns Three, another operator in Britain, expressed disappointment and indicated that it would appeal against the decision.

Make America great again



In a nod to the presidential election, Budweiser, which is owned by Anheuser-Busch InBev, a Belgian-Brazilian brewing giant, said it would emblazon “America” on its beer cans between late May and the vote in November. The rebranding is part of Budweiser’s campaign theme that “America is in Your Hands”. Whose hands, and whether they are adequately sized, is an entirely separate matter.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21698714-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21698716-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Leaders





The breakdown of Arab states: The war within

An election in the Philippines: The dangers of Duterte Harry

Yellow fever: A preventable tragedy

Second homes: Stay away

Banks and state aid: The rule of flaw





Articles Sections Next

The breakdown of Arab states

The war within

Europe and America made mistakes, but the misery of the Arab world is caused mainly by its own failures

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN Sir Mark Sykes and François Georges-Picot secretly drew their lines on the map of the Levant to carve up the Ottoman empire in May 1916, at the height of the first world war, they could scarcely have imagined the mess they would set in train: a century of imperial betrayal and Arab resentment; instability and coups; wars, displacement, occupation and failed peacemaking in Palestine; and almost everywhere oppression, radicalism and terrorism.

In the euphoria of the uprisings in 2011, when one awful Arab autocrat after another was toppled, it seemed as if the Arabs were at last turning towards democracy. Instead their condition is more benighted than ever. Under Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt is even more wretched than under the ousted dictator, Hosni Mubarak. The state has broken down in Iraq, Syria, Libya and Yemen. Civil wars rage and sectarianism is rampant, fed by the contest between Iran and Saudi Arabia. The jihadist “caliphate” of Islamic State (IS), the grotesque outgrowth of Sunni rage, is metastasising to other parts of the Arab world.

Bleak as all this may seem, it could become worse still. If the Lebanese civil war of 1975-90 is any gauge, the Syrian one has many years to run. Other places may turn ugly. Algeria faces a leadership crisis; the insurgency in Sinai could spread to Egypt proper; chaos threatens to overwhelm Jordan; Israel could be drawn into the fights on its borders; low oil prices are destabilising Gulf states; and the proxy conflict between Saudi Arabia and Iran might lead to direct fighting.

All this is not so much a clash of civilisations as a war within Arab civilisation. Outsiders cannot fix it—though their actions could help make things a bit better, or a lot worse. First and foremost, a settlement must come from Arabs themselves.

Beware of easy answers

Arab states are suffering a crisis of legitimacy. In a way, they have never got over the fall of the Ottoman empire. The prominent ideologies—Arabism, Islamism and now jihadism—have all sought some greater statehood beyond the frontiers left by the colonisers. Now that states are collapsing, Arabs are reverting to ethnic and religious identities. To some the bloodletting resembles the wars of the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. Others find parallels with the religious strife of Europe’s Thirty Years War in the 17th century. Whatever the comparison, the crisis of the Arab world is deep and complex. Facile solutions are dangerous. Four ideas, in particular, need to be repudiated.

First, many blame the mayhem on Western powers—from Sykes-Picot to the creation of Israel, the Franco-British takeover of the Suez Canal in 1956 and repeated American interventions. Foreigners have often made things worse; America’s invasion of Iraq in 2003 released its sectarian demons. But the idea that America should turn away from the region—which Barack Obama seems to embrace—can be as destabilising as intervention, as the catastrophe in Syria shows.

Lots of countries have blossomed despite traumatic histories: South Korea and Poland—not to mention Israel. As our special report sets out, the Arab world has suffered from many failures of its own making. Many leaders were despots who masked their autocracy with the rhetoric of Arab unity and the liberation of Palestine (and realised neither). Oil money and other rents allowed rulers to buy loyalty, pay for oppressive security agencies and preserve failing state-led economic models long abandoned by the rest of the world.

A second wrong-headed notion is that redrawing the borders of Arab countries will create more stable states that match the ethnic and religious contours of the population. Not so: there are no neat lines in a region where ethnic groups and sects can change from one village or one street to the next. A new Sykes-Picot risks creating as many injustices as it resolves, and may provoke more bloodshed as all try to grab land and expel rivals. Perhaps the Kurds in Iraq and Syria will go their own way: denied statehood by the colonisers and oppressed by later regimes, they have proved doughty fighters against IS. For the most part, though, decentralisation and federalism offer better answers, and might convince the Kurds to remain within the Arab system. Reducing the powers of the central government should not be seen as further dividing a land that has been unjustly divided. It should instead be seen as the means to reunite states that have already been splintered; the alternative to a looser structure is permanent break-up.

A third ill-advised idea is that Arab autocracy is the way to hold back extremism and chaos. In Egypt Mr Sisi’s rule is proving as oppressive as it is arbitrary and economically incompetent. Popular discontent is growing. In Syria Bashar al-Assad and his allies would like to portray his regime as the only force that can control disorder. The contrary is true: Mr Assad’s violence is the primary cause of the turmoil. Arab authoritarianism is no basis for stability. That much, at least, should have become clear from the uprisings of 2011.

The fourth bad argument is that the disarray is the fault of Islam. Naming the problem as Islam, as Donald Trump and some American conservatives seek to do, is akin to naming Christianity as the cause of Europe’s wars and murderous anti-Semitism: partly true, but of little practical help. Which Islam would that be? The head-chopping sort espoused by IS, the revolutionary-state variety that is decaying in Iran or the political version advocated by the besuited leaders of Ennahda in Tunisia, who now call themselves “Muslim democrats”? To demonise Islam is to strengthen the Manichean vision of IS. The world should instead recognise the variety of thought within Islam, support moderate trends and challenge extremists. Without Islam, no solution is likely to endure.

Reform or perish

All this means that resolving the crisis of the Arab world will be slow and hard. Efforts to contain and bring wars to an end are important. This will require the defeat of IS, a political settlement to enfranchise Sunnis in Iraq and Syria, and an accommodation between Iran and Saudi Arabia. It is just as vital to promote reform in countries that have survived the uprisings. Their rulers must change or risk being cast aside. The old tools of power are weaker: oil will remain cheap for a long time and secret policemen cannot stop dissent in a networked world.

Kings and presidents thus have to regain the trust of their people. They will need “input” legitimacy: giving space to critics, whether liberals or Islamists, and ultimately establishing democracy. And they need more of the “output” variety, too: strengthening the rule of law and building productive economies able to thrive in a globalised world. That means getting away from the rentier system and keeping cronies at bay.

America and Europe cannot impose such a transformation. But the West has influence. It can cajole and encourage Arab rulers to enact reforms. And it can help contain the worst forces, such as IS. It should start by supporting the new democracy of Tunisia and political reforms in Morocco—the European Union should, for example, open its markets to north African products. It is important, too, that Saudi Arabia opens its society and succeeds in its reforms to wean itself off oil. The big prize is Egypt. Right now, Mr Sisi is leading the country to disaster, which would be felt across the Arab world and beyond; by contrast, successful liberalisation would lift the whole region.

Without reform, the next backlash is only a matter of time. But there is also a great opportunity. The Arabs could flourish again: they have great rivers, oil, beaches, archaeology, youthful populations, a position astride trade routes and near European markets, and rich intellectual and scientific traditions. If only their leaders and militiamen would see it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698652-europe-and-america-made-mistakes-misery-arab-world-caused-mainly-its-own/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

An election in the Philippines

The dangers of Duterte Harry

A return to the bad old ways under Rodrigo Duterte?

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



DURING the six years of President Benigno Aquino’s administration, the Philippines has amazed itself and others by being both boring and successful. Once South-East Asia’s chronic underachiever, with a sluggish economy and a politics that puts showmanship over substance, the Philippines belatedly took the path of other, more successful economies. It adopted policies (now there’s a novelty) and these have encouraged foreign investment, spurred spending on infrastructure and boosted consumption. Growth has been a healthy 6% a year, the best among the region’s bigger economies. Jobs have been generated—call centres in the Philippines handle many of the world’s complaints. And social spending has risen even as the national debt has come down. Now all that progress is thrown in doubt with the emphatic election as president of Rodrigo Duterte, a loudmouth pursuing a wildly populist campaign (see Briefing). After the dull-but-sound Mr Aquino, the great risk is that bad old ways are about to return.

Sadly, it’s no joke

Mr Duterte—aka “Duterte Harry” or “the Punisher”—is the long-standing mayor of the city of Davao on the troubled southern island of Mindanao. What he lacks in policymaking interest or experience he made up for during the campaign with the showmanship that had been absent from national politics. Many Filipinos loved it.

He joked about sexual exploits with mistresses and he publicly entertained rape fantasies. In a Catholic country, he made people laugh by saying of Pope Francis that “your mother’s a whore”. He treated allegations of his links to vigilante killings in Davao with pride. And when he promised that he would, as president, dump the corpses of 100,000 gangsters in Manila Bay, the crowd went wild. That claim, a promise to declare a “revolutionary government” if he cannot get his way in pushing through a vaguely defined new “federalism” for the country, plus a vow to shut down Congress if it ever tries to impeach him, are pretty much the only policies he has articulated. Little things like due process, he suggests, are for wimps.

The elites in Manila are in shock at the defeat of their candidates. But they have only themselves to blame. They always found it more pleasant to take the case for liberalisation to Davos than to the millions of Filipinos, especially in the provinces, who have missed out on the fruits of growth. And, in their gated communities in the capital, they failed to grasp how much petty corruption and gun violence blight ordinary lives. The mayor of Davao understood.

The elite rarely mix with ordinary folk, apart from maids, chauffeurs and deferential farm hands who have worked for generations on the vast haciendas of the landowners (such as the clan the Aquinos married into). So they failed to see resentment growing at their wealth and complacency. Shortly before the election, Mr Aquino warned of a return under Mr Duterte to something like the dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos, (who put the country under martial law, tortured thousands and stole billions). Mr Aquino called on the other presidential candidates to come together to defeat Mr Duterte. They didn’t. Now they should acknowledge that the “people power” revolution in 1986 that unseated Marcos, and put Mr Aquino’s mother in power, has ossified into a self-selecting oligarchy.

Now that the oligarchy has been humbled, the question is how Mr Duterte will govern. In foreign policy his blunt style is cause for concern, at a time when extreme delicacy is needed in responding to China’s high-handed maritime claims in the South China Sea. As for the economy, Mr Duterte’s record in Davao, where he cut crime and encouraged investment, suggests that he may not be opposed to business. Indeed, unlike Donald Trump, to whom he is sometimes likened, he proposes no radical change of economic direction. Rather, he says he will hire the country’s foremost economic brains and put them in charge.

Perhaps that is why the stockmarket bounced on news of his victory. But much remains vague. He is thought to want to scrap competitive bidding for infrastructure contracts. If so, he will frighten off the foreign investment that has underpinned the Philippines’ boom. With so much uncertain, it is not clear what is to be feared more: Mr Duterte ignoring legal norms and trampling his country’s democratic institutions, or the old elite regrouping to frustrate him, inviting political chaos. The Philippines’ future risks being a mix of both.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698648-return-bad-old-ways-under-rodrigo-duterte-dangers-duterte-harry/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Yellow fever

A preventable tragedy

Africa is in the grip of one of the worst outbreaks of yellow fever in 30 years. A wider disaster threatens

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



ONE of the mysteries of epidemiology is why Asia does not suffer from yellow fever. The disease is endemic in Africa, the continent where it evolved. It is widespread in South America, having been carried there by European slave ships. It was once found in both North America and southern Europe, but it was eradicated by the application of considerable effort and money—and both places shared the good fortune of lacking monkeys, which act as reservoirs for the yellow-fever virus. Yet, although much of Asia is plagued by Aedes aegypti, the mosquito that spreads yellow fever, it remains blessedly free of infections.

It may be that Asian strains of A. aegypti are poor transmitters of yellow-fever viruses (though they have no difficulty passing on those of dengue, a related illness). It may be that surviving and recovering from dengue, which is widespread in southern Asia, confers a degree of resistance to yellow fever. Or it may be that past trade between Africa and Asia was too modest for the virus to take root. The world may soon find out. For an unplanned experiment has just started that could, if it is not nipped in the bud, spread one of the world’s nastiest diseases to its most populous continent.

Eastward, ho

The centre of events is Angola. Like many other African countries, it has endemic yellow fever (reckoned to be responsible for 80,000 African deaths a year). But in December 2015 doctors there noticed their caseload was rising and realised that they had an epidemic on their hands (see article).

This epidemic has now spread to the Democratic Republic of Congo; Angola’s other neighbours are watching nervously. A distant country that has at least as much cause to worry is China. As a result of fast-growing trade between Asia and Africa, large numbers of Chinese live in Angola. They are there, though, not as emigrants but as expatriates who expect to return home. This return has, for the first time, brought 11 cases of yellow fever to China. More will surely follow.

Other Asian countries must also be alert to the threat. A. aegypti is rife in Cambodia, India, Myanmar and Thailand (see map). With more intercontinental flights carrying travellers to and fro, the risk of an outbreak in Asia has never been higher. And A. aegypti has recent form in spreading disease to new places. The Zika virus, which it also transmits, infected more than 1m people in South America in a little over a year, from what was more or less a standing start. Should yellow fever come to Asia, some experts reckon that over 100m people living in large, well-connected cities would need to be vaccinated. That would rapidly exhaust the world’s supply of vaccine, even if only a fifth of a dose (thought to be enough to confer immunity to adults) were administered to each person who needed it. In the long term, if the disease establishes itself in Asia’s jungles, over 1 billion more people could be at risk.

That would be an unconscionable outcome—doubly so because yellow-fever vaccine is cheap and confers a lifetime of immunity. Production must be stepped up. The World Health Organisation, which has been vaccinating Africans against the disease since 2007, must now accelerate its efforts to reach the remainder who are at risk of contracting it, using the reduced dose to stretch the supply if necessary. Asian countries need fumigation plans in place to eliminate the mosquito from their cities. They must also train medical staff to administer the vaccine widely in an emergency.

The world has already failed to thwart yellow fever effectively in Africa. That threatens to put millions more lives at risk. It is time to act.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698649-africa-grip-one-worst-outbreaks-yellow-fever-30-years-wider-disaster/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Second homes

Stay away

There’s a new villain in town—at weekends and during the summer

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN owning one home seems like a struggle, resenting those with two comes easily. Second-home ownership is uncommon: in 2010 around 4% of houses in America were second homes; 1% of English homes are second properties of people living in England. But they still arouse passions.

Norway and Denmark limit second-home ownership, and in 2012 the Swiss voted to restrict second homes in places where they were most common. Australia has also clamped down on foreign purchases of residential property. Latest to the barricades is St Ives, a seaside town in south-west England, where a quarter of houses are second homes or holiday lets. On May 5th 83% of St Ives’s voting residents decided that newly built homes should be off-limits to non-residents. It is unclear if the vote is enforceable. It is certainly wrong-headed.

In some cases antipathy to second-home ownership simply reflects an ugly dislike of outsiders; in others, the NIMBYism of second-home owners themselves, keen to preserve the exclusiveness of their holiday patch. (In Switzerland the vote to ban new construction of second homes in sensitive areas was carried by urban residents of Basel, Zurich and Geneva, not the people affected.) Sometimes, too, it stems from a misguided effort to fight the facts of economic life, and stop dwindling rural populations from shrinking further. But the St Ives vote, and schemes like it, can also reflect more legitimate concerns: that ghost streets and empty houses drain local communities of life and that, as non-residents hoover up homes, housing will become unaffordable for poorer permanent residents.

Those tempted to mend the market should beware unintended consequences. Restricting the option to sell newly built properties as second homes will depress their price, discouraging development, including the new affordable housing that builders are often required to put up. And the spillover effects on the rest of the housing market could be nasty.

One risk is that the life is sucked out of the local economy as rich holidaymakers go elsewhere. Christian Hilber and Olivier Schöni of the London School of Economics have studied the effects of the Swiss reform, and their preliminary findings suggest that it depressed prices of primary residences in the affected areas by 12%. Much as locals want to climb the housing ladder, they are unlikely to welcome a less vibrant economy; and existing homeowners will resent the hit to their wealth. Another risk is that it could worsen the very “ghostification” problem it is trying to solve. If, as in St Ives, existing primary residences can easily be sold to out-of-towners, that may well boost their prices, encouraging locals to cash in and move out.

There are better answers to the problems posed by second homes. The tax system is one: the British, Dutch, French and Israeli governments all impose higher taxes on them. This makes most sense in places of extraordinary natural beauty, like the Swiss Alps or national parks, where sprawling new developments would blight the landscape.

Another brick in Cornwall

Everywhere else, the best policy is to increase supply. As long as homes are scarce, only those with deep pockets will be able to afford them. Loosening planning rules and incentivising development would keep the outsiders coming without forcing out locals. Australia has at least recognised the root of the problem by requiring foreign buyers to show that their investment will add to the existing stock. Build, don’t ban.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698651-theres-new-villain-townat-weekends-and-during-summer-stay-away/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banks and state aid

The rule of flaw

Italy has been flirting with a banking crisis—and Brussels is partly to blame

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



ATLAS could hold up the sky. Atlante, Italy’s bank-rescue fund, looks like a weakling. The fund, which raised €4.25 billion ($4.9 billion) last month, almost half of it from Italy’s two largest banks, has two purposes. One is to act as an emergency investor in banks starved of funds; the other is to kick-start a market in dud loans clogging up banks’ balance-sheets. On both counts, the fund has not done enough to calm nerves. Italy should have acted sooner to sort out its banks. But Europe’s approach to financial crises is also to blame.

Italian officials talk about the fund as a “game-changer”—partly because it has already pulled off a rescue of Banca Popolare di Vicenza (BPVi), a regional bank whose initial public offering (IPO) flopped. But that only underlines how close Italy has come to disaster. BPVi’s IPO had been fully, and foolishly, underwritten by UniCredit, Italy’s largest bank: had not the fund stepped in, UniCredit itself might have run short of capital. A banking crisis at the heart of the euro zone might by now have been raging. As it is, the BPVi’s rescue has depleted Atlante’s firepower. More calls on its cash may be imminent—an IPO by Veneto Banca hardly has investors swooning.

Defenders of Atlante pooh-pooh the critics. The fund has seen off the immediate risk of a crisis, they say, and enough money is left to put a big dent in Italy’s €360 billion of gross non-performing loans (NPLS). Specifically, Atlante is meant to help close the gap between the value that banks put on such assets and the price that investors in distressed debt will pay for them. It is supposed to accomplish this by acting as a junior investor in financial instruments that bundle banks’ bad debts together; by buying the riskiest slices of these investments, it will reduce the chance of losses for those higher up the ladder of investors. The theory is fine. But the appetite of those other investors is unproven. And as the amount of equity in Atlante goes down, so does the amount of risk it can take on.

In the meantime, it is true that the number of duff loans in the system has stabilised and that banks have set aside lots of provisions. A new bankruptcy law, by bringing down the time needed to foreclose on loans, ought to encourage investors to buy NPLs from banks. But gross non-performing loans still make up around 18% of total loans, equivalent to a fifth of Italy’s GDP. And the law applies directly only to new lending; its impact on the stock of bad loans will be more muted.

State flayed

If Atlante is an unconvincing answer to Italy’s woes, that is partly the country’s own fault. It stood by as NPLs soared. But blame also lies with Europe’s new rules for handling banking crises. Tighter restrictions on state aid have prevented Italy from setting up a government-backed “bad bank” of the kind that Spain used to cleanse its banks. In late 2015 the European Commission also ruled that tapping Italy’s deposit-insurance fund to recapitalise four troubled lenders would count as state aid. If the commission concludes that state aid has been given, it automatically means that a bank is deemed to be failing, or close to it, triggering Europe’s new “bail-in” regime. That in turn starts to hand out losses to shareholders and creditors (retail investors among them), risking contagion at other banks. Atlante exists because Italy has precious few alternatives.

The new rules are well-intentioned. State aid can distort competition; bail-in is designed to protect taxpayers from paying for bank failures. But in this instance the outcome is perverse. The Italian state is being forced, in effect, to stand back while its better banks risk being poisoned by the weaknesses of its worse ones. As a result the euro zone’s third-largest economy, and its second-largest public debtor, has been made more vulnerable to a banking crisis. Given a choice between financial stability and the rule book, ditch the rule book.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21698650-italy-has-been-flirting-banking-crisisand-brussels-partly-blame-rule-flaw/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Letters





On GDP, nuclear energy, Andrew Jackson, women and Islam, young voters: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

On GDP, nuclear energy, Andrew Jackson, women and Islam, young voters

Letters to the editor

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



Economics revision

I read with interest your briefing on “The trouble with GDP” (April 30th), which highlighted the limitations of gross domestic product as a measure of prosperity. I agree that although GDP provides a good measure of market and government economic transactions, it does not take account of many other important economic and social factors.

Since 2011 the Office for National Statistics has been developing wider measures of economic well-being. These include household “satellite accounts” that estimate the value of unpaid labour, such as volunteering and informal child care, that fall outside the scope of GDP. In 2014 the value of this activity amounted to £1 trillion ($1.65 trillion) compared with a British GDP of £1.8 trillion. We have also been publishing quarterly information on economic well-being since December 2014 that brings together a number of indicators to give a more rounded and comprehensive picture. These include net domestic product and net national disposable income per person that adjust GDP for the depreciation of assets, the net flows of profits into and out of the country and population change.

JONATHAN ATHOW

Deputy national statistician for economic statistics

London

Having seen countries magically slash excessive current-account deficits by big GDP revisions, I wish you success in finding a better assessment of prosperity. Whatever measure we end up with, multiply the growth rate by the percentage of the population that is better off financially from one year to the next. With two countries growing at 4%, the country where 75% of a population saw a blend of income and assets rise in real terms from one year to the next would report a 3% growth rate compared with 2% for the country where just half the population saw growth.

If we begin to measure economies in a way that reflects income distribution, we are more likely to see politicians motivated to pursue policies that support more inclusive growth.

MIKE HARRIS

Head of research

Renaissance Capital

London

Policymakers still focus on increasing the employment rate without giving enough attention to the quality of work that is being created. Research carried out in Scotland and Asia by Oxfam found that, when asked what they need to live well, people identify issues such as dignity, job security and meaningful work.

The move to replace GDP with a range of alternative measures is long overdue. These new measures must be aligned with a more human economy, one that genuinely reflects the public interest, from the environmental costs of transactions to whether wealth is distributed to benefit all citizens, especially those at the bottom.

Without this full picture, politicians will continue to make decisions based on flawed and partial data.

KATHERINE TREBECK

Senior researcher

Oxfam GB

Glasgow



Many years ago I was teaching economics in Peru, my native country, and I used to tell my students that a massive migration of women from poorer countries to advanced ones would result in an increase in GDP per head to both the exporting and the receiving countries. The rationale is simple: by reducing the population denominator in the poorer (exporting) country, you increase GDP per head. At the same time, the migrating young women would be hired as service maids in the receiving country, allowing wives to go to work. The salaries of the maids and the wives would boost the GDP per head in the receiving country. And this is not even counting transportation costs.

MAURICIO HERMAN

Palmetto, Florida

You could have cited Fred Hirsch’s masterful “Social Limits to Growth”, first published in 1976. If more refined measures of GDP do only a better job of accounting for the consumption of material goods and services, they will not capture the paradoxical phenomenon so sharply articulated in the book by Hirsch, a former financial editor at The Economist. I refer to “positional goods”, which bestow social status. Their implication for enhanced social welfare is primarily through the change in relative status conferred by the consumption of such goods.

JOEL DARMSTADTER

Bethesda, Maryland





Nuclear energy

* Your article on the Chernobyl explosion 30 years ago did not address the new nuclear safety risks emanating from Ukraine’s large and rapidly ageing nuclear sector (“Soviet apocalypse”, April 30th). Of the current 15 operating reactors, six will reach the end of their design lives by 2020. Amid acute power shortages, the demand pressure on nuclear generation is growing by the day. Ukraine is forced to import electricity from Russia with which it is in a proxy war. The coal-fired power plants are hamstrung by inadequate fuel supplies from the coal mines controlled by pro-Russian separatists. Natural gas supplies from Russia have been reduced to a trickle. The aging nuclear plants have thus become the lifeline of the economy and a guarantor of Ukraine’s energy security.



Amid this heavy demand pressure, there is a high risk that nuclear units with compromised safety are allowed to operate indefinitely and without proper maintenance. Current efforts, with help from Euratom and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, are focused on short-term safety upgrades, not on long-term life-time extensions. More ominously, Energoatom, the nuclear utility and market monopolist, is financially bankrupt due its huge debts and a poorly functioning, over-centralised power market with rampant non-payment. A financially weak nuclear utility is bad for nuclear safety. The company is beset by a flurry of corruption charges—the last thing you want to hear about a nuclear utility. These new security risks posed by the aging nuclear plants should be addressed now both by Ukraine and the international community before again it’s too late.



ISTVAN DOBOZI

Former Lead Energy Economist of the World Bank

Gaithersburg, Maryland





In praise of Jackson

You were rather hard on Andrew Jackson (“Not going to Jackson”, April 23rd). Yes, he was ruthless in removing native Americans from some states and yes, he was an unapologetic slaveholder. But his victory against the British in New Orleans in 1815 made it clear that the United States could not be successfully invaded. As president, Jackson almost single-handedly stood down South Carolina in the nullification crisis and thus kept our country from unravelling in the generation before the civil war. He also vetoed the rechartering of the second Bank of the United States, which established that a private group could not operate under the government to control the economy.

We are far away from the world of Andrew Jackson. What can we make of a man who clubbed a man who tried to shoot him to the ground with his cane? Grievous flaws he had, but maybe, without endorsing all his actions, we can still have some admiration for a man who did so much for his country and who in his life epitomised the values of personal loyalty, integrity and honour that were so important to early 19th-century America.

VINCENT DONATO

Yonkers, New York





The female form

The greatest achievement of Roger II’s court in Sicily was not, as you suggest, an atlas (“Land of reinvention”, April 23rd). Rather it was the promulgation of the Muslim view. To Christians a woman was a tool of Satan; to Muslims she was admirable, a thing of beauty, an ornament of creation. The Renaissance is often portrayed as a home-grown European invention. Au contraire, the freedom and fertility of 14th-century arts can be traced to the social innovations of the 13th century. The revised view of women was the true renewal of the human spirit, too often ignored in history until given visible form through works of art.

BRIAN BAYLY

Tucson, Arizona





Rock the vote

“Turning out the teens” (April 23rd) mentioned how a low turnout among the younger generation might affect the outcome of Britain’s referendum on the European Union. You noted that the vote will coincide with the start of the Glastonbury festival. I was surprised (and pleased) to see that my ticket-confirmation e-mail for Glastonbury pointed this out and provided helpful links to register for postal votes. Who says political activism is dead in modern rock music?

HELEN MCLEOD

London

* Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21698627-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next



Briefing





The Philippines: Fist of iron





Articles Sections Next

The Philippines

Fist of iron

A new strongman president may prevent the Philippines from becoming an economic star

May 14th 2016 | MANILA | From the print edition



IN A vain effort to quell the revolution that created the first, brief Philippine republic in 1899 the Spanish army executed Jose Rizal, a nationalist author, in a park that now bears his name. Almost 90 years later demonstrators, fed up with the murderous kleptocracy of President Ferdinand Marcos, massed in the same park in a display of people power that eventually pushed him into exile. On May 7th, two days before Filipinos went to the polls to choose a new leader, 250,000 people thronged Rizal Park for a rally for Rodrigo “digong” Duterte (pictured above), who promises another political upheaval.

Mr Duterte, the tough-talking mayor of Davao, triumphed on May 9th: with more than 95% of the vote counted, he holds a 15-point lead. The two runners-up have conceded defeat. His rivals were well beaten. Miriam Defensor Santiago, who has served in all three branches of government, took just 3.4% of the vote. Grace Poe, a telegenic senator with little political experience, threw in the towel on election night. Mar Roxas, a cabinet minister, finished well adrift, despite an endorsement by the outgoing president, Benigno Aquino. Jejomar Binay, Mr Aquino’s vice-president, who has faced a steady stream of corruption allegations, finished even further behind.

The country of 100m people that Mr Duterte inherits has one of the fastest-growing economies in Asia. But poverty stubbornly persists. Voters are also fed up with crumbling infrastructure, productivity sapping gridlock, persistent corruption and ineffective government. And discontent simmers at the country’s narrow, feudal politics, dominated for decades by a handful of wealthy landowning families.

Mr Duterte ran as an action man and outsider, ready to tackle the nation’s problems just as one might wring the neck of a foul snake. He has given few details. In a long, meandering speech, laced with bad language, at the rally in the park he promised only to fight crime and corruption. The crowd cheered as he pledged to send the army and police to kill criminals. Similar threats made on the campaign trail thrilled many more people than they horrified. Ordinary Filipinos are sick of the robbers they meet in the street—as well as those they put up with in high office.



Mr Duterte will be the first president from Mindanao, the southernmost of the islands that make up the Philippines and the poorest part of the country (see map). He will also be the first not to have held national office since the late Corazon Aquino, mother of Benigno and widow of an assassinated opposition leader, who rode the “people’s power” revolution to the presidency in 1986. Mr Duterte tapped into a deep resentment at the immense wealth and political sway amassed by a few elite families.

Three of the four candidates whom Mr Duterte defeated were politically connected to Ms Aquino; the fourth, Grace Poe, was the adopted daughter of a friend of Marcos. Malcolm Cook at Singapore’s Institute for South-East Asian Studies, refers to them as “the faded yellow ribbon brigade” (yellow ribbons were an anti-Marcos symbol).

Family ties

The promise of the 1986 revolution has turned into what Miguel Syjuco, a Filipino novelist, calls “a resurgent oligarchy”. Political dynasties dominate local and national politics. Even the Marcoses have worked their way back into power: Imelda, Ferdinand’s widow, is in Congress; Ferdinand junior is a senator locked in a tight race for vice-president; and his sister, Imee, governs Ilocos Norte province. This elite is well-connected, often Western-educated and its members present themselves well to the world, but they have grown increasingly disconnected from the people they supposedly serve.

Mr Duterte exploited this gap. He mentioned his modest means repeatedly during the campaign. His supporters railed against trapos (“traditional politicians”, a play on the Tagalog for “old rags”). His unpolished speech and impatience with convention and democratic processes became assets rather than liabilities; signs of authenticity and an indication that he will do things differently.

His advocacy of a barely defined federalism appealed to simmering provincial resentment of the power concentrated in Manila. To win over voters in the capital, meanwhile, he touted his record in Davao, which he takes credit for turning from a violent city into a mini-Singapore: safe, clean and orderly. Residents frustrated by chaos and gridlock in the capital hope he will work the same wonders there. But the Manila region, a conurbation of 17 cities and municipalities, will be hard to corral. And honouring his promise of federalism would require changing the country’s constitution. Three post-Marcos presidents have tried—and failed—to do so.

The question now is what sort of president Mr Duterte will make. His campaign focused almost entirely on crime, drugs and corruption. These are important in a gun-mad country where being asked for bribes is a daily frustration. But to deal with them he has offered only macho posturing. His promise to stamp out all three within six months of taking office is impossible, even if he goes ahead with his killing spree (he has threatened to slaughter 100,000 criminals and dump their bodies in Manila Bay to fatten the fish). But he can do a lot of damage trying.

Crime and punishment

He vows to hang offenders, and reminisced fondly about Marcos’s ability to “use the forces of government to get what he really wanted”. Many dismiss such statements as bluster and trust that Mr Duterte will moderate his tone once in office. But hoping that a president will not do as he says is risky.

In some respects, Mr Duterte says, he will follow the path the country is already taking, for instance, by seeking peace in the south. Mr Aquino’s administration was on the brink of signing a peace agreement with Muslim rebels in Mindanao, ending a decades-long insurgency, when 44 policemen died in a botched raid on a splinter group. After that raid the bill to establish an autonomous political entity became politically toxic and died in Congress. Mr Duterte says he supports creating such an entity and may revive the bill.



An abrupt shift in economic policy seems unlikely. For all his tough talk on everything else, he has suggested no major changes. Since the economy is chugging along nicely, this is just as well. Nominal income per head grew from $2,372 in 2011 to $2,873 in 2014. Between 2010 and 2015 the economy expanded at an average annual rate of 6.3%, nearly two percentage points faster than in the previous five years—and the biggest improvement among South-East Asia’s larger economies (see chart ). The World Bank forecasts more of the same—growth of 6.4% in 2016 and 6.2% for the two years after. In Mr Aquino’s term the country attained an investment-grade credit rating for the first time, reducing the country’s borrowing costs.

As the economy has expanded, public debt has declined markedly, from 77% of GDP in late 2004 to around 44% in March. Remittances grew in 2015 for the 14th year in a row and now account for around 10% of GDP. But a fast-growing service sector, particularly in business-process outsourcing—call centres, data transcription, software and engineering design, and other back-office tasks—has kept more skilled Filipinos at home. The number living abroad has fallen from 10.2m in 2013 to 9.4m today, according to Mr Aquino.

Mr Duterte wisely plans to maintain his predecessor’s focus on infrastructure. Less wisely, he thinks he can revive the country’s steel industry, despite a global glut. He wants to boost investment in tourism—the Philippines attracts fewer visitors than it should, given its situation and beauty—and proposes leasing islands to foreign investors to set up factories. Worryingly, given the Philippines’ potential as a trading nation, he sounds lukewarm about joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a free-trade pact. He says that he will hire “the economic minds of the country”, and let them make policy. Choosing the right advisers might reassure jittery investors and keep the country on track.

Mr Aquino does not deserve all of the credit for the country’s economic health. Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, his predecessor, put in place budgetary and fiscal reforms that laid the groundwork for steady growth. She introduced a value-added tax, which boosted government revenues, slashed administrative costs and instituted a cash-transfer programme that gives up to 15,000 pesos ($319) a year to nearly 4.4m poor households, provided they vaccinate their children and send them to school.

Mr Aquino built on Ms Arroyo’s ambitious social programmes and fiscal reforms. In 2012 his government imposed “sin taxes” on tobacco and alcohol, directing 85% of the revenue to health care and 15% to help tobacco workers and farmers find new jobs. Two years later the health department’s annual budget had risen from $1.25 billion to $2 billion; by mid-2015 the share of people enrolled in a popular national health-insurance scheme had risen to 82% from 74% in 2011. He expanded basic education to include kindergarten and schooling to the age of 18, and extended Ms Arroyo’s cash-transfer programme for the poor.

Mr Aquino also spent political capital on fighting corruption and improving transparency. Many noticed, however, that the highest-profile victims of his anti-corruption campaign were three opposition senators, a chief justice who ordered the break-up of an Aquino family plantation and Ms Arroyo, also a political opponent. Many also noticed that, despite Mr Aquino’s noble statements about following “the straight path”, ordinary folk still had to pay backhanders to police and bureaucrats. Even so, the Philippines has improved its position in Transparency International’s corruption index from 134th in 2010 to 95th last year.

Infrastructure is improving. Spending rose from 1.8% of GDP when Mr Aquino took office to around 5% this year. The perception that such spending is more effective and has been transparently handed out has helped bring a tripling of foreign direct investment into the Philippines.



A guide to the Philippines, in charts

Such encouraging numbers do not tell the whole story, however. The share of Filipinos living below the national poverty line in the first half of 2015 was 26.3%, the same as in 2009, before five years of runaway growth. An expanding population means that even as some have moved out of poverty, there are more poor people now than when Mr Aquino took office.

Poor state of affairs

City-dwellers and service-sector workers have done well. GDP per person in Manila is over four times higher than in parts of Visayas and Mindanao. More than half of the country’s poorest people are farm workers, who are three times more likely than city-dwellers to be poor. High rice prices, a result of a misguided self-sufficiency programme, hit the poor especially hard.

Manila and other cities remain horribly congested. Voters blamed Mr Aquino, though it is not his fault. The Philippines has underinvested in infrastructure for years. As the economy boomed, more money has been put into fixing roads, but not nearly enough to keep up with the soaring number of cars, especially in Manila. No one knows what Mr Duterte plans to do about rural poverty, or how he will ease Manila’s traffic jams.

When it comes to foreign relations, he has already shown a knack for offending allies. When officials from America and Australia expressed displeasure at a crass remark from Mr Duterte, about how he wished he had been first in line when an Australian missionary was raped and murdered during a prison riot in the Philippines, he dared these steadfast allies to sever diplomatic ties. After Singapore said that a Facebook post showing Lee Hsien Loong, the prime minister, appearing to endorse Mr Duterte was false, he joked about burning a Singaporean flag. Such cracks did not go down well, for some reason.

No figure is too beloved for Mr Duterte to insult. Recalling the heavy traffic during a papal visit to Manila, Mr Duterte said, “Pope, you son of a bitch, go home. Don’t visit us here anymore.” That was in a speech accepting his party’s nomination for president. Filipinos, more than 80% of whom are Catholic, seem not to have held it against him.

The most pressing foreign-policy question facing the Philippines is its stand-off with China over claims in the South China Sea (or the West Philippine Sea, as it is known at home). On this Mr Duterte has careened all over the map. He has declared himself “ready to die” for this country’s claims, vowing to jet ski to a disputed island personally to plant a Philippine flag. He has insisted that he is open to bilateral negotiations and joint development, something China has said it favours as well. He has also vowed to “shut up” about the dispute if China agrees to build train lines across the Philippines.

What he will actually do is a mystery. Most recently, he has seemed willing to accept the status quo: after voting on Monday he told reporters, “I would say to China: ‘Do not claim anything here, and I will also not insist that it is ours.’” The Permanent Court of Arbitration, an international dispute-resolution body in The Hague, is expected to rule in the coming weeks on the Philippines’ case against China. If it sides with the Philippines and then China begins building on the Scarborough Shoal—which both countries claim and which China has occupied since 2012 in contravention, according to the Philippines, of an American-brokered agreement—no Filipino president can simply acquiesce, especially a tough guy.



For all of Mr Duterte’s bravado and alleged extrajudicial killings of suspected criminals, he may not even make much of an impact on crime. The murder rate in Davao remains stubbornly high. Mr Duterte’s reputation for cleanness was challenged toward the end of the campaign, when Antonio Trillanes, an independent vice-presidential candidate, accused him of having millions of dollars stashed in secret bank accounts, running illegal protection rackets and hiring ghost employees. Mr Duterte denied the charges.

His anti-establishment campaign may also hamper him: having run against the political elite, he now must govern with them. In Mr Duterte many see echoes of Mr Estrada, another populist outsider elected on an anti-corruption platform. His presidency lasted just under 18 months: he was impeached for graft, and resigned after the army withdrew its support.

A similar future may lie in store for Mr Duterte. During the campaign some speculated that Mr Aquino’s Liberal Party (LP) machine would throw its support behind Ms Poe once it became clear that Mr Roxas could never win. Instead party grandees are rumoured to prefer impeachment, particularly if the LP candidate, Leni Robredo, wins the vice-presidency, and would become president on Mr Duterte’s departure. As The Economist went to press she had a narrow lead.

Many hoped the Philippines had outgrown such antics. When Mr Aquino steps down at the end of June, he will become the first president to enter office with clean hands and to leave the same way since Fidel Ramos in 1998. Unlike his two predecessors, Mr Aquino has faced no charges of impeachment (they succeeded against Mr Estrada, but not against Ms Arroyo) or coup attempts. Whatever one thinks of Mr Duterte, the country’s voters chose him and he deserves to take office with the wind, rather than schemers, at his back.

Thriller in Manila

A return to instability would do the Philippines no good. The country is not over-reliant on commodities or China. Unlike China, Japan and Thailand, the Philippines has a young population and a cheap English-speaking labour force. The country does not share Indonesia’s protectionist instincts and is more welcoming to foreign investors. If it keeps to today’s path it could become one of Asia’s stars.

All of that is at risk. In the short term Mr Duterte is unlikely to make any policy reversals to stop growth. But investors are nervous: Mr Aquino was dull but predictable; Mr Duterte is neither. Further ahead, the Philippines risks the same combination of political unpredictability and stagnation as Thailand—another country divided between a minority long accustomed to getting its way and a majority that keeps voting against it. If the Filipino elite understands the message voters have sent in electing Mr Duterte, they could avert this fate.

The bigger risk comes from the long-term damage a strongman could do to a young democracy’s still-fragile institutions. On the stump Mr Duterte mused about shutting down Congress and declaring a “revolutionary government” if he fails to get his way. His enthusiasm for vigilante killings shows his preference for order at the expense of law. The Philippines’ growing prosperity reflects the country’s improved governance, and the confidence of investors. Voters rightly want more inclusive growth and are frustrated at the domination of their country by a small number of families. But electing a president with contempt for the law and democratic norms will solve neither problem.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21698684-new-strongman-president-may-prevent-philippines-becoming-economic-star-fist/print





Articles Sections Next



United States





Death and money: Looking up

The Republicans: Learning to love the Don

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

Scourge, rather than saviour: Scourge, not saviour

Zombie campaigns: Greenback from the dead

Campus life: Unclubbable

The Supreme Court: Slowing down

Lexington: Citizen Brandeis





Articles Sections Next

Death and money

Looking up

The link between income and mortality rates is weakening

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS a bad time to be a middle-aged, middle-class, white American. Stripped of manufacturing jobs by trade and technology, then skewered by the financial crisis, white men aged 45 to 54 earn 7% less, in inflation-adjusted terms, than in 1987. Their suffering is not just financial. In November Anne Case and Angus Deaton, two economists, found that middle-aged whites were more likely to die in 2013 than they were in 1999. Another study recently found that, since 2001, gains in life expectancy at 40 have been unevenly distributed, benefiting the rich most. Yet the plight of middle-aged, middle-income whites, while distressing, is atypical. Across the whole population, the chance of early death depends ever less on economic circumstances.

In a recent article in Science, Janet Currie of Princeton University and Hannes Schwandt of the University of Zurich rank America’s counties by the proportion of their residents living in poverty. The poorest areas are clustered in the South; the poverty rate in Holmes County, Mississippi, for example, is over 40%. Counties with the least poverty are likely to be near rich, northern cities; Somerset County, New Jersey, an hour’s drive from Manhattan, has a poverty rate of only 5%. In general, the poorer the county, the more deaths. The researchers examined the strength of this relationship in three-year periods starting in 1990, 2000 and 2010.



Mortality has fallen for almost everyone. You would expect this: health care and lifestyles (most notably, smoking rates) have improved. Less predictably, age affects how those gains are divvied out between rich and poor (see chart). Those over 50 have done best in rich counties, reinforcing the notion that the link between income and health is strengthening for the middle-aged. Yet among the young—and particularly among young men—the biggest gains have been in the poorest places.

There are three likely explanations. First, crime has fallen, benefiting poor areas more. In 1990 there were 37 homicides per 100,000 men aged 18-24. By 2014 there were 20. This has particularly affected black men, who more frequently fall victim to murder. In 1990 twice as many young black men died from any cause as young white men. That has fallen to 50% more, with the lower murder rate accounting for four-fifths of the improvement.

Second, HIV is killing fewer people. This is partly due to fewer cases. In 1990 there were 21 incidences of HIV/AIDS per 100,000 men; today there are 12 (though all the progress was before 2000). It is also due to better treatment. Because the HIV epidemic is concentrated in poor, black, southern areas, falling deaths from HIV make mortality rates more equal. HIV mortality has fallen most among 25- to 44-year-olds; among black men in this age-group, HIV deaths are down by 90% since 1990.

The third explanation is better health care for mothers, babies and children. During the 1980s, for instance, Medicaid coverage for pregnant women was greatly expanded. The benefits were long-lasting: a study in 2015 found those whose mothers were included in the expansion were healthier in adulthood. Among other things, they were less likely to be obese.

In 1997 the federal government also began helping states provide health insurance to children in families that were poor, but not poor enough to qualify for Medicaid. This has probably reduced infant deaths that happen after mothers and babies leave hospital. A study in 2014 found that such deaths are largely responsible for America’s persistently high infant-mortality rate compared with Europe’s.

Targeted interventions such as the 1997 reform probably reduced infant mortality among the poor. The expansion of the earned-income tax credit in the 1990s may have helped, too, by reducing the strain on mothers, or improving toddlers’ nutrition. Other public-health improvements, such as cleaner air—particularly important for childhood health—have also disproportionately benefited poor areas.

These trends are especially welcome because more equal mortality should persist throughout the lives of today’s youngsters, argues Ms Currie. Frustratingly, this does not show up in the most-used statistic: life expectancy at birth, which rose by about the same amount in rich and in poor counties. Life expectancy is calculated by assuming that people continue to die at the same rate as today, so that opposing mortality trends among young and old cancel each other out. But in reality, mortality rates evolve over time. Today’s poor and middle-income young may avoid the malaise currently afflicting middle-aged, middle-income whites. Manufacturing jobs lost to trade cannot easily be lost a second time. The opioid epidemic ravaging communities today may yet be vanquished.

If so, the gap in life expectancy at birth between rich and poor will also fall. This has already happened between whites and blacks, because middle-aged blacks are living longer (for that, thank falling rates of cancer and heart disease). As a result, the life expectancy of whites is now just three-and-a-half years higher than that of blacks, down from seven years in 1990.

In short, income and race have an ever-weaker effect on mortality, despite rising income inequality. Thanks to the plight of middle-aged whites, this good news is easily missed, says Ms Currie. Evidence, perhaps, of a different sort of inequality.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698702-link-between-income-and-mortality-rates-weakening-looking-up/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Republicans

Learning to love the Don

The Republicans are in tatters over Donald Trump

May 14th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition

Trunk show

AFTER a bruising workout in the primaries, both parties are supposed to clank back into line for the general election. The losers and maimed quell their sniffling for the sake of unity. But that is not happening for Donald Trump. As Republican congressmen and senators returned to Capitol Hill on May 10th, the ranks backing the party’s prospective nominee looked ragged and querulous.

Many Republican congressmen have held off endorsing Mr Trump, including their leader, Paul Ryan, the Republican Speaker of the House of Representatives, who has declared himself “just not ready” to. Other Republican leaders, including two former presidents, George Bush senior and junior, a handful of senators, such as Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, and at least one governor, Charlie Baker of Massachusetts, have said they will never back him. ‘Sometimes there’s a stink you just can’t wash off, kinda like a venereal disease,” said a Republican congressman. “That’s the problem Trump’s got.” There is muttering of mutiny, perhaps a rallying around an alternative leader. Senator Ted Cruz, who suspended his campaign after Mr Trump trounced him in Indiana, hinted on May 10th that he might reactivate it.

This is at once unprecedented and predictable. No presidential nominee has shown such contempt for his party’s verities as Mr Trump has. While professing to admire Ronald Reagan, he castigates free trade, vows to defend Social Security and apologises for Vladimir Putin. He has also missed no opportunity to belittle his Republican confrères.

Asked, in an interview with The Economist, which brand was more powerful, the Republicans or his own, he responded by nofsting that a television debate he had appeared in was watched by 24m people; “Massive, massive show—biggest show in the history of cable. If I wasn’t in it, they would’ve had 3m-4m, if that.” Responding to Mr Ryan, he has declared himself “not ready to support Speaker Ryan’s agenda” which, he implied, ran contrary to the interests of Americans, who “have been treated so badly for so long.” That was less a snippy rejoinder than a statement of war. It identified the prospective Republican nominee with those—around half the Republican electorate, according to recent exit polls—who say they feel “betrayed” by their party.

As The Economist went to press on May 12th, Mr Trump and Mr Ryan were due to hold peace talks. The impression of a party in meltdown is helping neither. Despite his braggadocio, Mr Trump needs Mr Ryan’s help to raise money—he says he may need $1.5 billion—and to turn out the conservative vote in November. There are not enough aggrieved Republicans to give him victory; Mr Trump needs all Republicans—including those, roughly a quarter of the total in recent primary exit polls, who currently say they will not vote for him.



America's primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

Mr Ryan’s interests are more balanced. A wonkish sort of politician, he must be horrified by Mr Trump’s policies. He preaches fiscal discipline, including by trimming welfare; Mr Trump, who vows to safeguard Social Security, promises tax cuts worth $10 trillion (though he says he is seeing if he can reduce that cost a bit). A former acolyte of Jack Kemp, who retains his mentor’s optimistic belief in the power of enterprise and free markets to help the poor, Mr Ryan must find Mr Trump’s angry pessimism even more objectionable. He denounced the tycoon’s proposed ban on foreign Muslims, as well as his reluctance to disavow the support of a former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, David Duke. Mr Trump’s offensiveness is also a worry for the many Republican congressmen who are up for re-election in November—and maintaining Republican control of both houses is one of Mr Ryan’s main responsibilities. John McCain, a senator from Arizona, a state with many Hispanics, who mostly loathe Mr Trump, has predicted a tough re-election fight for himself. Despite Mr Trump having denigrated his heroism as a prisoner-of-war in Vietnam, however, Mr McCain is reluctantly backing the tycoon.

Sooner or later, Mr Ryan is likely to follow suit. He will not want to be seen blocking party unity. For the same reason, he and other front-rank Republicans will probably not be tempted to run as an independent, which would hand victory to Hillary Clinton, the prospective Democratic nominee. By holding out against Mr Trump, at least for a bit, Mr Ryan mainly hopes to persuade him to adopt a less vituperative style. He knows there is not much he can do to influence Mr Trump’s policies. “This is a big-tent party,” he said on May 11th. “There’s plenty of room for policy disputes.”

The painful fact for Republican leaders, including Mr Cruz, whose campaign is dead, is that Mr Trump has won. They have lost. The rest is mostly noise.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698712-republicans-are-tatters-over-donald-trump-learning-love-don/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The campaigns

Heard on the trail

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



Four years a candidate

“Be full of faith and so full of joy that this team was chosen to fight a long battle. Think that slavery—it took 25 years to defeat slavery. That is a lot longer than four years.”

Heidi Cruz, in a call-in with supporters, on her husband’s campaign. Texas Tribune

Taking care of the pennies

“I don’t take money from billionaires, but I do check every vending-machine change slot.”

Bernie Sanders on his fundraising technique. Late Show, CBS

A gimme

“It was unbelievable. But I guess it was his course, so it was his rules.”

Oscar De La Hoya, ex-champion boxer, claims Donald Trump cheats at golf. AP

The apprenticeship

“Well this is the ultimate reality show, it’s the presidency of the United States.”

Paul Manafort, an adviser to Mr Trump, on convention plans. MSNBC

Veep peep

“We would consider people who are Americans and who put America first.”

Ben Carson explains the parameters of Mr Trump’s veep search. Wall Street Journal

Jobs for the boys

“This is one, singular person who is the Steve Jobs of modern politics. And he is going to drive the system.”

Newt Gingrich auditions. Bloomberg

Tow thy neighbour

“Something came over me, I think the Lord came to me, and he just said ‘Get in the truck and leave.’ And when I got in my truck…I was so proud, because I felt like I finally drew a line in the sand and stood up for what I believed.”

A Trump-supporting tow-truck driver in North Carolina refused to tow a stranded Sanders supporter. ABC Eyewitness News

Foreign affairs

“I know Russia well, I had a major event in Russia two or three years ago—Miss Universe contest.”

Mr Trump on Russia. Fox News

With a whimper

“My heart is not in this.”

John Kasich ends his presidential campaign on a runway in Columbus, Ohio

Vanity, thy name is...

“My hair look okay? Give me a little spray.”

Donald Trump discusses hair products with coal miners in West Virginia. Gawker





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698710-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Donald Trump and small business

Scourge, not saviour

What small-businesses owners might wish to know about Mr Trump

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



“HE ALMOST bankrupted us,” says the retired owner of a construction business on the east coast. Thirty years ago he ran a small business with around ten employees, which was hired by Donald Trump to work on an 11-month project at his Taj Mahal casino in Atlantic City. It was the biggest contract, by far, that the business had ever had. The builders worked as they had never done before to complete the job on time. As soon as they finished, Mr Trump stopped paying. He owed around $200,000 of a bill totalling about $700,000, a huge sum for a small company.

What followed was a nearly year-long battle to extract the money it was owed. Lawyers advised the company that Mr Trump would procrastinate with expensive litigation, as he had done many times before. Other contractors relayed their experiences with the “Trump discount”, the billionaire’s habit of rarely paying the full sum he owed. As the “Trump discount” made the rounds in the industry, wily contractors quoted a higher price at the outset to avoid suffering any losses. Then, one day in 1988, the phone rang at 9.30am. A sweet-voiced special assistant of Mr Trump’s announced she had a cheque for the builders which, she claimed, had been lying on her desk for a year. “We only got paid because of Merv Griffin,” says the retired contractor. In a surprising swoop, Mr Griffin, an entertainment-business tycoon, had bought the company that owned the Taj Mahal.

Owners of small businesses are among Mr Trump’s most dedicated supporters. They believe his biggest selling point is his business acumen. He is a consummate dealmaker, they say, and has made heaps of money, maybe as much as $10 billion. They also like his proposal to slash the corporate income-tax rate from 35% to 15%. A poll earlier this year by Manta, an online directory for small businesses, of 2,527 owners of small companies who were planning to vote in the primaries, found that 60% favoured Mr Trump as the Republican candidate.

Bryant Simon of Temple University, who wrote a history of Atlantic City, marvels at how the author of “The Art of the Deal” sells his failure there as a great success. Mr Trump paid too much to finance the Taj with junk bonds; he also overpaid for the casino’s interior, whose mirrors and chandeliers made the palace of Versailles look unadorned. Even though the Taj was the highest-earning casino in America for a while it could not cover its debt.

Even more impressive business accomplishments do not readily translate into success in the White House. Presidents who cut their teeth in business are among the least successful and least popular of the 43, according to the Siena College Research Institute (SRI), which ranks presidents in 20 areas such as integrity, intelligence, willingness to take risks and leadership ability. Harry Truman is the only president with business experience who ranks highly, says Don Levy, director of the SRI. (Truman, a former haberdasher, ranks ninth.) Warren Harding, a newspaper publisher, comes bottom, at 43. Calvin Coolidge, a corporate lawyer, ranks a lowly 29th and Herbert Hoover, who had a career in the mining industry, comes in at 36.

Those businessmen who became presidents eased into politics slowly. After making money in the oil business, George H.W. Bush served for years in Congress, as ambassador to the UN and as boss of the CIA. His son, George W., also started out in the oil business and then, after a false start when he lost a House race, was elected governor of Texas at the first attempt.

Some companies are considering skipping the Republican convention in Cleveland. Presented with a choice of Trump v Clinton, the owner of the construction business that worked on the Taj would set aside his dislike of Mrs Clinton and vote for her. The Clinton campaign can look forward to plenty more stories like this from those who have worked with Mr Trump during his freewheeling career.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698613-what-small-businesses-owners-might-wish-know-about-mr-trump-scourge-not-saviour/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Zombie campaigns

Greenback from the dead

Presidential campaigns raise funds long after they cease to function

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



KIM CLAUSEN of Denver, Colorado, made a $250 contribution to the presidential campaign of Republican Senator Marco Rubio on March 16th. The transaction was, for the most part, unremarkable. Indeed, Ms Clausen had made identical contributions in each of the previous six months. Her latest gift, however, would differ in one key respect. Its designated recipient, Mr Rubio, had suspended his campaign the day before.

Ms Clausen is not alone. Since September, the Federal Election Commission (FEC) has recorded hundreds of contributions to presidential campaigns whose candidates are no longer in the race. In all, zombie campaigns have raised about $1m. Scott Walker, the governor of Wisconsin, leads the pack, having raked in more than $700,000 since his withdrawal from the primaries in September. Lindsey Graham, who quit in December, has since raised about $70,000.



America's primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

Fundraising of this sort is perfectly legal under FEC rules. Candidates who suspend their campaigns can continue raising money long after they have left the trail. A campaign technically ends only once it has retired its debts and filed a termination report with the FEC. For most candidates, this will not happen soon. FEC records show that as of March 31st, the failed Republican presidential campaigns had debts of nearly $5m. Mr Rubio alone owes nearly $2m. Lincoln Chafee is the most indebted Democratic ex-candidate: he owes $360,000.

Democrats may be tempted to chide their Republican counterparts for their profligacy. They should recall that in 2008, after a long and bitter primary campaign, Hillary Clinton was left with over $22m in unpaid bills. Those debts would not be paid until January 2013, more than four years later.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698720-presidential-campaigns-raise-funds-long-after-they-cease-function-greenback/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Campus life

Unclubbable

Harvard sanctions members of off-campus private clubs

May 14th 2016 | CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS | From the print edition

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT won four presidential elections, but there was one vote that eluded him. As a Harvard undergraduate, he “punched”—sought to join—the Porcellian, the oldest of Harvard’s eight private, historically all-male “final clubs”. Even though it had previously admitted his father and his cousin Theodore, he was rejected. Now Drew Faust, Harvard’s president, is attempting to tame the secretive organisation as even the Roosevelt clan could not. On May 6th Ms Faust announced that the college would punish students who join single-sex social clubs.

America’s oldest university was historically an exclusively male domain. It did not educate women until the founding of Radcliffe in 1879, which did not merge with Harvard itself until 1977. As expectations of sexual equality evolved, Harvard followed suit, and demanded that its social clubs go co-ed. They refused, and in 1984 the college cut ties with them.

Once Harvard’s relationship with the clubs was severed, however, its administrators lost all power to influence them. As a result, the final clubs have continued to play a dominant role in the college’s social life without any external oversight. By the late 1990s female students began setting up their own single-sex organisations. Today, a quarter of undergraduates belong to a social club. Since 2014, two male clubs opened their doors to female members.

But in recent years activists and the press have devoted increasing scrutiny to the spectre of rape on campus. In March Harvard published an official inquiry into sexual assault, and found that 47% of women in their last year of study who had attended final club events (including female-hosted ones) said they had experienced non-consensual sexual contact in college, compared with 31% for senior women overall. Defenders of the clubs said the study conflated correlation with causation—it did not determine whether these unwanted encounters occurred in the clubs or elsewhere, or whether the perpetrators were club members. The report’s authors accused the clubs of “deeply misogynistic attitudes” and a “strong sense of sexual entitlement”.

Even the clubs’ critics, however, had reason to be surprised by Ms Faust’s response. Although Harvard cannot control unaffiliated private organisations, it still wields power over other aspects of student life. So rather than targeting the clubs, Ms Faust went after their members. She announced that from 2017, members of single-sex clubs, fraternities and sororities will not be allowed to lead official campus groups or captain sports teams. Nor will they be eligible for some scholarships. Harvard, she said, could not “endorse selection criteria that reject much of the student body merely because of gender”.

The final clubs protest that the university is violating their First Amendment right to freedom of association. One may challenge the policy in court—though such a claim is unlikely to get far, since Harvard is itself a private institution, with the same freedom to establish rules for its students that final clubs do for their members. In the case of the all-male Porcellian, which does not allow guests of any gender past its reception hall, its former graduate board president Charles Storey has noted that forcing it to admit women “could potentially increase, not decrease, the potential for sexual misconduct.” Sororities are not happy with the decision either. They marched through Harvard Yard on May 9th, declaring that all-female clubs provide a much-needed “safe space” for women.

Even if the statistical evidence tying the clubs to sexual assault is contested, Ms Faust has good reasons to pressure them to go co-ed. Despite the proliferation of sororities and female final clubs, only the male clubs boast luxurious mansions scattered around Harvard’s campus, out of the reach of police enforcing under-age drinking laws. This disparity entrenches Harvard’s retrograde tradition of privileges for men.

But the main reason Ms Faust’s predecessors left the clubs in peace is that the new edict may be unenforceable. Final clubs do not publish membership lists. Will the college plant spies at their events? Or reward students who rat out their roommates with extra helpings in the dining hall? Harvard may end up proving the law of unintended consequences taught in its economics courses: as Peter Ayala, a student, notes, the rule could cause the clubs to become more secretive than ever.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698711-harvard-sanctions-members-campus-private-clubs-unclubbable/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Supreme Court

Slowing down

Why, when it comes to justices, nine are better than eight

May 14th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition

Eight ain’t great

WITH five votes, the late Justice William Brennan liked to tell his clerks, “you can do anything around here”. The rule still applies after the death in February of Antonin Scalia. But with only eight justices remaining, the magic number of five is now harder to come by. Twice since Mr Scalia’s death the Supreme Court has performed the judicial equivalent of throwing up its hands. In a small case concerning banking rules and in an important one challenging the future of public-sector unions, the justices issued one-sentence per curiam (“by the court”) rulings: “The judgment is affirmed by an equally divided court.” A tie in the high court means that the ruling in the court below stands. But these non-rulings do not bind other lower courts, and the judgment has no value as a precedent. A tie, in short, leaves everything as it was and as it would have been had the justices never agreed to hear the case in the first place.

That’s a lot of wasted ink, paper, time and breath. And now it seems the justices may be keen to reduce future futile efforts as they contemplate a year or more with a missing colleague. Only 12 cases are now on the docket for the October 2016 term, and grants are lagging below the average of recent years. The slow pace is especially notable because it marks a slowdown from an already highly attenuated docket. Seventy years ago, the justices decided 200 or more cases a year; that number declined to about 150 in the 1980s and then plummeted into the 80s and, in recent years, the 70s. The justices will grant more cases in dribs and drabs following their conferences in May, June and September (followed by more conferences throughout the autumn and winter), but early indications are that the next term may be one of the most relaxed in recent memory.

What’s wrong with eight justices? The main worry is that tied votes sow legal confusion. When the judges are split down the middle, they cannot resolve rival views on controversial issues—from affirmative action and public unions to gay rights, birth control and abortion. By letting lower-court decisions stand but not requiring other courts to abide by the ruling, the stage is set for odd state-by-state or district-by-district distinctions when it comes to the meaning of laws or the constitution. This seems to be the worry that prompted the justices to search for a compromise, after hearing arguments in March in the latest fight over Obamacare and contraception. One federal district court has said that the law’s compromise violates a law of 1993 banning the government from unduly interfering with other people’s religious scruples. Half a dozen other appellate courts have come to the opposite opinion. So if the justices divide 4-4 in Zubik v Burwell, women across most of America will have access to birth control through their employer’s health coverage, while women in seven midwestern states will not.

Some legal scholars argue that an eight-justice bench isn’t so bad. Eric Segall, of Georgia State University, thinks the 4-4 ideological divide is pushing justices to moderate their arguments in an effort to win votes from their colleagues on the other side. “To accomplish their goals,” Mr Segall writes, “the justices would simply have to get along better.”

Just such a compromise may have led to a recent voting-rights decision, Evenwel v Abbott. After the oral argument in December, most pundits were expecting a 5-4 decision upending the common understanding of “one person, one vote” (counting everybody) in favour of counting only eligible voters, a scheme favouring whiter, wealthier, districts. But the justices came out 8-0 in the other direction. The four liberals seem to have attracted the conservatives’ votes by lowering the temperature a bit: the constitution allows states to use total population as the basis for drawing districts, Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote for her colleagues, but the question of whether it requires them to do so is off the table until a case forces it back on.

Yet it is hard to see how a denuded court is appealing in the medium or long term. A patchwork of legal realities may have been fitting for America under the Articles of Confederation, before the country had a political system that turned it into a union, but America’s constitutional design is not consonant with confusion about what the law means on controversial questions. Whether the divide manifests as 4-4 splits or a tendency to hear fewer cases in which those splits seem likely, a Supreme Court with eight judges is not a court that can live up to its name.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698709-why-when-it-comes-justices-nine-are-better-eight-slowing-down/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

Citizen Brandeis

A 20th-century giant of the Supreme Court offers lessons about politics today

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



SOME of the wiser words about the great American experiment—namely, the creation of a continent-sized country, governed of, by and for the people—were written by Louis Brandeis, a justice of the Supreme Court between 1916 and 1939. To Brandeis is owed the observation that the federal system often gains by letting each state, if its citizens so choose, serve as a “laboratory” of democracy, trying out new policies without imposing them on the whole country. Few have improved on Brandeis’s defence of free speech, written in 1927 after a Californian woman was jailed for speaking on behalf of a communist party. America’s founders, he argued, put their faith in reasoned discussion among citizens and believed that the “greatest menace to freedom is an inert people”. Thus, unless hateful speech poses an imminent danger, the remedy is “more speech, not enforced silence.”

The centenary of the Brandeis confirmation falls next month, sparking a flurry of scholarship. His confirmation by the Senate was bitterly contested by the standards of the day. Brandeis was the first Jewish justice, nominated by Woodrow Wilson amid some coded anti-Semitism (one critic accused him of “Old Testament” cruelty towards courtroom opponents). Others called him a dangerous radical: he was an outspoken foe of concentrated power, whether wielded by rival-crushing big businesses, or by remote and therefore clumsy big government.

A live political charge still flows through his words: indeed, with his views on tolerating speech that shocks, Brandeis might struggle to give a college commencement address in 2016 without provoking jeering protests. But in a time of populist, elite-bashing rhetoric, his beliefs about the “curse of bigness” are even more topical. To simplify, Brandeis urged intense scepticism when any leader—in politics or business—claims to have the general interest at heart, while at the same time constructing any agency or enterprise so large that it cannot be understood, efficiently managed or held to account by alert, responsible, ordinary citizens.

A fine new book, “Louis D. Brandeis: American Prophet” by Jeffrey Rosen, describes how seriously the justice took these beliefs. Though eager to see big banks and businesses broken up to prevent monopolies, Brandeis turned on President Franklin D. Roosevelt and his young left-wing advisers when they used the New Deal to bring great swathes of the economy, including small farms, under central government control. Mr Rosen, who heads the National Constitution Centre in Philadelphia, describes Brandeis joining more conservative justices in striking down key planks of the New Deal in 1935. After that display of wrath, Brandeis summoned a presidential aide to hear a message for FDR. “This is the end of this business of centralisation,” he said, adding that “as for your young men…tell them to get out of Washington…back to the states. That is where they must do their work.”

Brandeis was brought up in Kentucky by a loving and bookish family of secular Jewish immigrants from Prague. His upbringing, which included three years of schooling in Dresden, left him with a distrust of high finance (bankers playing with “other people’s money”, he scowled), a fondness for small business and a horror of chain stores that was at once rather Germanic and powerfully influenced by Thomas Jefferson’s vision of America as a country of self-governing yeoman farmers.

Brandeis offers modern political lessons because his equal distrust of big corporations and big government puts him at odds with both political parties. The Republican-controlled Senate may be refusing even to hold hearings for Merrick Garland, the centrist judge nominated by Barack Obama to sit on the Supreme Court after the recent death of Justice Antonin Scalia. But if transported to the present, Brandeis (who died in 1941, aged 84) would not have a hope of nomination, let alone confirmation.

It is not just that the left would find Brandeis dismayingly unmoved by the ills of racism, and the right would find him too willing to read the constitution in the light of modern values and science. His real problem is simpler: both parties rather like some forms of bigness. To too many Democrats, calls for limited government sound like unilateral disarmament: they view federal authority as the only effective check on corporate power, big polluters or those who challenge civil rights. The policy platform of Hillary Clinton, the presumed Democratic presidential nominee, is built on a tottering stack of federal regulations, tax credits and paper-spewing schemes to make a Brandeis weep. Meanwhile, too many Republicans make populist arguments about bullying officials and Washington pen-pushers, while turning a blind eye to years of mergers that have left some industries at the mercy of a few, exceedingly powerful, incumbents. One Republican, the putative presidential nominee Donald Trump, positively boasts that he will run the economy like a Putinesque strongman.

Chain-store politics

Even Brandeis’s passion for devolving power to accountable levels of government has been subverted by the forces of bigness. National interest groups have perfected the art of drafting cut-and-paste “model” bills, ready to be passed by pliant legislatures. Rather than acting as innovators in democratic laboratories, such groups look more like chain stores choosing locations for a new franchise. Gun lobbyists, say, know just which statehouse might buy their law allowing teachers to pack heat at school. Trade unions know in which cities to sell a minimum-wage ordinance.

Ordinary Americans have to take their democracy back from the political hacks and lobbyists, Brandeis might respond. Always suspicious of experts, he put his trust in enlightened citizens. Civic activism is hard in a busy, distracted, cynical age. But barriers to rallying like-minded campaigners are falling, too. The digital world might startle the stern and cerebral justice: he loathed newspapers filled with “gossip”. But if new laboratories of democracy are out there, Brandeis would surely bless them.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21698653-20th-century-giant-supreme-court-offers-lessons-about-politics-today-citizen/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



The Americas





Brazil’s political crisis: An unplanned presidency

Bello: Mercosur’s missed boat

The Fort McMurray fire: The green and the black





Articles Sections Next

Brazil’s political crisis

An unplanned presidency

Michel Temer has better ideas than Dilma Rousseff. That does not mean he will be a successful president

May 14th 2016 | SÃO PAULO | From the print edition



VICE-PRESIDENTS rarely wield real power. Presidential candidates pick them as running mates to broaden their appeal to voters, or to butter up allies. Once in office they become appendages—unless fortune thrusts them into the top job. In Brazil, that happens more often than you might think. José Sarney became president in 1985, when the man Congress chose after 21 years of military rule died before he was sworn in. Mr Sarney oversaw failed attempts to quash hyperinflation. In 1992 Itamar Franco replaced the first directly elected leader after the dictatorship, Fernando Collor, who was impeached for taking bribes. Franco healed an economy damaged by his predecessors’ erratic policies.

As The Economist went to press, Brazil was bracing itself for its third unplanned presidency in as many decades. In the early hours of May 12th the Senate voted to open the impeachment trial of President Dilma Rousseff. Under the law, she must now step aside for up to 180 days while the chamber considers her fate. Michel Temer, the vice-president, will now move into the Planalto, as the presidential palace is known. If the Senate votes by a two-thirds majority to convict Ms Rousseff, Mr Temer would serve out the rest of her term, which ends in 2018.

Despite the high stakes and chaos surrounding the impeachment process, it now seems inconceivable that some last-minute reversal could keep Ms Rousseff in office. That nearly happened on May 9th, when the Speaker of Congress’s lower house annulled a vote by that chamber to forward the impeachment motion to the Senate. Hours later he changed his mind. But it now looks virtually certain that Mr Temer will become president, at least for a while. How he acquits himself could affect Brazil’s fortunes for years to come.

His job will be harder than the one faced by earlier unelected presidents. After five years of inept rule by Ms Rousseff, Brazil is suffering its worst recession since the 1930s. The economy will probably shrink by a total of 7.5% in 2015 and 2016; the unemployment and inflation rates both stand at around 10%. The budget deficit is more than a tenth of GDP. Nearly as acute as the economic crisis is the political one caused by the scandal surrounding Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company. This has tarnished both Ms Rousseff’s Workers’ Party (PT) and the centrist Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB) of Mr Temer.

The multi-talented Mr Temer

His claim to the presidency, unlike that of his forerunners, is bitterly contested. Ms Rousseff and her allies denounce the impeachment process as a “coup”. On the eve of the Senate vote pro-PT protesters put up barricades and blocked roads in several Brazilian states. The more Mr Temer tries to reverse Ms Rousseff’s disastrous policies, the more her supporters will accuse him of overturning the verdict of the voters who re-elected her in 2014.

Mr Temer has offsetting strengths. Temperamentally, he is nearly the opposite of the unpopular Ms Rousseff. While she is gruff, he is charming. Mr Temer is eloquent. Ms Rousseff inspired the coinage of the word dilmês, meaning garbled oratory. She is stubborn. Mr Temer, the youngest of eight children, is conciliatory. Ms Rousseff had never held elected office until she became president. Mr Temer was elected to Congress four times and was Speaker of the lower house. He has written dry tomes (a bestselling textbook on constitutional law) and moist verse (collected in “Anonymous Intimacy”).

Although Mr Temer rarely challenged his boss’s economic interventionism, he believes in a blend of economic and social liberalism that is unusual in Brazil. As one of the drafters of the constitution adopted in 1988, he opposed its employment-stifling protections for workers. He was against the death penalty (which was banned for civil crimes) and in favour of legal abortions (which are still outlawed in most cases).

As the PMDB’s 13-year alliance with the PT began falling apart, Mr Temer’s closet liberalism came out into the open. Last October his party published “Bridge to the Future”, an 18-page manifesto that laments the enterprise-sapping effects of Brazil’s overlarge state, which claims 36% of GDP in taxes while providing poor public services. Though short on detail, the document advocates a series of sensible measures, from privatisations and freer trade to reform of over-generous public pensions, sclerotic labour laws and the Byzantine tax code.

Judging by the ministers Mr Temer is expected to appoint, he intends to carry out some of these proposals. Henrique Meirelles, an inflation-busting governor of the Central Bank under Ms Rousseff’s predecessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, will probably be the new finance minister. Seasoned PMDB operators will probably serve as chief of staff (Eliseu Padilha), planning minister (Romero Jucá) and as super-minister for infrastructure, a new job (Moreira Franco). Mr Temer is expected to compensate for the loss of the PT’s votes in Congress by bringing into government the centre-right Party of Brazilian Social Democracy (PSDB).

Swift reforms, especially cuts to public spending, would, despite the recession, boost confidence, curb inflation and allow the Central Bank to start reducing its target interest rate from a growth-crushing 14.25%. Mr Temer may chop the number of ministries from 32 to 23 to please voters who think the government should make sacrifices, too. That would be an astonishing decision for a man from the PMDB, where the unifying characteristic is the quest for patronage. Such prospects have stirred euphoria in the financial markets, which would otherwise be depressed by the miserable state of the economy.



Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts

Things could easily go wrong. The first problem is the PMDB’s role in the Petrobras scandal, which fuels the fury that is driving Ms Rousseff from office, though it does not provide the legal grounds for her impeachment. Six of the PMDB’s sitting congressmen, including Mr Jucá, are under investigation. On May 5th the supreme court suspended Eduardo Cunha, the PMDB Speaker of the lower house, from Congress after indicting him for corruption. Mr Cunha and the others deny wrongdoing.

The electoral authority is investigating whether Petrobras-related bribes helped finance the re-election campaign of Ms Rousseff and Mr Temer. If it unearths irregularities, it could annul the results, evicting Mr Temer from office. A new election would allow Brazilians to choose leaders untainted by scandal, which would be welcome. But the uncertainty leading up to them would unsettle the economy. Mr Temer argues that the PMDB’s coffers were separate from the PT’s, and above board.

A second worry is that the new president, despite his backroom flair, may fail to secure majorities for reforms. At the best of times, congressmen are reluctant to vote for spending cuts and tax rises. Their attention will soon shift to the Olympic games in Rio de Janeiro, which take place in August, and then to October’s local elections. The latter will be more important than usual. The Petrobras scandal has cut the flow of illicit money to political parties; last year the supreme court barred corporate donations. So candidates for national office in 2018 will rely on local officials elected this year to usher their voters to the polls. Austerity will not appeal to congressmen already thinking about their re-election campaigns two years hence.

Mr Temer could forgo immediate budget cuts in favour of fundamental reforms, such as delinking pensions from the minimum wage and granting independence to the Central Bank. But these measures would run up against a third problem: the perception, especially among Ms Rousseff’s supporters, that Mr Temer has no mandate to do anything important. In 2014 voters rejected a blander version of Mr Temer’s reforms, put forward by the PSDB’s losing candidate, Aécio Neves. Impeachment is bringing about not just a change of personnel but a change of political philosophy that Brazilians did not vote for. It may be legal, but it is not legitimate, said Celso Amorim, a former foreign and defence minister, in an interview with the BBC.

Most Brazilians, delighted to see Ms Rousseff gone, are not pleased about Mr Temer coming in. He and a majority of the most important members of his prospective team are septuagenarians with centuries of political baggage between them. Just 8% of Brazilians think they will do a better job than Ms Rousseff and her colleagues. Mr Temer might be able to change their minds, if he can enact the controversial reforms he espouses and Brazilians feel the economic benefits. The question is whether the newly promoted vice-president will get that chance.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21698719-michel-temer-has-better-ideas-dilma-rousseff-does-not-mean-he-will-be-successful/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

Mercosur’s missed boat

Can a new attempt to strike a deal with Europe revive a moribund trading block?

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



AT A meeting in Brussels this week, officials from the European Union (EU) and Mercosur exchanged offers to cut tariffs and expand market access for each others’ goods and services. This is their second attempt to begin serious negotiations on a free-trade agreement—a mere 16 years after the idea was first mooted.

The first effort collapsed in 2004, when both sides judged the other’s offer to be insufficiently ambitious. Even now, nobody should count on success. The core Mercosur countries—Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay—are keener. But 13 European countries, led by France, want to scupper the talks because their farmers are scared of Mercosur, the world’s most competitive producer of grains and meat. They forced the EU to withdraw, at the last minute, proposed tariffs cuts on beef.

A trade pact between the blocks would make shopping cheaper for 750m consumers. The EU wants accords on services and government procurement. Brazil’s law firms are notorious for protecting their home market, while its construction and engineering companies used corrupt practices to win contracts from Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company. As for Mercosur, Europe is potentially a big market for some of its manufactures as well as its grains and soyabeans.

If the talks prosper, the biggest benefit for Mercosur could be the reviving of its original mission of boosting trade and investment. Over the past dozen years, left-wing governments in Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay have turned Mercosur into a political club. They invited Hugo Chávez’s Venezuela to join; Bolivia, under Evo Morales, followed (neither is part of the EU talks). Buoyed by high prices for their commodities, they proclaimed their commitment to “south-south” economic ties.

They did strike useful agreements on migration, pensions and tourism. But they lost interest in trade deals with rich countries and in deepening economic integration in Mercosur itself. Although Mercosur claims to be a customs union (like the EU) with a common tariff and foreign-trade policy, in practice it is not even a proper free-trade area. Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, Argentina’s former president, imposed quotas and licences on imports from Brazil. Uruguayan truckers face harassment in Brazil, says Luis Alberto Lacalle Pou, a Uruguayan senator. Intra-Mercosur trade was only 14% of its members’ total trade in 2014, down from 19.5% in 1995. Mercosur thus excluded itself from regional value chains in which much production is now organised—as well as from new trans-regional trade and investment agreements, such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

A light breeze of change is now in the air. Argentina’s new president, Mauricio Macri, is opening up his country after Ms Fernández tried to shut it off from the world. Tabaré Vázquez, Uruguay’s president, recognises that Mercosur is suffering from “fatigue”. The impeachment of Dilma Rousseff, Brazil’s president, would bring to power people who are more open to trade talks with Europe and the United States, and who are “very critical of the south-south strategy”, says Alfredo Valladão, a Brazilian political scientist at Sciences Po, a French university.

The obstacles to renewal in Mercosur remain large. In the short term Brazil’s political upheaval divides the group. At a meeting last month to mark the 25th anniversary of the Treaty of Asunción, Mercosur’s founding document, most of the Brazilian parliamentary delegation walked out in protest when Jorge Taiana, who was once Ms Fernández’s foreign minister and now chairs the block’s parliament, called Ms Rousseff’s impeachment “a coup”. Many in Uruguay’s left-wing government are wary of collaborating with Michel Temer, who is poised to replace Ms Rousseff as Brazil’s president. Argentina is cautious about freeing trade in cars within Mercosur, fearing that Brazil’s currently idle factories will flood its market. Most Brazilian industry lives on “protection and subsidies”, says Mr Valladão.

But some Brazilian industrialists are starting to realise that the state has run out of money to prop them up and that protectionism has weakened them. China has wrested markets from Brazilian manufacturers across Latin America. Chile, Colombia, Peru and Mexico formed the Pacific Alliance of free-trading economies; on May 1st they eliminated tariffs on 92% of their trade with each other and will phase out the rest over 17 years.

Brazil’s industry lobbies, like its probable new president, now want to talk trade with the United States as well as the EU. But free trade has become politically toxic in the north. While they were indulging ideological dreams, Mercosur’s governments were also missing the trade boat.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21698715-can-new-attempt-strike-deal-europe-revive-moribund-trading-block-mercosurs-missed/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Fort McMurray fire

The green and the black

A catastrophe increases tensions over oil, pipelines and climate change

May 14th 2016 | OTTAWA | From the print edition



CANADIANS have rallied round Fort McMurray, the western city ravaged by a forest fire this month. They have sent food, clothing and messages of support to the 90,000 people who fled their homes. The Red Cross collected C$54m ($42m) in a matter of days. Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, promised federal help.

But the disaster has also exposed divisions between oil-producing Alberta, where more than 220,000 hectares (550,000 acres) were engulfed by fire, and the rest of Canada. The rancour appeared first on social media, with tweets such as “Welcome to climate change, Alberta. Feel free to keep denying it.” “Scumbag” was one Albertan response. The spat spread to newspapers and television. Asked at a news conference whether he blamed climate change for the fire, Mr Trudeau dodged the question.

He cannot avoid the argument which the fire has reignited. Fort McMurray makes its living from Alberta’s Athabasca tar sands. Although scientists can never be sure that climate change caused a particular event such as the Alberta fire, few people doubt that producing Athabasca crude emits more greenhouse gas than conventional oil. When oil prices were high, Fort McMurray and Alberta prospered, spurring Canada’s economic growth. The price drop has hit the region’s economy hard. Alberta is in its second year of recession; the province is likely to have a record budget deficit of C$10 billion this year. After the fire forced firms near Fort McMurray to suspend production, economists revised down their forecasts for Canada’s growth in the second quarter this year.

What Albertans want, far more than help from the Red Cross, is pipelines to carry crude oil to world markets. The province now sells nearly all its oil to the United States, which pays too little, Albertans grumble. Barack Obama has blocked the Keystone XL pipeline (see map), which would have made transport cheaper. Albertans’ hopes now rest on three other proposed conduits. Energy East, a 4,500km (2,800-mile) pipeline, which is already partly built, would carry crude to the Atlantic coast. Northern Gateway and Trans Mountain, which would run alongside an existing line, would pipe it to the Pacific. All three need the approval of the federal government and its regulator, plus support from aboriginal groups and the provinces through which they would pass. Many places have objections.

British Columbia greeted Northern Gateway with a barrage of conditions, including protection for indigenous groups, benefits for the province and measures to prevent oil spills. Most voters in the province oppose both the pipelines that would cross their territory. The governments of Ontario and Quebec set similar tests for Energy East. The project must pass a “climate test”, insists Montreal’s mayor, Denis Coderre. He dreams of a city buzzing with electric cars, drawing power from Quebec’s dams. That does not fit well with the idea of providing passage for crude from Alberta’s sticky oil sands. The project as it is “is not acceptable”, says Mr Coderre.

Even before the fire, such attitudes were riling Albertans. “We can’t continue to support Canada’s economy unless Canada supports us,” warned Rachel Notley, the province’s premier, in April. Her left-leaning government tightened environmental rules to encourage other Canadians to accept the pipelines. Rona Ambrose, the interim leader of the federal Conservative Party, who is from Alberta, says the federal government’s reluctance to support Energy East, the least unpopular project, is a national-unity issue. Some worry that such resentments will encourage the growth of Alberta’s tiny separatist movement.

All this puts Mr Trudeau in an awkward spot. In last October’s election, his Liberal Party promised to fight climate change and subject pipelines to rigorous regulatory standards. Young green voters who helped the Liberals win will be disappointed if the federal government now backs any of the three proposed pipelines. Mr Trudeau has sent mixed messages. He has come out against Northern Gateway, mainly because its route passes through a temperate rainforest. His position on Energy East and Trans Mountain is unclear, but his government has added several steps to the environmental reviews they face. Oil-industry lobbyists worry that more are to come. Ms Ambrose says the prime minister is “waffling”. That was before the fire. Now Mr Trudeau faces an unenviable decision: whether to help the victims of a natural disaster at the expense of nature itself.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21698717-catastrophe-increases-tensions-over-oil-pipelines-and-climate-change-green-and-black/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Asia





India’s water nightmare: Unholy woes

Child poverty in Japan: Hidden blight

Taiwan readies for a new president: Sizing Tsai up

Kim Jong Un thrills North Koreans with hours of brilliance: Sport of Kims

Banyan: Despotic in Dhaka





Articles Sections Next

India’s water nightmare

Unholy woes

India’s water shortage owes more to bad management than drought

May 14th 2016 | UJJAIN | From the print edition



AT THE dawn of time Lord Vishnu made gods and demons join in churning the milky oceans to extract an elixir of eternal life. After cheating the demons of their share, Vishnu spilled four drops of the precious nectar. Where they fell sprang up sacred rivers whose waters wash away sins, now sites for mass Hindu pilgrimages called Kumbh Mela.

For a lunar month every 12 years it falls to Ujjain, a town in the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, to host the Kumbh Mela by the revered Shipra, whose waters meander north into the mighty Ganges and eventually eastward to the Bay of Bengal. By the time the full moon reappears on May 21st tens of millions of bathers, among them thousands of bearded ascetics known as sadhus (pictured), will have worshipped on Ujjain’s teeming riverbanks.

What few are aware of is that the water is no longer the Shipra’s. Urbanisation, rising demand and two years of severe drought have shrivelled the sacred river. Its natural state at this time of year, before the monsoon, would be a dismal sequence of puddles dirtied by industrial and human waste. But the government of Madhya Pradesh, determined to preserve the pilgrimage, has built a massive pipeline diverting into the Shipra the abundant waters of the Narmada river, which spills westward into the Arabian Sea. Giant pumps are sucking some 5,000 litres a second from a canal fed by the Narmada, lifting it by 350 metres and carrying it nearly 50 kilometres to pour into the Shipra’s headwaters. To ensure clean water for the festival, the Shipra’s smaller tributaries have been blocked or diverted, and purifying ozone is being injected into the reconstituted waters in Ujjain itself.

The pilgrims and merchants of Ujjain are happy. But down in the Narmada valley there is little cheer. “They are wasting water on sadhus…while our farms go dry,” says Rameshwar Sitole, a farmer in the hamlet of Kithud. Since March the canal, which feeds his 2.5 hectares of maize and okra along with the farms of 12 other hamlets, has been bone dry. Mr Sitole’s crops have withered and died: a loss, he reckons, of some 50,000 rupees ($750). The government insists the water will return once Ujjain’s pilgrimage ends, but he is not so sure. “They turn it on when we protest, and then take it away again,” Mr Sitole shrugs. Meanwhile, over the hills, industrial users near Ujjain are lobbying loudly to exploit the fancy new water sources.



Poor monsoons are not unusual, but the back-to-back shortfalls, linked to the El Niño effect, which India has experienced in the past two years are very rare. Ten out of 29 states, with a population of some 330m, have been badly hit, with the worst-affected areas in the centre of the country. India is suffering its gravest water shortage since independence, says Himanshu Thakkar, a water expert in Delhi, the capital. Every day brings news of exhausted rivers and wells, destitute farmers migrating to the cities or even committing suicide, water trains being dispatched to parched regions—and of leopards venturing into towns in search of a drink.

The central government has responded with make-work programmes for afflicted areas, emergency shipments of water, and many promises. In February Narendra Modi, the prime minister, pledged to double farm incomes by 2022. Other ministers speak of massive irrigation projects, and have dusted off an ambitious water-diversion scheme for parched regions that is priced at $165 billion and involves no fewer than 37 links between rivers. Most links would be via canals—some 15,000km of artificial waterways in all.

Hydrologists such as Mr Thakkar are sceptical of big projects, open to massive cronyism, when simpler and environmentally sounder solutions are at hand. India relies not on rivers but on underground aquifers for some two-thirds of its irrigation and for more than three-quarters of its drinking water. With 30m wells and pumps at work, it is hardly surprising that groundwater levels have been dropping. Nearly two-thirds of wells tested in a recent nationwide survey showed levels lower than their ten-year average. Much water is being squandered.

Plenty, Mr Thakkar argues, could be done to conserve groundwater; for instance, by collecting and storing rainwater more effectively, regulating consumption, treating urban sewage properly and providing credit for drip irrigation to replace wasteful flooding techniques. And pricing water properly would be much better than shunting it about at great expense. Despite the severity of the current drought, which will end if meteorologists’ predictions of a better-than-average monsoon in June are correct, the real problem is not a lack of water. Per person, India has twice as much of the stuff as water-starved northern China. But India is being hampered by mindless overuse and, in many places, a lack of sensible water-allocation policies.

The contrast between two districts in a corner of Maharashtra state that is severely afflicted by drought provides a case in point. For the past two months the 400,000 residents of Latur, a city 400km east of Mumbai, have had, at great expense, to rely on tanker lorries and trains coming from the Krishna river 350km away to quench their thirst, while the district’s stricken farmers have fled en masse. Nearby Solapur once faced similar problems. Following a bad monsoon in 2012 it had to mobilise more than 650 tanker lorries to get water to needy citizens. This year, under far worse drought conditions, fewer than 20 tankers are operating.

The difference comes down to governance. When Tukaram Mundhe was appointed the main local-government administrator in 2014, he set to work applying laws and policies on groundwater use that had been wilfully ignored in the arid region. “Solapur was not taking any preventive…measures,” he says. “So I took a firm stand. I went directly to the public instead of going through my officers.”

Local farmers were encouraged to revive some 5,000 defunct water sources, such as abandoned wells and silted-up ponds, to collect rainwater. Strict regulation was imposed on these and existing sources, with only nearby farms allowed access. Commercial drilling for new wells was restricted. The owners of a water-guzzling sugar factory were fined for polluting nearby water sources. In Latur, by contrast, politically influential owners kept sugar mills running even as the wells dried up.

With the monsoon looming and their storage capacity high, Solapur’s farmers appear confident of avoiding future shortages. Mr Mundhe says that all his projects are “scalable and replicable”. But he will not have a chance to find out himself. The state government abruptly appointed him last month to a municipal post near Mumbai. Some in Solapur suspect that powerful owners of water-tanker fleets and sugar mills may have had a hand in Mr Mundhe’s sudden transfer.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21698678-indias-water-shortage-owes-more-bad-management-drought-unholy-woes/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Child poverty in Japan

Hidden blight

Japan has more poor children than it thought

May 14th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



VISITORS to Japan rarely encounter the usual markers of privation. Housing is not run down. The urban homeless are out of sight, in makeshift tents in public parks or down by river banks. Japanese cherish a belief that theirs is an egalitarian society. So high poverty among children should come as a shock.

Official figures on child poverty were not even published until 2009. They show that the rate of (relative) child poverty—defined as the proportion of children in households with income after tax and transfers of less than half the national median household income—rose from 11% in 1985 to 16% in 2012, one of the highest rates among OECD countries. The gap between well-off and poor children is more pronounced in Japan than in America, and not far off levels in Mexico and Bulgaria, said Unicef last month.

Couples who both work in low-paid irregular or contract jobs, which now make up around two-fifths of all employment, are particularly badly off. But roughly a third of poor children live with divorced or widowed single mothers. Akiko Kamon, a single mother of two young boys in a hard-up area of Osaka, says she struggles to feed them properly. She wanted to work longer hours to earn more money, but her eight-year-old son burst into tears at the prospect of being left alone. Like many, Ms Kamon won’t take the paltry general welfare on offer, so great in Japan is the social stigma.

Single parents sometimes leave children as young as five at home during the day or night, with a bento box for food. Poverty raises the odds of worse-off children dropping out of school or even sleeping rough. Chiatsu Sumi, the 16-year-old daughter of a single mother from Saitama, near Tokyo, works part-time. But she says she still finds it hard to afford compulsory school trips, the four different kinds of shoes that her school requires and other extras. Poor children are especially prone to being bullied, she says.

Poor kids are not starving, but often the school lunch is their only proper meal, with junk food supplementing their diet. Gas and electricity are often cut off when parents cannot pay the bills, so children end up washing in public toilets. As for socialising with friends in cafés, or affording after-school cramming classes—considered essential for getting into university—these activities are out of the question.

The government is starting to take notice. New measures in 2014 increased the number of social workers in schools and slightly lifted child allowances for single parents for the first time in years. Given that many in the (conservative) ruling Liberal Democratic Party blame single mums for getting divorced, it was surprising that the party did that much, says Aya Abe, who heads a poverty-research unit at Tokyo Metropolitan University.

It may come under pressure to do more. For a government that recently pledged to ensure that every Japanese citizen can play an active role in society, child poverty is awkward. The office of the prime minister, Shinzo Abe, is devising ways to pitch his economic policies as especially helping the young rather than the elderly (on whom the state already spends generously). But competing with recent newspaper headlines about poor children stealing, resorting to prostitution or living in squalid conditions may prove rather hard.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21698687-japan-has-more-poor-children-it-thought-hidden-blight/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Taiwan readies for a new president

Sizing Tsai up

Tsai Ing-wen has a delicate balancing act, both at home and with China

May 14th 2016 | TAIPEI | From the print edition

YOUNG designers have come up with a rose-gold brooch for the ushers at the presidential inauguration on May 20th of Tsai Ing-wen. One of the designers, Zita Hsu, explains that they found inspiration in a mathematical concept known as Euler’s formula to create an abstract design. Both mathematics and Ms Tsai, she adds, embody rationality and calmness.

Ms Tsai will need plenty of both. A quiet, cat-loving former legal scholar, Ms Tsai worked hard in opposition to nudge her party, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), away from economic populism and an anti-China, pro-independence stance towards more moderate views. She was rewarded with a landslide in January elections, in which her party also secured control of the parliament, the Legislative Yuan.

Yet her new administration will have no honeymoon. At home she is under pressure to revive an economy that is barely growing and offers few good jobs to the young. Abroad, she will need to manage delicate relations with China. The Chinese government has made very clear in recent days that it will blame Ms Tsai for any crisis across the Taiwan Strait that might erupt after she takes office.

The economy first. Ms Tsai inherits a growth rate of less than 1%; a trading system skewed heavily towards China; an ageing population; and a pension system for public officials that is going bankrupt. When growth was sizzling, earlier Kuomintang (KMT) governments used to pick developing industries and throw money at them. Now Ms Tsai has to foster an environment that is friendly to innovation and foreign investment. It means dismantling unhelpful regulations, fostering co-ordination among ministries and sharpening up the civil service. Not only KMT-linked business interests will oppose her. Her own left-leaning party is suspicious of business.

Ms Tsai’s government line-up favours technocratic competence over politicking. The prime minister will be Lin Chuan, a former finance minister, reflecting a focus on the economy. Ms Tsai has even put experienced KMT hands in the cabinet. Ms Tsai’s choice of defence minister, Feng Shih-kuan, the former head of a state-run aerospace company, reflects her desire to build up a local defence industry. And the economics minister, Lee Chih-Kung, is an energy expert—the DPP pledges to make Taiwan nuclear-free.

As much as anything, Ms Tsai wants to strengthen trade ties. She seeks better business links with South-East Asia and is keen to launch negotiations for a free-trade agreement with Japan. But greatly expanding trade agreements depends, as ever, on China. It has long frustrated Taiwan and has the power, behind the scenes, to discourage countries or blocs from signing free-trade deals with Taiwan. To date only Singapore and New Zealand have bilateral agreements with both China and Taiwan, while the island is outside South-East Asian initiatives.

As for trade with China itself, it ballooned under the outgoing president, Ma Ying-jeou (as did Chinese tourism to the island). Indeed, Taiwan is one of very few countries to run a trade surplus with China, thanks mainly to contract manufacturing and exports of capital equipment. Yet many Taiwanese resent the relationship, along with the cross-strait trade and economic agreements that multiplied under Mr Ma. Indeed the signing of a services agreement led two years ago to the “sunflower” movement of protesters, who argued that the deal would lead to China’s exerting undue influence on Taiwan. The movement, and subsequent student occupations of the Legislative Yuan, greatly undermined Mr Ma’s presidency.

Yet Ms Tsai has no choice but to grapple with trade issues across the Taiwan Strait. They remain for now at the heart of her island’s prosperity. And not to engage on trade would only confirm Chinese suspicions that Taiwan under the DPP is not to be trusted and is intent on drifting further away from the mainland. She is quietly negotiating with Taiwanese civic groups and student leaders over a bill for monitoring cross-strait trade and economic agreements, one of the protesters’ key demands. Some say they accept Ms Tsai’s tactful avoidance of language that casts Taiwan and China as two separate countries in the DPP’s draft of the bill. To do otherwise would enrage China, which insists that Taiwan, a democratic country, is merely a renegade region that must be reclaimed.

The bill will be deliberated during a parliamentary session that ends by July. Already, one main complaint is that it does not give enough room for public participation or for in-depth legislative review of future agreements. For now the DPP has fallen in line behind Ms Tsai on the bill. The question is how long she can maintain unity on such issues in a party with hardline pro-independence members who do not favour thicker ties with China.

Yet it is not just over trade that Ms Tsai must tread carefully with China. It insists that the rapprochement that took place under Mr Ma, whom China’s president, Xi Jinping, met in a surprise summit in Singapore last November, should continue. But Mr Xi has also made it clear that Ms Tsai’s government must acknowledge that Taiwan, however loosely, remains part of China. To date, the president-elect has promised peace, and no unilateral changes to Taiwan’s status (ie, moving towards formal independence). But China will surely want more. The honeymoon is over before Ms Tsai even begins.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21698707-tsai-ing-wen-has-delicate-balancing-act-both-home-and-china-sizing-tsai-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Kim Jong Un thrills North Koreans with hours of brilliance

Sport of Kims

A rare congress of the Workers’ Party produces almost nothing of note

May 14th 2016 | SEOUL | From the print edition



THE seventh congress of the Workers’ Party was meant to be North Korea’s most notable political shindig in nearly four decades. The sixth, in 1980, was a coming-out party for its then dictator-in-waiting, Kim Jong Il. At this one the late Kim’s son, Kim Jong Un (pictured), spoke for interminable hours to more than 3,000 clapping delegates, lauding a recent nuclear test and missile launch (subjects know nothing of the three that flopped last month) and announcing an empty five-year economic plan. None of the 120-odd foreign journalists invited to cover the show saw any of this gripping stuff, being sent off to a model electric-cable plant, a pristine hospital and a silk mill instead. Things briefly went off-script when North Korea expelled a BBC journalist and his team for “disrespectful” reporting—furnishing visiting media with some news after all.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21698703-rare-congress-workers-party-produces-almost-nothing-note-sport-kims/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

Despotic in Dhaka

Bangladesh is sliding into one-party dictatorship

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



IN TERMS of international news stories per head of population, Bangladesh, a Muslim-majority country of more than 160m, is among the world’s most underreported places. But recently it has been attracting headlines for ugly reasons. First came the religiously motivated murders—of more than two dozen secular bloggers, liberals and others since 2013, typically hacked to death with machetes; then, on May 11th, the execution of Motiur Rahman Nizami, leader of the country’s largest Islamist party, for atrocities committed during the war for independence from Pakistan in 1971. Less reported is Bangladesh’s remorseless descent into authoritarian rule. All three phenomena are symptoms of the same disease: a political culture that cannot brook dissent and which views power as a means to crush it.

The hanging of Mr Nizami is a reminder that Bangladesh was born with the disease. In the war of secession, probably hundreds of thousands died in the former East Pakistan, the Bengali half of a geographically divided country. The Bangladeshi government estimates that 3m died and accuses Pakistan of genocide, systematically killing intellectuals and professionals to blight the new country’s prospects. A crucial role was played by Al-Badr, a pro-Pakistan militia which in 2014 Nizami was convicted of having led.

Many Bangladeshis resented that for so long no one was held responsible for the crimes committed in 1971. So when the government of Sheikh Hasina, the prime minister from the Awami League, set up a tribunal in 2010 to try suspects, it was a popular move. It remains so, but the process has been a travesty: a witch-hunt to weaken opposition to the League rather than a search for justice. Mr Nizami is the fourth senior figure in his party, Jamaat-e-Islami, to be executed. The party was a coalition partner in the previous government of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) of Sheikh Hasina’s nemesis, Khaleda Zia. Mr Nizami served as her industry minister. Jamaat is in decline, but still a force in parts of Bangladesh. Protesters took to the streets after the execution, though not in huge numbers; a strike called after the rejection of Mr Nizami’s final appeal on May 5th was poorly observed.

Bangladesh used to have a kind of rotating one-party system. Sheikh Hasina is trying to keep the one-party bit without the rotation. One of her supporters looks to Malaysia as a model, another moderate Muslim-majority country with a strong economic record and a democratic constitution, but with one party apparently immovable from power. In Bangladesh from 1991 to 2006 the League and BNP would rule in turns, winning elections thanks to popular disgust at the other’s failings, and using their stints in office to enrich themselves and hound the opposition. So entrenched was the winner-takes-all mentality that even the possibility of free elections was unimaginable, and polls were held under supposedly impartial caretaker governments. But after a landslide victory in 2008, the League changed the constitution to get rid of the caretaker arrangement. As a result the BNP boycotted the most recent election, in January 2014. No longer enjoying a popular mandate, and with opposition marginalised, the League has bullied and muzzled the press and bought off public officials with a hefty pay rise. The courts, civil service, army and police are all thoroughly politicised.

That Bangladesh’s government can get away with trampling on democracy, freedom and the rule of law owes much to two factors. One is the “Bangladesh paradox” that, despite everything, the country’s development record is respectable. Somehow, the political mayhem—the repression, the frequent street protests and strikes, the recurrent violence—does not do too much economic damage. Even now, GDP is growing by more than 6% a year.

The second factor is the awfulness of the most recent BNP government. On top of its incompetence, corruption and authoritarianism it was also seen as pandering to extremist Islamist groups. Under its rule, Bangladesh’s most important foreign relationship, with India, languished. (Mr Nizami, besides his war crimes, was also convicted of involvement, as a cabinet minister, in a huge arms-smuggling scandal in 2004, funnelling weapons to insurgents in India’s north-east.) In opposition, the BNP’s record is hardly much better. In early 2015 it was blamed for the killing of civilians to enforce a transport blockade it had called in an effort to bring down the government.

Bad news

For all its sins, the League is still heir to the liberal, secular dreams many Bangladeshis nurtured when they were led to independence by Sheikh Hasina’s father, Mujibur Rahman. The spate of murders, however, makes a mockery of these ideals. Targets have included atheists, liberals, Hindus, gay-rights activists and, on May 7th, a Sufi Muslim leader. The government insists that culprits are being hunted, caught and prosecuted. But it has seemed far more critical of the victims’ perceived crimes against Islam than of their murderers. The perception is of a culture of impunity and that the League, too, is appeasing Islamists.

The government blames the murders on the BNP and Jamaat. It resists claims that Islamic State and al-Qaeda are to blame, because it likes to present itself as the best bastion against Islamist extremism in Bangladesh. Many outsiders, nevertheless, fear fanaticism is on the rise. Last month eight Bangladeshi migrant workers were detained in Singapore, having allegedly formed a group called Islamic State in Bangladesh and plotted attacks in their homeland. With mainstream political competition foreclosed, extremist fringes are likely to thrive. The religious murders may provide grisly evidence of this. They also attract headlines abroad that foster the paranoid nightmares said to haunt Sheikh Hasina: that, having vanquished her enemies at home, she will somehow be brought down by meddling foreigners.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21698677-bangladesh-sliding-one-party-dictatorship-despotic-dhaka/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



China





The Cultural Revolution, 50 years on: It was the worst of times

Xi Jinping and the Cultural Revolution: Mao, diluted





Articles Sections Next

The Cultural Revolution, 50 years on

It was the worst of times

China is still in denial about its “spiritual holocaust”

May 14th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



IN FEBRUARY 1970 a 16-year-old boy, Zhang Hongbing, denounced his mother to an army officer in his village in Anhui province, in eastern China. He slipped a note under the officer’s door accusing her of criticising the Cultural Revolution and its leader, Mao Zedong. She was bound, publicly beaten and executed. Decades later Mr Zhang began writing a blog about the tragedy, seeking to clear his mother’s name and to explain how her death happened. “I want to make people in China think,” he wrote in April. “How could there be such a horrifying tragedy of…a son sending his mother to execution? And how can we prevent it from happening again?” Mr Zhang suffers recurrent nightmares about his mother. So does China about the Cultural Revolution.

What documents at the time called “the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolutionary bugle to advance” first sounded 50 years ago, on May 16th 1966, when Mao approved a secret circular declaring war on “representatives of the bourgeoisie” who had “sneaked into the Communist Party, the government, the army and various spheres of culture”. Just over a year later Mao wrote to his wife, Jiang Qing, that he wanted to create “great disorder under heaven” so as to achieve “greater order under heaven”.

He achieved only the first. Between May 1966 and Mao’s death in 1976, which in effect ended the Cultural Revolution, over 1m died, millions more were banished from urban homes to the countryside and tens of millions were humiliated or tortured. The Communist Party does not want any public commemoration of those horrors. Though it has called the Cultural Revolution a “catastrophe”, it fears that too much scrutiny might call into question the party’s fitness to rule. But debate about it still rages on the internet in China, and even occasionally surfaces in mainstream publications.

Its wounds are still raw. On May 2nd the Great Hall of the People in Tiananmen Square held a gala concert featuring “red songs” of the period, triggering uproar on social media. Xi Jinping, China’s president, was himself a victim. Yet his seeming fondness for Mao, his contempt for Western liberal thinking and his ruthless campaigns against political enemies cause some to see parallels between China today and that of Mao’s later years (see article). Like an unexorcised demon, the Cultural Revolution still torments China.

To most outsiders, the period was one of those episodes of unreason that can afflict a great nation, comparable, say, to France’s reign of terror in 1793, though that nightmare lasted only ten months and claimed fewer lives. The Cultural Revolution involved three years of mob violence and an entire decade of terror (or more—even in 1978, two years after Mao’s death, the Cultural Revolution was officially described as having been “triumphant”).

It was a time of ignorance and folly. “They beat her to death with their clubs,” wrote a student about his teacher. “It was immensely satisfying.” Schools and universities closed for months or years on end. When it reopened, Beijing Middle School Number 23 was held up as a model for devoting many hours to Mao Zedong Thought and the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, and for dedicating “a very limited amount of time…to general cultural knowledge (for example, Chinese, mathematics and foreign languages).”

The struggle of memory

It was a time of devastation. The demolition of ancient monuments by Islamic State in the Syrian city of Palmyra was an echo of what happened in Qufu, Confucius’s birthplace in eastern China, in 1966. Groups of Red Guards (Maoist youth gangs) took over the Confucian temple there, a great national treasure, and smashed it up. They destroyed thousands of manuscripts, ancient stone tablets and other “feudal property”. Of the 6,843 officially designated places of cultural and historic interest in Beijing, Red Guards vandalised 4,922.

Above all, it was a time of death. In Wuhan, in central China, where 54 rival Red Guard groups fought it out, middle-school students were paid 50 yuan (roughly a month’s wages) by gang leaders to kill children in rival factions. “I killed five kids with my star-knife,” wrote one teenager. In Daxing, on the southern outskirts of Beijing, 325 people from “landlord and rich peasant families” were killed in one night, with most of the bodies dumped down a well. A Chinese journalist who visited in 2000 was told of an old lady and her granddaughter being buried alive. “Granny, I’m getting sand in my eyes,” the child cried. “Soon you will not feel it any more,” came the reply.

In a nightmarish confluence of class hatred and reversion to primitive custom, it is claimed that victims in Guangxi, a province in southern China, were eaten according to rank. In “The Cultural Revolution: a People’s History” (see article), Frank Dikötter quotes a local account asserting that “leaders feasted on the heart and liver, mixed with pork, while ordinary villagers were only allowed to peck at the victims’ arms and thighs.”

The people’s entertainment

Mr Dikötter estimates that between 1.5m and 2m were killed in political violence across China between 1966 and 1976. As a proportion of the total population (then 750m), that was smaller than the number of Chinese killed in pogroms in Indonesia just before the Cultural Revolution began. It was also eclipsed by the numbers killed in earlier episodes of violence and calamity inflicted upon China by its Communist leaders. Millions had died in purges of “landlords” and “counter-revolutionaries” in the early years after Mao’s victory in the civil war of the 1940s. Tens of millions perished in the famine Mao created with his “Great Leap Forward” of the late 1950s.

But what made the Cultural Revolution so unusual was its assault not only upon the lives but also on the values and norms by which people had lived for centuries. One of its core purposes was to accelerate the eradication of the “Four Olds”: old customs, old culture, old habits, old ideas. So family ties, cultural traditions and Confucian principles of respect for the elderly and learning all became targets of Mao’s revolutionary fury. Ba Jin, a novelist, once called the Cultural Revolution China’s “spiritual Holocaust”—a stretch but perhaps an understandable one. In “Mao’s Last Revolution”, Roderick MacFarquhar and Michael Schoenhals quote the chairman as saying “this man Hitler was even more ferocious. The more ferocious, the better, don’t you think? The more people you kill, the more revolutionary you are.”

But the Cultural Revolution was not anarchic for anarchy’s sake. It was manipulated by Mao to rid himself of rivals, real and imagined, and to purge the Communist Party of doubters of his wisdom. After the famine, Mao thought he was being sidelined. To reassert control, he called on students and workers to “bombard the headquarters”, that is, attack everyone in authority—except himself and those he had clearly signalled to be his allies. By 1968 almost three-quarters of the members of the Central Committee had been dubbed traitors or counter-revolutionaries. They included Liu Shaoqi, the state president, whom Mao had once tipped as his successor. Had Mao seen his revolution mainly as a means of defeating rivals, he might have stopped there. But he wanted it to go further. According to Chen Boda, Mao’s secretary in the early 1950s and later the Cultural Revolution’s chief propagandist, Mao thought that, when righting a wrong, one had to “go beyond the proper limits”. This he repeatedly did.

Disorder under heaven

Almost all countries struggle to come to terms with dark periods in their histories. Japan, for example, has failed fully to acknowledge its wartime atrocities. China is no exception. Both its government and its people wrestle with the story of the Cultural Revolution.

For many young people at the time, the Cultural Revolution was a thrilling experience, a period when those in authority were humbled and peasants and workers were encouraged to speak up (as long as they supported Mao); when students could travel free by train and meet comrades from other parts of China.

Zhang Baohua, a member of a group that promotes orthodox Maoism via a website in China called Utopia, recently wrote about China’s modern leftists commemorating the achievements of the Cultural Revolution with seminars, lectures and other public events. He admitted they are being kept low-key, lest the government stop them.

Many of today’s leaders spent their formative years in the Cultural Revolution. Of the seven members of the Politburo’s Standing Committee, the party’s highest organ, four others shared President Xi’s experience of banishment to the countryside to “learn from the peasants”, including: the prime minister, Li Keqiang; the chief ideologue, Liu Yunshan; and the anti-corruption chief, Wang Qishan. The sister of another, Yu Zhengsheng, committed suicide after persecution by schoolmates. Mr Xi’s half-sister also committed suicide.

Many perpetrators survived, too many to prosecute. And millions were both perpetrator and victim. Red Guard torturers were tortured in their turn. Among a generation of educated teenagers sent to the countryside were some who had been vicious fanatics. And although for some of those rusticated the experience was liberating, for many others it was grim. Girls were raped; girls and boys starved. No wonder older Chinese do not want to revive such memories.

Thomas Plankers, a German psychologist, argues in “Landscapes of the Chinese Soul” that, in the few countries where people have come to terms with dark periods in their history, historians and public intellectuals have played vital roles in overcoming the reluctance of politicians and ordinary people to talk openly. That process has not happened in China.

One reason for the silence is private reticence. But another is Mao’s unique position. Whereas in the former Soviet Union, the chief perpetrator of terror, Joseph Stalin, had not been the founder of the Communist state (that was Vladimir Lenin), in China, Mao was both. At the end of his life, he described his two proudest achievements as the founding of Communist China and the launching of the Cultural Revolution. It is impossible to separate one from the other. “Discrediting Comrade Mao Zedong”, said Deng Xiaoping in 1981, “would mean discrediting our party and state.”

That could not be tolerated, so official historians, with Deng’s guidance, concocted a careful formula. In 1981 the Central Committee published a “Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party”. It argued that Mao had “initiated and led” the Cultural Revolution, which it called a “grave blunder”. But “as for Lin Biao [Mao’s chosen successor in 1969-71], Jiang Qing and others…the matter is of an entirely different nature. They…committed many crimes behind his [Mao’s] back, bringing disaster to the country and the people.” And having established that, Deng said he hoped debate on major historical questions would come to an end. It was a sort of historical omerta.

And it has mostly been respected. A few memoirs have been published. In the late 1970s a so-called “scar” literature appeared, in which writers sought to describe their experiences. And in March Wang Meng, a former minister of culture under Deng, wrote in Yanhuang Chunqiu, a reformist magazine, that China bore an “unshirkable responsibility” to explain the politics of the Cultural Revolution. “The Chinese people should be doing this, the Chinese Communist Party should be doing this, Chinese scholars should be doing this. It is the duty of the Chinese people, to history and to the world.”

But public discussion is rare. Most Chinese historians have steered clear of writing about the period. Shapingba cemetery in the south-western city of Chongqing is the only one dedicated to the dead of the Cultural Revolution, bearing monuments to hundreds of Red Guards, most of whom were killed in battles with another faction. It is closed most of the year. Museums gloss over the period. And this year China’s leaders, who love to celebrate anniversaries at every opportunity, will draw a veil of silence over the decade.



Yet however much the Cultural Revolution is ignored officially, it casts a long shadow. Widespread abhorrence of it enabled the eventual rise of pragmatists led by Deng Xiaoping, who ushered in economic and social reforms. But it also exacerbated widespread disenchantment with politics; Rana Mitter, a historian at Oxford University, notes that older generations that suffered under Mao’s endless political campaigns and policy flip-flops transmitted their disillusionment to younger ones. Perhaps, Mr Plankers suggests, Chinese people are unusually determined to succeed in business partly in order to protect themselves against the randomness of power embodied in the Cultural Revolution.

Failure’s inheritance

Yet the reaction against a decade in which ideology trumped all has not helped China’s leaders think more profoundly about how to avoid the destructive caprices of unrestrained power. In a rare criticism of this omission, China’s then prime minister, Wen Jiabao, warned in 2012 that without successful political reform, “such historical tragedies as the Cultural Revolution may happen again in China.”

The violence of the Cultural Revolution, and the many officials it claimed as victims, may explain why China’s liberalisation of the economy has not gone hand-in-hand with greater democracy. To Westerners, the students protesting in Tiananmen Square in 1989 may have seemed a million miles from the Red Guards who had assembled there more than two decades earlier screaming Maoist slogans. But to China’s leaders, there has always been a connection: that the Cultural Revolution was a kind of “big democracy” (as Mao called it) in which ordinary people were given the power to topple officials they hated. The students in 1989 may not have been Mao-worshippers, but had they been given a chance, they would have acted just like the Red Guards, according to the logic of Chinese officials—with chaotic, vindictive rage. They produce no evidence. They do not need to. The nightmare of the Cultural Revolution continues to disturb the dream of Chinese democracy.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21698701-china-still-denial-about-its-spiritual-holocaust-it-was-worst-times/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Xi Jinping and the Cultural Revolution

Mao, diluted

The Cultural Revolution echoes faintly in Xi Jinping’s rule

May 14th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition

THE Cultural Revolution was a hellish period for millions of Chinese. President Xi Jinping’s father, Xi Zhongxun, a minister under Mao, was tortured, and a half-sister committed suicide. Yet some who lived through the period (those who suffered less) recall aspects of it with nostalgia. So it is with mixed feelings that Chinese now view the recent reappearance of some of the ingredients that made that era so toxic.

Many liberals in China wince at a renewed emphasis under Mr Xi on the Communist Party’s traditional beliefs, including “Mao Zedong thought”. They fret about adulation of Mr Xi in the official media—faintly reminiscent of Mao’s personality cult, which reached fever pitch during the Cultural Revolution. Others shrug. China needs a strongman like Mao, they say (though not his Red Guard mobs).

Mr Xi wants to be seen as such a man. By taking all the top jobs under his control, he has been turning away from the collective leadership of equals that Deng had created after the Cultural Revolution to ensure the capricious rule of someone like Mao could never happen again. In early April Mr Xi gave himself a new title: “commander-in-chief” of the Joint Operations Command, a new body (he was already head of the armed forces). He showed this off by appearing for the first time in public wearing combat fatigues.

Mr Xi clearly worries that liberals might try to use the horrors of the Cultural Revolution to negate Mao entirely, and thus the party’s right to rule. He has been campaigning against what he calls “historical nihilism”, namely attempts to blacken the party’s early record by contrasting it with the prosperity of the post-Mao era.

Officially, the Cultural Revolution is still described as having inflicted “untold disasters” on China. But Mr Xi wants the period since 1949 to be seen as a continuous whole, with no break in 1976 when Mao died. He does not want people to conclude that Mao was all bad.

There are huge differences between Mr Xi’s rule and the Cultural Revolutionary period, of course. Mr Xi has no truck with Maoist ideas about permanent revolution. Through his anti-corruption campaign, he is attacking his enemies in the party, but his attacks come from above, not (as in the Cultural Revolution) from below. He is even rumoured to be trying to dampen his mini-personality cult. But as Andrew Nathan of Columbia University points out, even distant parallels are worrying. Mr Xi is blowing on the embers of the conflagration that consumed China 50 years ago.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21698708-cultural-revolution-echoes-faintly-xi-jinpings-rule-mao-diluted/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Middle East and Africa





The Democratic Republic of Congo: The guide to the promised land?

Zimbabwe’s new currency: Who wants to be a trillionaire?

Closing the world’s largest refugee camp: Kenya says go home

Sierra Leone’s first post-war traffic light: Amber for recovery

Fighting Islamic State in Libya: The scramble for Sirte

Israeli agriculture: Desert wines





Articles Sections Next

The Democratic Republic of Congo

The guide to the promised land?

Moïse Katumbi takes on President Joseph Kabila

May 14th 2016 | LUBUMBASHI | From the print edition



AT THE Palais de Justice in Lubumbashi, the Democratic Republic of Congo’s second biggest city, an impressive piece of political theatre is about to unfold. Hundreds of cops in navy-blue uniforms form a cordon, clutching riot shields and smoke grenades. They are waiting for the arrival of Moïse Katumbi Chapwe, a former governor of Katanga, the region of which Lubumbashi is the capital, whom the government has accused of hiring mercenaries and plotting a coup.

When Mr Katumbi arrives, he does so in a black minivan surrounded by a huge crowd of people who fill the square, singing and waving signs that read “Je Suis Moïse”. Dressed all in white, with a Congolese flag around his neck, he clambers out and pushes through the crowd, ascends the steps and goes inside. The moment the doors of the Belgian-built 1920s Art Deco building close, the cops rush the crowd, firing tear gas and waving tasers. In less than a minute, the square is devoid of anyone not wearing a blue uniform.

Over the past year, Mr Katumbi has become Congo’s most influential opposition leader. Few believe the accusation about mercenaries: despite raiding Mr Katumbi’s homes, the Congolese government has arrested only a few unarmed security guards. The American embassy has dismissed the claim. But even without armed men, Mr Katumbi may be the biggest threat to Congo’s president, Joseph Kabila.

Under the constitution, adopted in 2006 at the end of a war that killed anywhere between half a million and 5m people (nobody is sure), Mr Kabila should stand down at the end of his second term in December. But the former guerrilla, who took over as president when his father was murdered in 2001, shows little sign of planning to do so. As a result Congo, a country of perhaps 90m people four times the size of France, which outside its fragile eastern regions has been relatively stable for the past decade, may be plunged back into chaos.



Mr Katumbi formally entered the race on May 4th, the same day that the accusations about mercenaries emerged. His plans were hardly secret, however. In September he split from Mr Kabila’s party together with a number of other influential Congolese politicians, declaring that he no longer believed the president would respect the constitution. Ever since, he has been courting the press and nurturing allies among Congo’s disparate opposition.

More than anyone else, Mr Katumbi has the chance to build a coalition able to force Mr Kabila to step down. In Katanga, where he was born—the son of a Greek Jew and his Congolese wife—he is enormously popular. Having made a fortune in servicing mining companies, in 1997 he bought TP Mazembe, Lubumbashi’s football team, and turned it into Africa’s most successful. Katanga, by far Congo’s wealthiest region, is also its most functional. Some of this is thanks to Mr Katumbi’s work as governor, at a time when international mining companies moved back to Katanga having all but abandoned it.

The president, by contrast, is deeply unpopular in most of the country. He won elections in 2006 and 2011, but against a divided opposition, and amid widespread irregularities. In both cases, he relied heavily on support from Katanga, and in turn on Mr Katumbi, who was one of his closest allies in government.

That support is now almost all gone. “We do not want another Mobutu,” says a smartly dressed man who gives his name as Constantine, outside a pharmacy in Lubumbashi (Mobutu was the dictator of the then Zaire from 1965 to 1997). “I was not a supporter of Moïse Katumbi, but today I am,” he says.

The question is whether Mr Kabila can gather enough support to stay in power despite the constitution, following the example set by the presidents of Congo-Brazzaville, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi. So far the indications are that he is weaker than his peers. At the end of 2014 he sought to change the constitution. Some 40 protesters were shot by the police on the streets of Kinshasa. But the gambit failed.

Since then, he has followed a strategy of glissement, or slippage. He split Congo’s 11 regions into 26, in the process ejecting many of his opponents from their positions. He has starved the election commission of funds and has claimed an election is impossible to organise. That, the Supreme Court has just ruled, would allow him to stay on past December. Most recently, he has started a “national dialogue” to try to convince opposition leaders to support a way for him to stay in power.

But he has also embarked on a policy of repression. Whereas soldiers fighting rebels in the east do so with ancient weapons, the police in opposition strongholds such as Lubumbashi are smartly equipped with brand new equipment, such as the tasers. Protests have been put down by force. Hundreds of people—opposition politicians, activists and journalists—have been arrested across the country.

This has not made Mr Kabila more popular. And too-blatant repression is threatening to undo him. Diplomats from donor countries are talking about imposing targeted sanctions if Mr Kabila does not leave office. More importantly, the economy is slowing because of lower commodity prices. In Katanga some mines have closed and many Western investors are pulling out. On May 9th Freeport, a large American firm, announced that it planned to sell its copper mine to a Chinese firm for $2.65 billion. The government is running through its reserves fast and, being unable to borrow, is printing money.

What happens next is anyone’s guess; the government is plainly nervous about the local reaction if it tries to cart Mr Katumbi off to Kinshasa for trial. A day before he was taken to court, Mr Katumbi explained his strategy at the tennis courts behind his house in Lubumbashi, a mansion festooned with football memorabilia. “He can’t bribe all of the population and he can’t kill all of the population.” Mr Katumbi proposes to lead demonstrations against the government until it gives up—and if he is arrested, or worse, killed, then to become a martyr. “My fight is a pitiful fight. I have no gun. But if I die, it will be for a cause,” he says, somewhat grandiloquently for a man dressed in whites and clutching a racquet. He thinks that Mr Kabila should step down gracefully.

Yet others are fearful of nastier consequences. Not everyone in Congo will embrace a president from the south, like Mr Katumbi. In the east, in particular, as many as 70 armed groups still run rackets and fight localised wars with the government and each other. Many are hostile to the entire Congolese state, not just to Mr Kabila. Even if he does not step down, Mr Kabila may struggle to stay in control of much of the country. And Congo’s history shows that when the president struggles, bloodshed quickly follows.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698657-mo-se-katumbi-takes-president-joseph-kabila-guide-promised-land/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Zimbabwe’s new currency

Who wants to be a trillionaire?

Lock up your dollars right now; Mugabenomics is back

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



LIKE the governors of the Reichsbank, who kept on speeding up the printing presses as Germany plunged into ever-steepening hyperinflation in the 1920s, insisting that the real problem was a shortage of banknotes, Zimbabwe’s government claimed to have overturned the laws of economics during its own bout of hyperinflation nearly a decade ago. Gideon Gono, then governor of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe, claimed that “traditional economics do not fully apply in this country,” and said “I am going to print and print and sign the money…because we need money.”

The result was an increase in prices so swift that it was almost impossible to calculate the rate of inflation. By some estimates it peaked at 500 billion per cent, as the government printed ever-larger denominations. Notes such as one with a face value of 100 trillion Zimbabwe dollars are worth much more now as a novelty on eBay (where they sell for about $45) than they ever were in shops in Harare.

Zimbabwe finally tamed inflation in 2009, when it abandoned the Zim dollar and started using American dollars and other foreign currencies instead. (It converted bank balances to US dollars at a rate of $1 for every 35 quadrillion Zim dollars.) That brought instant relief. But the government of Robert Mugabe, a 92-year-old who has held power since the end of white rule in 1980, has again been spending more than it collects in taxes, and importing more than it exports. It does not help that Mr Mugabe destroyed the country’s main source of foreign revenue when he chased mainly white farmers off their land and handed it to ruling-party bigwigs.

Without money to pay civil servants—in particular the soldiers and policemen who keep Mr Mugabe in power—the government intends to start printing it again. This time it insists it is not bringing back the reviled “new” Zim dollar, but is printing notes that are “backed” by some $200m that Zimbabwe has borrowed from the African Export-Import Bank. However, it seems unlikely that holders of these new notes will be allowed to exchange them for those real dollars.

Given Mr Mugabe’s track record, that means they are likely to plummet in value very fast. Slow-motion bank runs have already started, as savers fret that their US dollars will be forcibly converted into the new notes. Banks have had to restrict dollar withdrawals, in some cases to as little as $20 a day. The last bout of hyperinflation wiped out savers and pensioners. Savers are braced to be robbed again.

The governor of the Reserve Bank, John Mangudya, insists the new notes will be an “incentive” to exporters, not a return to the bad old days. Not even the government believes this. It will not, for example, be using them to pay civil servants. Instead they will be foisted onto exporters who, having paid their suppliers and workers in hard cash, will have to accept funny money for their earnings. What could go wrong? Many will go bust, so export revenues will quickly tumble. Eddie Cross, an opposition MP, says the new policy could mean “the final collapse of the economy”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698658-lock-up-your-dollars-right-now-mugabenomics-back-who-wants-be/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Closing the world’s largest refugee camp

Kenya says go home

Or are the refugees bargaining chips?

May 14th 2016 | NAIROBI | From the print edition

THE world’s largest refugee camp looks permanent. The first tents were pitched in the desert almost 25 years ago. Dadaab now sprawls over more than 50 square kilometres (20 square miles) on the arid Kenyan-Somali border. It is home to some 344,000 people, mostly Somalis who have fled their war, as well as shops, makeshift cinemas and a football league. The Kenyan government now wants to dismantle what is in effect a medium-sized city, along with Kakuma, a second smaller camp of 189,000 refugees close to South Sudan and Uganda. Neither task will be easy; either would provoke outrage.

The country’s interior ministry announced on May 6th that it wanted to close the two camps as quickly as possible, citing risks to national security. A similar pledge was made last year after 147 students at Garissa University were killed by attackers from a Somali terrorist group, al-Shabaab, (who some security officials say had links with Dadaab). On that occasion, an international outcry, culminating in a visit from John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, forced the government to back down. This time it seems more serious. It has repeated its declaration several times; and now, ominously, Kenya’s Department of Refugee Affairs (DRA) has also been shut down.

“We can’t do anything right now because we don’t exist,” says one aid worker. Some 70-100 asylum seekers arrive from South Sudan every day, but they cannot be registered and moved into Kakuma’s main camp, according to Lennart Hernander of the Lutheran World Federation, which manages the camp’s overflowing reception centre. The DRA is (or was) also responsible for issuing passes for medical emergencies that cannot be treated in camp hospitals; charity workers fear death rates will rise as a result.

Aid agencies in Kenya and beyond have struggled to respond to the latest announcement. As The Economist went to press the UNHCR still had not been able to meet the government to decipher its motives or plans. In an article published on May 9th the interior ministry’s top civil servant, Karanja Kibicho, said that terrorist attacks, including one on the Westgate Mall in 2013, had been “planned and executed from Dadaab”. Others, though, put more of the blame on endemic problems within the Kenyan security services. Although a settlement that size has almost certainly been infiltrated by al-Shabaab to some extent, “those attacks couldn’t have happened without the same kind of vulnerabilities you find across Kenya,” says Cedric Barnes of the International Crisis Group. Kenya’s security has been improving, thanks in part to increased intelligence co-operation with Western countries.

Money is probably the real reason for the sudden announcement. Mr Kibicho pointedly mentioned in his article that donor funds are being switched from Kenya to deal with the influx of migrants to Europe. Having seen Turkey secure promises of €6 billion of aid in return for taking migrants back from Greece, Kenya doubtless wants more from the West.

AMISOM, the African Union force in Somalia, to which Kenya contributes more than 3,500 troops, needs a new UN mandate at the end of May. Moving half a million people out of Kenya is impossible, at least without immense cruelty. So the chances are that the threat of closure is a desperate appeal for more funds. But whether any will be forthcoming is still an open question.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698675-or-are-refugees-bargaining-chips-kenya-says-go-home/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sierra Leone’s first post-war traffic light

Amber for recovery

After years of war, progress of sorts

May 14th 2016 | FREETOWN | From the print edition



MULTI-COLOURED minibuses, shabby motorbike-taxis, white four-wheel-drives and battered jeeps stream through the centre of Freetown, overtaking on both sides, hooting as they go. A few strategically positioned cops try to control the flow by waving sticks and yelling at bad drivers over a cacophony of horns. They act as inefficient human traffic lights, with the added power to stop helmetless bikers and extract small bribes from them with the threat of a visit to the police station.

Until this month, Sierra Leone had not seen a real traffic light in more than 14 years. They were all stolen and sold for scrap during a civil war that lasted, off and on, from 1991 to 2002. During that period rebel armies rampaged through the country, terrorising civilians and sometimes chopping off their hands. Hungry for booty, they grabbed whatever they could carry off, from livestock to diamonds, aid shipments, televisions, cars—and traffic lights.

So Sierra Leone’s first post-war traffic light, which now stands proudly at a busy crossroads in downtown Freetown, is more than just a tool to ease congestion. The president’s spokesman, Abdulai Bayraytay, says it represents “a transformation. We are moving forward as a country; the light is part of our reconstruction effort.” Erected on President Ernest Bai Koroma’s personal instructions, it is supposed to be the first of many that will appear around the country in the years to come.

As well as demonstrating the nation’s recovery, Mr Bayraytay believes that the light will also help reduce corruption. “The traffic police are perceived as being very corrupt, and if we limit human contact in road services there will be less misconduct,” he says.

For all the government’s efforts to portray a single traffic light as a symbol of progress, it also serves as a reminder that the country’s recovery has a long way to go. Growth has averaged 5.1% a year since the war ended. But if you stroll to the heaving junction where the light is, you will see that it works fitfully, blinking only with an amber bulb. Road users, many of whom have never seen a traffic light before, are cheerfully oblivious.

It may be just a matter of time until the light is working properly. But a cynic might speculate that it is purely for show. Sierra Leone is gearing up for elections, with parliamentary and presidential polls due next year. Symbols are becoming rather more important than anything so mundane as managing the traffic.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698672-after-years-war-progress-sorts-amber-recovery/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Fighting Islamic State in Libya

The scramble for Sirte

Libya’s armed groups take aim at the jihadists, and each other

May 14th 2016 | CAIRO | From the print edition



ISLAMIC STATE (IS) in Libya is a popular target these days. From the east and south, the army of Khalifa Haftar, Libya’s most potent warlord, is moving on the coastal city of Sirte, which is controlled by some 5,000 jihadists. To the west, the UN-backed administration of Fayez al-Serraj has created an anti-IS command centre in Tripoli, the capital. And a rival government in the west is also preparing for the fight, as are tribes around Sirte.

It is a shame, then, that these groups are failing to work together. The main divide, as ever, is between the east, where General Haftar backs yet another government, and the west, where Mr Serraj is struggling to establish his authority. Each side sees the fight against IS as an opportunity to bolster its standing—at the other’s expense. They are both scrambling for Sirte and may soon take aim at each other, as well as the jihadists. The UN warns of civil war again.

America and Europe want Libya’s armed groups to unite under Mr Serraj, who was installed as prime minister after politicians from both sides of the country signed an agreement in December. But that deal has still not been approved by the parliament in the east, where some oppose handing control of the army to the new administration without guaranteeing the future of General Haftar.

Mr Serraj has hunkered down at a naval base since arriving in Tripoli on March 30th. After a smooth start, in which he was handed control of state institutions and backed by several militias, he has struggled to make progress. Citizens still suffer from power cuts, cash shortages and a lack of security. Worse, IS is on the move. On May 5th the jihadists took Abu Grain, 130km west of Sirte, without much of a fight from the forces aligned with Mr Serraj.

Needing to reassert some authority, Mr Serraj announced his new-command centre the following day. He has filled it with army officers from Misrata, home to dozens of linked militia groups that form the main rivals to General Haftar’s forces. Their focus is meant to be on the west of the country, to avoid an inter-regional conflict. But Misratan forces have already skirmished with General Haftar’s troops near Zillah, south of Sirte.

It is, for now, “a rhetorical race to Sirte”, says Jason Pack of Libya-Analysis, a consultancy. No one has actually attacked the jihadists. General Haftar, who is backed by Egypt and the UAE, is still consolidating his supply lines. But he seems eager to prove himself an indispensable ally in the West’s fight against IS—and to increase his influence in future negotiations over the shape of Libya’s government. Some believe he is hoping for Mr Serraj to fail, and then to assume the role of strongman.

On his way to Sirte General Haftar may try to snatch up oil facilities along the coast, which are protected by the semi-official Petroleum Facilities Guard. The black stuff is yet another cause of dispute between east and west. The national oil firm, which has pledged its allegiance to Mr Serraj, is the only body allowed to export oil, says the UN. But the eastern government has set up a parallel institution and tried: on April 25th a tanker carrying its first shipment was turned back from Malta.

The eastern government has since blocked all oil shipments from the port of Marsa el-Hariga. If its allies gain control of facilities in Brega, nearly all Libya’s already diminished oil exports could be cut off. That would deny Mr Serraj a critical source of revenue, and legitimacy—he, of course, has to pay salaries and run the state. Libya’s foreign reserves, used to keep it afloat, are running perilously low.

General Haftar is raising tensions in other ways. He has refused to meet Martin Kobler, the UN’s envoy to Libya. And he has struck an alliance with commanders who served under Muammar Qaddafi, Libya’s late dictator. IS, for its part, is likely to put up a vicious defence of its stronghold. America, Britain and France, which have troops on the ground in Libya, may eventually be forced to choose between backing Mr Haftar in his fight against IS in Sirte, or preserving the legitimacy of Mr Serraj.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698671-libyas-armed-groups-take-aim-jihadists-and-each-other-scramble/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Israeli agriculture

Desert wines

How to grow grapes where the ground is a griddle

May 14th 2016 | BE’ER SHEVA | From the print edition

The desert shall rejoice

DANIEL KISH once speared fish for a living. Now he makes wine in Israel’s Negev desert. Sipping on Shoshanna, a spicy blend of petite sirah, zinfandel, merlot and shiraz named after his mother, he explains why winemaking there can be so hard. The ground is rocky and parched. The sun is fearfully hot. And the local Thomson’s gazelles adore grapes. “You’ve opened a restaurant in the desert. So of course animals are going to eat,” he says. Mr Kish produces between 6,000 and 7,000 bottles of wine a year; he reckons each costs 45 shekels ($12) to make. They sell for just over twice that at his vineyard on Kish Farm. Keeping the process kosher is costly.

A region’s climate determines its terroir—the environmental elements that affect the quality of grapes, such as rainfall, temperature and soil conditions. Consequently, vineyards and their produce serve as a particularly sensitive means of measuring climate change. Most grapes grow between temperatures of 12°C and 22°C. So research in recent years suggests that, in a warmer world, grapes will cope better at higher latitudes and elevations.

A study published last month in Nature Climate Change, a journal, found that grapes across France are now harvested two weeks earlier than they were 500 years ago. This trend could mean that wine gets worse, as it did after Europe’s heatwave in 2003. Grapes exposed to too much sun become sweeter and less acidic; eventually, they become raisins. Some spots, such as California’s Napa Valley, may get too hot for vines altogether. This will squeeze the juice out of an industry that generates more than $1 billion a year in taxes in America.

Israel’s deserts can serve as laboratories for growing vines in warmer conditions. Intense sunshine there can mean that one side of a grape can warm to 50°C in the summer, while the side in shadow will experience temperatures of just 30°C. Aaron Fait, an Italian academic at Ben Gurion University, is using nets of different densities and colours to protect the growing clusters. The temperature, weight, size and chemical composition of the grapes are monitored and conditions tweaked accordingly.

Dr Fait also researches the combinations of cultivars and root stocks that will allow water to be used most efficiently; certain Australian types are particularly hardy. And trimming, or using trellises to force vines into different growth-patterns, can help manage the efficiency of their water use. Dr Fait already advises vintners in Bordeaux on how to beat the heat. “These new strategies for irrigation and shading will keep the wine industry going,” he reckons. L’chaim!



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21698670-how-grow-grapes-where-ground-griddle-desert-wines/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Europe





Russia and Syria: The withdrawal that wasn’t

German football: Red Bull gives you wingers

Austrian politics: Waltzing out of the door

France’s recovery: Ça va

Schools in Finland: Helsinking

Charlemagne: Europa all’italiana





Articles Sections Next

Russia and Syria

The withdrawal that wasn’t

Syria still provides a useful stage for Russian strategy—and propaganda

May 14th 2016 | LATAKIA, MOSCOW AND PALMYRA | From the print edition



VLADIMIR PUTIN stares out from a poster hanging at Russian army installations throughout Syria. “Russia’s armed forces are the guarantor of world security,” the posters declare. It is a good summary of the thinking behind Russia’s mission, which has never been mainly about Syria. When it intervened in Syria last year, Russia sought to provide TV spectacles for the masses at home, re-establish itself as a global power and force the West into taking account of Russian interests.

So when Mr Putin said in March that “the main part” of Russia’s forces could now leave Syria, their mission having been accomplished, he was partly telling the truth. Russia today hardly looks like the mere “regional power” that Barack Obama once dubbed it. Any path to peace in Syria now runs through Moscow. “Only Russia and the United States of America are in a state to stop the war in Syria, even though they have different political interests and goals,” wrote Valery Gerasimov, chief of Russia’s general staff, in a recent article.

The curious thing about Russia’s withdrawal, however, is that it has not actually happened. To leave would be to abandon Russian influence and hand Syria over to Mr Assad’s other ally, Iran. Rather than withdrawing his forces, Mr Putin has retrenched. The March announcement was really “a way to reconceptualise the presence as permanent, rather than as part of a specific mission,” says Dmitry Gorenburg, an expert on the Russian armed forces. Russia did recall a handful of aircraft—a signal to Syria’s stubborn president, Bashar al-Assad, not to take it for granted. But its footprint in Syria remains heavy.



The Khmeimim airbase near the Syrian port of Latakia hums with fighters and bombers taking off. New attack helicopters have arrived for close air support. Powerful S-400 anti-aircraft missiles maintain an air-defence perimeter in the eastern Mediterranean that constrains even NATO. Just as America’s bases in Iraq had KFC franchises, Russia has tried to make the desert home: Slavic women serve kasha (porridge) in the mess tent; a container unit holds a library of 2,000 Russian books.

On the ground, Russia seems to be running the show. When Russian and Syrian forces carry out joint missions, they operate “on Russian terms”, says Dmitri Trenin of the Carnegie Moscow Centre, a think-tank. A Russian defence-ministry convoy that took journalists on a recent press tour rolled nonchalantly past dozens of checkpoints. Throughout the tour, Syrian officers deferred to the Russians.

A glance at the Syrian forces explains the deference. The Russians are well-equipped and disciplined; the Syrians are dishevelled. During rehearsals for a Victory Day parade at the Russian airbase, a small Syrian unit struggled to keep step, arms and legs swinging out of sync. Mr Assad has supplemented his forces with fighters from the Lebanese militia Hizbullah, foreign paramilitaries and thugs. At Syrian checkpoints, irregulars in mismatched uniforms and shabby sneakers keep watch.

The bombing campaign has been massive, but Russia has also done much else. Palmyra, recently recaptured from Islamic State (IS), now hosts a small Russian base, ostensibly for sappers clearing the area of mines. Russian special forces are involved in intelligence and targeting. Instructors train Syrian counterparts. Russian officers have waded into local politics, brokering ceasefires. The Russians are here for the long haul: when the defence ministry ordered medals for the Syrian campaign, it asked for over 10,000.



Syria’s war, violence beyond control

Mr Putin has framed his intervention in Syria as a battle between good and evil. In fact, Syrian and Russian forces have as often targeted moderate rebels as extremists. Mr Assad’s plan has always been to convince the world he is fighting jihadists rather than his own angry citizens. And indeed, he has helped stoke the rise of IS and, by killing moderates, he has driven some of his people into the welcoming arms of the extremists.

On May 5th Russia brought its world-renowned Mariinsky Theatre orchestra to give a concert in Palmyra’s Roman amphitheatre, on the stage where IS executed dozens of people last year. The orchestra delivered a sublime performance of Bach, Shchedrin and Prokofiev, even as bombs were falling on Aleppo, Syria’s largest city. Many Syrians were disgusted.

It was no accident that the concert took place just before Victory Day, the Russian holiday marking the end of the second world war. Mr Putin called the Russian soldiers in Syria “worthy successors of the great patriotic war heroes”. The concert was dedicated in part to Alexander Prokhorenko, a special-forces soldier who, Russian television reported, had called in air strikes against his own position when surrounded by IS during the battle for Palmyra. Even liberal commentators normally critical of Mr Putin gushed.

In Syria and in Western capitals, this charm offensive is less effective. Even some supporters of Mr Assad are wary of Russia’s growing control over their country. The West sees Russia’s talk of fighting terrorism as a smokescreen for supporting Mr Assad’s autocratic regime. Philip Hammond, the British foreign secretary, called the concert “tasteless”. Few believe Russia’s claim that it is working towards a fair political solution in Syria. But Russia is not concerned with winning over the West. Instead, by proving itself indispensable, Russia believes it can compel the West to collaborate on Russian terms. Or as Mr Trenin says, to “love us as we are”—bombs, cellists and all.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698688-syria-still-provides-useful-stage-russian-strategyand-propaganda-withdrawal-wasnt/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

German football

Red Bull gives you wingers

In the Bundesliga, East-West tension is very much alive

May 14th 2016 | LEIPZIG | From the print edition

Someone’s had enough caffeine today

ON MAY 8th the sold-out Red Bull Arena, an old communist stadium with a new roof and a new name, rejoiced at the triumph of German football’s boldest corporate experiment. RB Leipzig, a team owned by Red Bull, an Austrian fizzy-drink maker, beat Karlsruhe SC to win promotion to the Bundesliga, Germany’s premier league. For Leipzig, the only sour note came when the coach suffered a hamstring injury trying to escape a Bierdusche (beer shower) from his players. But in the rest of Germany, many fret that the team is sabotaging traditional Fussballkultur.

Germany has so far avoided the worst excesses of modern football. Tickets are cheap, and clubs have to be majority-owned by their fans. But RB Leipzig bucks the model. Red Bull bought the team, then a small town side, in 2009. Barred from renaming it after its product, it altered the colours to resemble the Red Bull logo and renamed it “RasenBallsport [literally, “lawn ball sports”] Leipzig”. To circumvent fan ownership, it arbitrarily rejects membership applications: whereas Bayern Münich has 270,000 members, RB Leipzig has only 636.

Red Bull’s cash has allowed the club to buy talent and rise through four divisions in seven years. This has outraged fans across Germany. RB Leipzig’s first competitive game ended with the team bus fleeing an angry mob. The stadium is boycotted by other teams’ fans. Before last year’s away match at Karlsruhe SC, anonymous letters were sent to RB Leipzig fans’ homes warning them to stay at home. “What is being done (by RB Leipzig) makes me want to throw up,” a rival coach recently told journalists.



INTERACTIVE: Footballing pay and performance

Leipzigers do not care. Red Bull has brought elite football back to a parched region. East German clubs were crushed by reunification: unable to compete, they slipped down the divisions. RB Leipzig will be the first eastern club to play in the Bundesliga since 2009. Of Germany’s 23-man World Cup squad in 2014, only Toni Kroos, a midfielder, was not born in the West. “In no other sector of society is the East so discriminated against,” wrote Die Zeit, a newspaper.

RB Leipzig’s rise mirrors that of Leipzig itself, Germany’s fastest-growing city. Known as “Hypezig”, it has a reputation as a cheaper, edgier Berlin. The club boosts the city as well as Red Bull.

Other German clubs are hardly free of corporate influence. Schalke 04’s shirts boast Gazprom’s logo; Volkswagen pumps money into VfL Wolfsburg. Some commentators wonder whether more corporate cash might make the Bundesliga more fun to watch: this year Bayern Münich cantered to their fourth straight first-division title. But most Germans still prefer their flat, egalitarian meritocracy over bubbly, caffeinated commercialism.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698690-bundesliga-east-west-tension-very-much-alive-red-bull-gives-you-wingers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Austrian politics

Waltzing out of the door

As the far right rises, a chancellor departs

May 14th 2016 | VIENNA | From the print edition

No more chances for the chancellor

FOR seven and a half years, Austria’s chancellor, Werner Faymann, survived the fall-out of the world financial crisis, turmoil in the euro zone, a wave of refugees and more than a dozen electoral setbacks for his Social Democratic party. As of last week, he was the European Union’s second-longest-serving head of government, after Germany’s Angela Merkel.

But the first round of Austria’s presidential elections last month, where his party’s candidate won a dismal 11% of the vote, was one defeat too many. At the traditional May Day parade, party stalwarts turned away and young activists booed him. On May 9th Mr Faymann stepped down. A politician better at infighting than public speaking, he leaves behind a divided party and a precarious government.

The coalition, with the centre-right People’s Party as junior partners, enjoys a slim majority in parliament. But it is under attack from the far-right Freedom Party, which is well ahead in the opinion polls. Norbert Hofer, its soft-spoken candidate for the federal presidency, got 35% in the first round and is the favourite to win the run-off on May 22nd. The position is mostly ceremonial, but can exercise real power in uncertain times. Mr Hofer has threatened to try to block EU trade agreements, and to dismiss parliament if it raises taxes or relaxes immigration barriers.

The Freedom Party has been riding a wave of discontent with both governing parties, which have been ruling jointly or in alternation since 1945. It got its biggest boost last year, when about 1m migrants from the Middle East came through the country. Though most moved on to Germany and Sweden, 90,000 people applied for asylum in Austria last year, a large number for a nation of 8m citizens.

Mr Faymann at first stood by Mrs Merkel in her determination to keep the doors open for refugees. But under pressure from public opinion and his coalition partner, he agreed in January to erect border controls and cap the number of asylum-seekers allowed in, triggering a wave of border closures through the Balkans. The volte-face split the party: left-wingers accused Mr Faymann of kissing up to the Freedom Party, while centrists said the party should start to cooperate with the far right.

This rift puts Mr Faymann’s successor in a tricky position. The most likely candidate is Christian Kern, the boss of the state-owned railway company, who has strong roots in the party but no experience of day-to-day politics. He will be more willing to undertake business-friendly economic reforms than Mr Faymann was, says Thomas Hofer, a political analyst, “but it will be a hard sell within the party.”

The refugee policy, however, is unlikely to change. The People’s Party says it will remain in the coalition only if the borders remain shut for most asylum-seekers. Reinhold Mitterlehner, the party leader, is under pressure because of poor polls and must compete for popularity with Sebastian Kurz, the foreign minister, a charismatic 29-year-old who takes hard-line positions on immigration. Both parties will want to avoid snap elections before their term ends in 2018.

A victory for the far-right presidential candidate may, paradoxically, boost the fortunes of the coalition, says Mr Hofer. It would bring its parties closer together, fearing a far-right power grab. Neither Social Democrats nor conservatives will want to play junior partner to a populist Freedom Party and its rabble-rousing leader, Heinz-Christian Strache. Thanks to a lack of good alternatives, the old coalition could live on, warts and all.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698691-far-right-rises-chancellor-departs-waltzing-out-door/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

France’s recovery

Ça va

If the economy is running again, François Hollande will be, too

May 14th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



FOR reasons either of irrepressible optimism or self-delusion, François Hollande regularly claims to spot economic improvements. Shortly after he was elected president, in 2012, he said that France’s unemployment would start to fall the following year. Alas, it kept rising. In his election manifesto, he forecast an imminent economic upturn. Instead France went through two more years of near-zero growth. So when Mr Hollande declared on television recently, “Ça va mieux!” (things are improving), he was widely ridiculed. “Are you joking?” asked his dumbfounded interviewer.

Yet there are signs that, this time, Mr Hollande may be right. The French economy, the second-biggest in the euro zone, grew faster than expected in the first quarter of 2016, at a quarterly rate of 0.5%. This puts growth on track to reach 1.5% this year, in line with the government’s forecast. The uptick was driven mostly by a rebound in consumer spending, the traditional motor of the French economy, along with low oil prices. But private-sector investment is beginning to recover, too. In the first quarter, investment in machinery, vehicles and the like was up by a healthy 2.6%, the second consecutive increase at that pace.

Since October, the business-confidence index compiled by Insee, the statistics body, has climbed back above its long-term average. This year manufacturing bosses expect to increase investment by 7%, according to Insee, which would mark the biggest rise since 2011. Bank lending is strong. After a long slump, even the construction and housing sector is beginning to show signs of life. In an April survey 74% of property-industry respondents expected an improvement in the coming 12 months, up from 59% a year ago, according to Crédit Foncier, a lender.

No economist expects a sudden turnaround. Exports dropped back a bit in the first quarter, despite the weak currency. Industrial output was disappointing in March. The European Commission forecasts growth of only 1.7% in 2017. Nor does the rest of the euro zone, where growth is expected to reach no more than 1.6% this year, offer much support. But the commission’s spring forecast is now for France to “move slowly towards a more self-sustained recovery”. Bruno Cavalier, chief economist at Oddo Securities, who is habitually cautious about the French economy, says that he is now “relatively upbeat on France.”

All of this is welcome, both for France and for the fragile euro zone. The missing feature of the French recovery, however, is jobs. The latest unemployment figures, for the fourth quarter of 2015, showed just a modest dip. And youth unemployment, at 24%, has barely moved. A €2 billion ($2.3 billion) government training scheme for the unemployed should help improve the numbers. The European Commission expects only “limited” job creation this year and next, with unemployment receding a bit, to 10.1%. Any fall would be better than none, but firms remain wary of taking on workers under the country’s rigid labour code before they are sure about the upturn. Next year, France is expected to end up with a jobless rate above the euro-zone average for the first time since 2007.



Explore our interactive guide to Europe's troubled economies

The political stakes are high. Mr Hollande not only promised to curb joblessness under his presidency: he vowed not to seek re-election in 2017 unless he succeeded. Right now another run seems improbable. He remains France’s most unpopular president ever, with an approval rating of just 13%. Fully 73% of respondents told a poll that they do not feel, as he does, that “things are improving”. And there is a rebellion on the left of his own party over his U-turn towards a more business-friendly economic policy. This week, fearing it could not secure a parliamentary majority, the government invoked a rarely-used article of the constitution to force its labour-law reforms through without a vote, prompting a vote of censure.

Indeed, it would suit some on the left if Mr Hollande did not run again. Arnaud Montebourg, a left-wing former industry minister fired for insubordination, rates his chances as a challenger. Such rivals could use Mr Hollande’s failure to curb joblessness to bolster their case for an alternative Socialist candidate. Neither growth nor the labour-market reforms will be enough to make a serious dent in French unemployment. But the resolutely optimistic Mr Hollande may reckon that even a soupçon of job growth is enough to let him run again, however doubtful his chances.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698689-if-economy-running-again-fran-ois-hollande-will-be-too-va/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schools in Finland

Helsinking

Europe’s top-performing school system rethinks its approach

May 14th 2016 | HELSINKI | From the print edition

Finns no longer win

THERE are no cars in the car park at Hiidenkivi Comprehensive School; most pupils walk or cycle to school. Inside they sit at tables of four in groups of mixed abilities. They have a say in what they learn and where: many work slouched against a wall in the corridor. Tests are rare. Lunch is free. The youngest pupils go home by noon with little or no homework.

Tens of thousands of visiting wonks have taken similar notes since 2000, when Finland came at or near the top for reading, maths and science in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), an influential triennial test of 15-year-olds in 60 or so countries. Teenagers consistently score higher only in Japan, Singapore, South Korea and the richest parts of China. But unlike these places, Finland is said to have cracked schooling without working its pupils into the ground.

Pasi Sahlberg, a former official at the education ministry, says Finland is inoculated from the Global Education Reform Movement, or “GERM”—a scornful term for those who call for competition between schools, standardised tests, accountability for teachers and a focus on basic knowledge. These views hold sway in many of America’s “no excuses” charter schools, and in government in England. The Finnish model is preferred in Scotland, in Sweden and by defenders of America’s public schools.

Inside the country, however, educators are worried. PISA scores fell in 2009 and 2012 (the next results will be published in December). Data suggest the slide began around the turn of the century. Children of immigrants tend to score worse, but native Finns’ scores have dipped, too. The problem is worst among girls from non-Finnish-speaking households and native boys: one in eight 15-year-old boys cannot read at the level necessary to keep studying.

A separate problem is that when Finnish children are in school, they are surprisingly glum. About half of 14- and 15-year-olds feel that their teachers do not care about their lives. Finnish pupils are more likely than the average OECD student to say that their classroom environment is bad for learning. Tuomas Kurtilla, the country’s ombudsman for children, says 20-25% of Finnish girls aged 14 and 15 receive school counselling.

Mr Sahlberg frets that Finnish education is repeating Nokia’s error: failing to innovate when on top. Literacy has traditionally been prized, says Sirkku Kupiainen of the University of Helsinki; until about 50 years ago the Lutheran church often would not marry Finns unless they could read. But between 2000 and 2009 the share of 15-year-olds reading more than 30 minutes per day fell from a half to a third. Teachers bemoan the siren song of the smartphone.

Finland is hardly alone in facing shifts in youth culture, notes Tim Oates of Cambridge Assessment, a testing company. Some countries, like England, have responded by tightening discipline. But Finland is taking a sensitive and “pupil-led” approach. In August its 313 municipalities will roll out their versions of a new national curriculum meant to restore the “joy and meaningfulness of learning”.

This will mean more art, music and “phenomenon-based learning”: team projects that combine subjects. Hiidenkivi, for example, is planning a module about the origin of the Earth, combining the Big Bang with religious lessons and Finnish poetry.

Finnishing school

Sceptics have two main concerns. The first is inequality. Finland’s gap between rich and poor pupils is smaller than in most OECD countries, but it has widened since 2000. Mr Kurttila says well-off parents are renting flats near good schools and entering pupils for competitive music classes to game the system. Critics of “phenomenon-based learning” say it will make things worse by reducing the time poorer pupils spend on core subjects.

Opponents also think the new curriculum undermines what they say led to Finland’s previous success: an idiosyncratic mix of culture, history and traditional education. Gabriel Heller Sahlgren of the Centre for the Study of Market Reform of Education, a think-tank, says the key question is what led to the surge in Finnish performance between 1965 and 2000, not what is happening in schools today.

Some of Finland’s strengths are hard to copy. Teachers have exceptionally high social status: only doctors are more sought-after as partners. (This stems from their role defending Finnish culture against Russian repression in the 19th century.) Finland industrialised later than other Nordic countries and launched mass education only in the 1960s. Ms Kupiainen says this meant the parents of the “PISA generation” were upwardly mobile, and passed on a belief in the power of education. Younger parents, she says, worry that their children have not inherited their diligence.

Defenders of the reforms insist that policy mattered in Finland’s rise. They point to the support given to laggards, and to rigorous teacher training. Finns themselves generally care less about staying top of PISA than visitors assume; and Finland still performs well, if not as well as before.

But both defenders and opponents of the new curriculum agree that children’s will to succeed in school has diminished. “Ten years ago education was highly valued among all Finns,” says Ilppo Kivivuori, deputy head teacher at Hiidenkivi. “Now that is less clear.” So is whether the reforms can turn things round.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698679-europes-top-performing-school-system-rethinks-its-approach-helsinking/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

Europa all’italiana

Matteo Renzi hopes he can transform Europe. It would be pretty to think so

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



ITALY is Europe’s great underachiever. Despite being roughly the size of Britain or France, it has often adopted the prickly and unambitious stance of a medium-sized country towards the European Union. Its prime ministers, by turns weak or clownish, have been unable to place their mark on a country many see as ungovernable. The Silvio Berlusconi years heaped ignominy upon ineptitude, raising fears that Italy, the euro zone’s third-largest economy, could tumble out of the single currency, bringing the entire edifice down with it. So when Matteo Renzi, a hyperactive 39-year-old, took office in February 2014 vowing to change Italy, he could count on a lot of goodwill from his fellow EU leaders.

It is still there, more or less. Italy’s partners look approvingly upon Mr Renzi’s flurry of activity, from last year’s Jobs Act, designed to reduce firing costs and encourage firms to recruit permanent staff, to political reforms that should guarantee stronger governments and cut legislative logjams. They have tolerated the periodic outrage Mr Renzi directs at Germany and the European Commission. And they have welcomed Italy’s recent “migration compact”, which proposes to stem the flows of people by increasing development spending and investment in Africa.

Now Mr Renzi’s team has a plan for Europe. It goes like this. First, regain credibility by passing reforms. Second, polish Italy’s pro-EU credentials: Mr Renzi recently laid flowers on the grave of Altiero Spinelli, an early enthusiast for Euro-federalism. Finally, advance an alternative vision to Germany’s dreary emphasis on fiscal restraint. Last year Mr Renzi accused Germany’s austerity politics of “destroying growth” in Europe; now his team will offer proposals on everything from economic governance to integrating transport systems. “We believe to save Europe, we must change it,” says Sandro Gozi, the Europe minister.

In the short term, Italy is content to go with the European grain. It needs to exploit flexibility clauses to avoid being censured by the commission over its growing structural budget deficit. On migration, officials note that large parts of the EU have finally come round to Italy’s way of thinking: Mr Gozi speaks of a new “Rome-Berlin-Stockholm axis”. On foreign policy, Italy will lean dovish on Russia (without breaking ranks on sanctions) and keep attention focused on the chaos in Libya.

But this is just the overture. In the run-up to the 60th anniversary next March of the Treaty of Rome, the EU’s founding document, Italian officials want to lay the groundwork for ambitious moves towards European integration, particularly inside the euro zone. Giant stimulus or common unemployment-insurance schemes will spook Berlin. But some in Rome suspect the days of German hegemony are numbered. Some optimists even think that, should Britain vote to leave the EU next month, the fear of disintegration could jolt the euro zone into action. In the ministries and palazzos of Rome, the talk is of common solutions, overcoming nationalism and More Europe. Outside Brussels, Charlemagne has never heard such unabashed mania for federalism.

Alas, this heady stuff finds few takers elsewhere. In part, Mr Renzi’s problem is style. He has a back-slapping approach that ill suits the slow coalition-building necessary to get things done in Brussels. Some of his fellow leaders find his histrionics infuriating. His decision this week to change Italy’s EU ambassador for the second time in as many months looked disorganised.

But his bigger problems are at home. Italy’s voters have lost their traditional Euro-enthusiasm: in one recent poll 48% said they wanted to quit the EU. Mr Renzi’s centre-left Democratic Party is besieged by populist outfits. One, the Five Star Movement, topped a national poll for the first time this week, and is on course to win control of Rome in elections next month. In October Italians will vote on a reform of the Senate. Mr Renzi says he will resign if the referendum fails, a gamble that could backfire.

The economic news is grimmer still. Last year Italy grew by a pitiful 0.8%. That nonetheless represented an advance on three years of recession; GDP remains far below its 2008 peak. The commission has cut its 2016 growth forecast for Italy from 1.4% to 1.1%. Banks are weighed down by bad loans. Unemployment is stubbornly high at 11.4%. And then there is the gargantuan public debt (133% of GDP), which every Italian prime minister must haul around like a ball and chain. Deep-seated structural problems remain, from an inept bureaucracy to bloated pensions. Mr Renzi’s team plead that reforms take time. Voters may not be patient.

All this leaves Italy’s position in Europe weaker than the Palazzo Chigi would hope. Germany is not yet ready to listen to instructions from an economic laggard; Angela Merkel quickly squashed Italy’s proposal for joint bonds to finance its Africa plans. Like a proud padrone, Mr Renzi may demand respect for Italy’s position. But behind him, rather than a powerful family, his euro-zone partners see a vast debt pile, a floundering economy and an increasingly restive electorate.

Bella istoria

Europe needs Italy’s ideas, particularly at a time when France, the traditional foil to Germany, is distracted and Britain has one foot out of the door. But perhaps Mr Renzi came to power at the wrong time: too early for an EU consumed with fighting endless fires (and upcoming elections in France and Germany) to listen to his ambitious proposals; too late for an Italy bearing a legacy of debt and mistrust that cannot be cast off quickly.

Mr Renzi is still young, note his admirers. If he survives his referendum and the next election—which many expect to be brought forward to next year—he may see his strategy start to work. His reforms could bear fruit, the political threat within might calm, and the Germans may start to see sense. The fiscal bean-counters will be put in their place, and great investments unleashed across the continent. It is an attractive story for a Europe lacking leadership. It almost sounds like a fairy tale.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21698667-matteo-renzi-hopes-he-can-transform-europe-it-would-be-pretty-think-so-europa-allitaliana/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Britain





Energy policy: Power hungry

Brexit brief: Security concerns

Public transport in London: Going underground

Corporate bonds: Not so sterling

Predicting election results: Fluttering in

Private higher education: Could do better

Leisure activities: Dreading water

Bagehot: Donald Trump’s nightmare





Articles Sections Next

Energy policy

Power hungry

The Hinkley Point nuclear shambles highlights the flaws of British energy policy

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR months a profound somnolence has settled over Hinkley Point C, where the government hopes to install an £18 billion ($26 billion) nuclear power plant. On a recent weekend the security guards were not on the gate. Dozens of diggers and bulldozers were lined up as if on sale. A sign hung at the entrance displaying the core values of the project. One of them was “Know how far we’ve come, how far we’ve got to go, and how we’re going to get there.”

In fact, no one has a clue when or how the world’s most expensive power station will get anywhere. EDF, the French contractor, has once again postponed a decision to go ahead—until September. There are growing fears that the French nuclear technology it intends to use is flawed. The British government, which has offered a huge subsidy to ensure that nuclear power helps keep the lights on and emissions down for decades to come, insists it will go ahead. But that conviction is shared only by local villagers, who shrug off the delays as a fact of life. “This is Somerset. We invented the word mañana and sold it to the Spanish,” a female Land Rover driver says jauntily.

The innumerable delays over Hinkley Point matter, though, because they reflect what many consider to be a crisis in British energy policy: the inability to build large power plants of any kind at a time when many coal-fired ones are closing and existing nuclear ones are on their last legs. Britain, once a model of energy deregulation, is now able to get the power it needs only when the government meddles in the market with subsidies and other inducements.

In his book, “Empires in Collision,” David Howell, a Tory former energy secretary, calls it “a very British fiasco”. He blames a combination of EU energy policy and overzealous greenery by Liberal Democrats in the former coalition government for putting Britain at risk of blackouts, pushing up energy bills and making energy-intensive industries such as steel uncompetitive.

But the current government is also at fault for continuing a series of interventions that Dieter Helm of Oxford University only half-jokingly says bring back memories of the pre-privatisation Central Electricity Generating Board. Since taking office last year Amber Rudd, the energy secretary, has offered new subsidies for offshore wind while removing them from onshore wind and solar power. She has proposed 2025 as a deadline for scrapping Britain’s coal-fired plants, which still provide nearly a quarter of the nation’s electricity. By the same year, she hopes to see less government involvement in the energy market, while saying it is “imperative” to build new gas-fired power plants.

Meanwhile investors are leery of investing in big gas plants when there is so much uncertainty about government policy, including whether or not Hinkley Point—which could supply 7% of the country’s electricity—will be built. Peter Atherton of Jefferies, an investment bank, says Carrington, a combined-cycle gas-turbine plant in Manchester, given the green light in 2012, may be the last big gas plant to be built in Britain without subsidies. “Now everyone sits down and says, ‘have we got a government contract?’ ”. He says it is an “absolute dog’s dinner of interlocking policies and interventions—and calling it a dog’s dinner is unkind to Pedigree Chum.”



This year more than 6,000 megawatts (MW) of power generation could be lost, or almost twice Hinkley Point’s proposed 3,200MW capacity. That would lead to potentially the biggest supply shortfall in decades (see chart). On May 6th the Department of Energy said that the gap is the result of low fossil-fuel prices that have pushed down wholesale power prices, damaging the profitability of coal and gas plants. Under normal conditions, it says, the market can cope with up to three hours in which supply fails to match demand. National Grid, the system operator, makes up the shortfall with stop gap measures. But with a 6,000MW shortage, that timespan could increase to 38 hours, it said.

As a result it has brought forward a market-based subsidy scheme that aims to secure temporary supplies to prevent blackouts in winter when demand is highest. It held the first two “capacity” auctions in 2014 and 2015, aiming to bridge a gap in the winters of 2018-19 and 2019-20. Now it has scheduled another one early next year to smooth things out in the winter of 2017-18. On May 9th, for the first time since 2008, National Grid issued a summer alert that it urgently needed 1,500MW of extra power because of a mix of plant breakdowns, a drop in wind power and other factors. It paid one operator £1,250 per MW/hour for its electricity—30 times the normal price.

Such ad-hoc interventions push up energy bills. They have also handed juicy rewards to owners of small-scale diesel generators—a feature of life more reminiscent of countries like Nigeria. To be fair, governments across Europe are facing similar power-generation problems (though few have such a small cushion of capacity). The growth of renewable energy, which last year accounted for almost a quarter of Britain’s electricity supply, is becoming so abundant it is distorting electricity markets. Because it is intermittent, it needs backup supplies when there is no wind or sun. But when there is, it is so cheap that fossil-fuel plants struggle to compete.

Carbon targets are also complicating life for policymakers. One reason the Tory government remains committed to Hinkley Point is to avoid missing its 2030 emissions-reduction goals. Ideally, it should rely more on undersea power lines that connect it to the Netherlands and elsewhere. Last year it imported about 6% of its electricity. However, a vote this summer to leave the EU would make it harder to build more, analysts say.

In the long-run there may be no option but to muddle through until renewables work without subsidies, and backup technologies such as battery storage or nuclear power become cheaper and more efficient. For now, the strain on the grid is lightened by feeble electricity demand in Britain, which is still more than 10% below its level before the financial crisis in 2008-09. But that could change if more people start plugging in their cars rather than filling them up, and switching on industrial plants rather than stoking their furnaces. The country with the cheapest and most abundant electricity will prosper in such a future. At this rate, it won’t be Britain.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698673-hinkley-point-nuclear-shambles-highlights-flaws-british-energy-policy-power-hungry/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit brief

Security concerns

Is Britain safer in the European Union than outside it?

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Spooked by Brexit, Mr Bond?

MOST debate over Brexit has been about economics, trade and migration. But when David Cameron called the EU referendum in February he cited a new factor, asserting that membership made Britain safer. This week the prime minister went further, hinting that Brexit might increase the risk of conflict—and adding that, every time Britain turned its back on Europe, it had come to regret it.

In the past 25 years the EU has developed its common foreign and security policy. Examples of joint action include a common response to Iran’s nuclear ambitions and sanctions on Russia after it invaded Ukraine. Polls suggest that most voters support such co-operation. Sir Simon Fraser, a former head of the Foreign Office, believes that “Brexit would diminish Britain’s role in the world.” Some fear questions over its place on the UN Security Council, though Britain could veto any change.

Europe also has a role in security and intelligence co-operation. In March Sir Richard Dearlove, a former head of MI6, the foreign-intelligence service, argued that “the truth about Brexit from a national security perspective is that the cost to Britain would be low”. He set off a huge debate. Theresa May, the home secretary, pointing to the European Arrest Warrant and access to intelligence databases, insisted that being in the EU made Britain “more secure from crime and terrorism.” Pauline Neville-Jones, a former national security adviser, said Brexit would weaken border control and police co-operation.



Many of Sir Richard’s old colleagues have now weighed in. Lord Evans, a former boss of MI5, the security service, and John Sawers, another former head of MI6, wrote in the Sunday Times on May 8th that the EU “matters to our security” and that, by reducing data sharing, Brexit “could undermine our ability to protect ourselves”. On May 11th Eliza Manningham-Buller, another former MI5 boss, warned that “if we isolate ourselves we would lose influence…and put ourselves in greater peril.”

Brexiteers reject this on three grounds. On foreign and defence policy, they insist that NATO is what matters and the EU could undermine it. Second, they say that, for intelligence, the key group is the “Five Eyes” linking Britain, America, Canada, Australia and New Zealand; and that post-Brexit it would be easy to replicate co-operation with Europe. And third, they say the EU is damaging not just because some members are unreliable but because the European Court of Justice (ECJ) can rule in security cases. This, plus migration, makes the EU bad for Britain’s safety.

On the first point, the EU has civilian tools that NATO finds useful. Brexit also raises the risk of the EU wastefully opening its own military headquarters, a move long resisted by Britain. As for Five Eyes, all the other members want Britain to stay in the EU, partly because it makes it easier to co-operate with European colleagues. Nor are the two groups mutually exclusive: in practice, the security services work with foreign agencies all over the world. Third, Lady Manningham-Buller is clear that the ECJ has no jurisdiction in security matters, which are a national prerogative. The judges who have stopped the extradition of terrorists, for example, have been British or from the European Court of Human Rights, which is not part of the EU.



INTERACTIVE: The Economist's “Brexit” poll-tracker

Post-Brexit, Britain would find it harder to keep close foreign-policy and security links with the EU, not least because it would no longer be in the room. There is a broader geopolitical point, too. Partly because its foreign-policy role has grown, the EU has become a key piece of the West’s defence and security architecture. Brexit would weaken the EU—and so the West.

Mr Cameron may have exaggerated the risk of armed conflict in Europe. But the people keenest on Brexit are the West’s enemies. That is why several former Pentagon and NATO bosses called this week for Britain to stay in the EU. Britons are unlikely to have security uppermost in their in mind on June 23rd. But Brexit could yet cause much collateral damage.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698629-britain-safer-european-union-outside-it-security-concerns/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Public transport in London

Going underground

The capital’s new mayor needs to protect investment in public transport

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Squeezing on, then as now

ON MAY 7th, in the medieval splendour of Southwark Cathedral on the south bank of the Thames, Sadiq Khan of the Labour Party was sworn in as London’s new mayor, the first Muslim to hold the post. Although the campaign came to be dominated by accusations that Mr Khan was tolerant of Islamic extremism (see Bagehot), it is the more mundane issues of transport and housing that will be filling his in-tray. Transport for London (TfL), the organisation that runs the capital’s roads, railways, buses and shared bicycles takes up £10.7 billion ($15.5 billion) of City Hall’s budget of £17 billion. But there are questions over whether TfL has enough resources to build the public-transport capacity the booming capital needs.

The new mayor’s flagship transport policy is to freeze all fares on London’s public transport system, including those for buses and the Underground. He says this will cost £450m in revenue over four years. TfL claimed £1.9 billion over five years. Whatever the case, TfL is already under pressure, both financially and in demand for its services. In November the Treasury announced that it planned to phase out, by 2019, the annual operational grant of £700m to TfL, leaving a large hole in the body’s revenue predictions.



Meanwhile demand for public transport is rising fast. As London’s economy has boomed after the financial crisis, its roads reached full capacity. Bus and Tube usage has increased much faster than population growth since 2001. (see chart). Significant investment is under way, but more supply will simply create extra demand. For instance, although a signalling upgrade meant that rush-hour capacity on the Northern Line increased by nearly 20% in 2014, regular passengers complain that trains are no less crowded. Crossrail, a new rail project through London that will boost the capacity of the Underground by 10%, is not a permanent solution. With London-wide passenger volumes growing by 3% a year, when it opens in 2018 “it will be immediately full”, Sir Peter Hendy, the then boss of TfL, forecast in 2013.

The new mayor will need to protect transport investment in London if he wants to meet his other pledges, for instance on boosting house-building from 25,000 units last year to 80,000 by the end of his term. Developers no longer want to build on sites without public-transport links. Only 350 houses of a total of 10,800 given planning permission in 2007 have been built at Barking Riverside in east London; it lacks a rail connection to the city centre.

Mr Khan says that he hopes to pay for his fares freeze through reorganising TfL’s maintenance division, saving money on contractors and raising revenue from other sources such as developing TfL’s surplus land. But the organisation is already in the midst of an austerity drive; in 2013 it targeted £16 billion of savings by 2021, of which only a quarter has yet been identified. And it already hopes to generate £3.4 billion of revenue from commercial development by the same year. How fast this programme can be expanded with London’s strict planning laws is not clear.

It would therefore be undesirable for Mr Khan to cut investment. But there are few other ways the shortfall could be met. He could raise council tax, or business rates, over which he will gain some control in April next year. But his costly pledges on house-building, and other competing demands, give limited room for manoeuvre.

TfL could borrow more. But the fare freeze may damage its creditworthiness, says Jennifer Wong of Moody’s, a ratings agency. Mr Khan would therefore be wise to forge a good relationship with George Osborne, the Tory chancellor of the exchequer, who has pledged to boost grants for transport investment 50% by 2020 and who can lend TfL money for capital projects through the Public Works Loan Board. But with projects such as HS2, a high-speed railway, and other devolved bodies such as Transport for the North competing for cash, Mr Khan will need to lobby hard.

Whatever happens, he will still need to make difficult decisions over his financial priorities. In part, this is what Mr Osborne, the architect of England’s devolution revolution, intended. Rather than local authorities simply lobbying the Treasury to fund as many of their projects as possible, the point of devolving budgets is to force locally elected officials to take responsibility for decisions instead. On transport, it will ultimately be London’s electorate in 2020 that decides whether Mr Khan tackled the right priorities or not.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698680-capitals-new-mayor-needs-protect-investment-public-transport-going-underground/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Corporate bonds

Not so sterling

Brexit or not, business investment may be held back in future years

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

FEARS over Brexit are hitting business investment. The Bank of England, in a statement on monetary policy in April, said that firms were holding off on capital spending until after the vote on June 23rd. As businesses delay buying new computers and machinery, Britain’s measly productivity will remain stagnant, so pay-packets will not grow.

In the event of a “yes” vote that keeps Britain in the EU, the market jitters will disappear and investment will improve. But whether Britain stays in Europe or not, there is something else that may constrain investment by British businesses in the coming years: a shrinking sterling corporate-bond market.

Only around 100 British non-financial companies issue bonds (the rest raise smaller sums via bank loans or from family and friends). However, though small in number, bond-issuing British firms have a big economic impact. A report from the Bank of England calculates that publicly listed British companies that issue bonds accounted for a third of business investment in 2012.

So it is worrying that two of the bank’s economists have found that the market for corporate bonds denominated in sterling has shrunk in recent years. In the early 2000s sterling took up as much as 6% of the investment-grade corporate-bond market. Now it takes up less than 2%. With a less liquid market, investors worry that they will struggle to sell on sterling bonds, so they demand a higher interest rate. The cost of issuing sterling corporate bonds has risen relative to those in other currencies, such as the euro. Small wonder that bond issuance in sterling by British non-financial firms is half what it was in 2013.

What is going on? Pension reform may be a culprit, say the Bank of England researchers. Until April 2015 people with defined-contribution pensions had to purchase an annuity upon retirement. Insurance firms thus needed to buy sterling debt with long maturities. Such products ensured that there would be enough funds available to pay the promised pensions over a long timeframe. Now, however, Britons are given great flexibility over how to use their pension savings: people over 55 can withdraw all their pension in one go if they like. The reform reduces the demand for annuities—by 50-75% according to some estimates—and so firms looking to issue sterling-denominated bonds are faced with a smaller market.

Increased concentration in the investor base for sterling corporate bonds, thanks to a series of recent mergers, may have made it a tougher place to sell bonds, too, pushing yields up. Simultaneously, it has become relatively more attractive to issue corporate bonds in other currencies. Yields in euro-denominated bonds have fallen recently, thanks in part to a €1.5 trillion ($1.7 trillion) programme of quantitative easing (printing money to buy bonds) by the European Central Bank. The ECB’s plan to buy corporate debt from June has forced yields down, says David Riley of BlueBay Asset Management. The Bank of England, which has also used QE, no longer holds corporate bonds. Worries over Brexit have further pushed up the cost of issuing sterling bonds relative to euro ones, with investors demanding higher rates in case the pound slumps.

Some British businesses happily issue debt in foreign currencies. But the bank researchers argue that firms with little presence outside Britain, particularly those with low credit ratings, can have a hard time finding foreign investors. They might find it even trickier if Britain votes to leave the EU. Such firms will thus be stuck with a small, costlier sterling corporate-bond market. In the coming years, business investment may look lacklustre.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698681-brexit-or-not-business-investment-may-be-held-back-future-years-not-so-sterling/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Predicting election results

Fluttering in

The polls may be evenly split, but bettors are leaning towards Remain

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



IF THE referendum on June 23rd regarding Britain’s EU membership were a horse race, you might be wary about picking a favourite. Throughout 2016, public support for the Remain and Leave campaigns has moved up and down but is still too close to call.

By contrast, the Brexit betting markets have remained stable. Betfair—an exchange that allows punters to wager against each other leading to more efficient odds than traditional bookmakers—says the probability of Britain leaving the EU has remained below 40% throughout 2016. Fully 72% of the total money accepted so far by William Hill, a bookmaker, has been on a Remain victory.

Do the gamblers know something the pollsters do not? Neither foresaw an outright Conservative majority in the general election of May 2015, though the punters were closer to the final outcome. Justin Wolfers of the University of Michigan has shown that betting markets tend to be less volatile in the run-up to a vote, and a study at the University of Iowa found that bookmakers’ odds provided more accurate predictions overall than polls before American presidential victories from 1988 to 2004.

Punters’ greater accuracy is to be expected: betting odds are meant to reflect the risk of an eventual outcome, whereas polls measure public opinion at a specific time. Polls are fiddly, too: they have to be weighted according to the likelihood of respondents turning out, the impact of undecided voters and what type of people are answering the questions. Referendum polls have often over-predicted the proportion of voters yearning for change—and therefore, in this case, voting Leave—as such people are more likely to participate in surveys.

Betting markets are not immune from failure. The odds on Donald Trump winning the Republican nomination were still long even months after voter surveys had shown he had sizeable support. Nor is a 68% chance of Remain winning—the Betfair odds as The Economist went to press—a guarantee that Brexit will fail. It is still a two-horse race. But the punters have clearly chosen a front-runner, even if the pollsters have not.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698683-polls-may-be-evenly-split-bettors-are-leaning-towards-remain-fluttering/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Private higher education

Could do better

The government hopes to encourage more private higher education

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

AT UCFB, a private higher-education provider, around 50 students sit listening to a talk on football-club finances. Looking ahead, they see a lecturer and a projection of a balance sheet. But if they turn to their right, they get a box-office view of the inside of Wembley stadium, featuring 90,000 seats and a groundsman slowly mowing an immaculate green pitch. The unusual location is “a spoonful of sugar to go with the education,” explains Sharona Walker, the chief marketing officer.

UCFB was established in Burnley Football Club’s stadium in 2011. In 2014 it opened its Wembley outpost; one more is due to open at the Etihad stadium, home of Manchester City, later this year. It offers degrees in sporty topics such as international football business. In 2011 it took on 50 students. Next year it plans to accept as many as 1,000, most paying £9,000 ($13,000) a year for tuition. The early signs suggest that it may be more than just a clever use of space: some 91% of its first two cohorts found a job or went into further study within six months of graduating.

There are hundreds of private higher-education providers in England. Typically they fill market niches, offering specialist vocational education. Although they do not receive direct government funding, as traditional universities do, around 140 of them receive indirect support in the form of government loans to students to cover living expenses and tuition fees (loans are capped at £6,000 compared with £9,000 at traditional universities). Eight institutions have the right to award their own degrees; others provide degrees that are validated by partner universities or offer alternative qualifications. In 2014-15, £534m of student support went to those at private establishments, 4% of the total spent on support for students across higher education.

That may soon rise. In a forthcoming bill, the government will seek to make it easier for new private providers to enter the market and for some existing institutions to grow. Changes could include a reduction in the wait for institutions to be granted degree-awarding powers and the relaxation of restrictions on student numbers, put in place to control government spending, for the best providers. The government may also seek to standardise regulation, which would expose some providers to greater scrutiny in return for allowing their students to borrow up to £9,000. “I am determined to tackle the perception that these challenger institutions are in some way inferior,” says Jo Johnson, the universities minister.

At their best, private providers offer flexible, innovative education. Whereas traditional institutions pay lip-service to the idea of work-focused courses, says Peter Crisp, dean of BPP Law School, private ones are more likely to put them in place. Supporters argue that private providers are less bureaucratic and are therefore able to adapt better to changing student demand. Some offer different course lengths and new methods of teaching. This, the government hopes, pushes innovation in the traditional sector.

Yet a shadow hangs over the plans for expansion. In 2012, the coalition government increased the tuition-fee loan available to students at private institutions from £3,375 to £6,000. This led to an explosion in the number of students taking up such support, from 6,500 students in 2010-11 to 53,000 in 2013-14, many of whom lacked the skills to benefit from higher education.

In 2012-13 the 18 higher-education establishments with the highest drop-out rates were all private providers. In 2013-14, a government investigation found that half of the EU students scrutinised could not demonstrate they had lived in England long enough to qualify for support. Dodgy recruitment practices—often advertising the availability of visas—were rife. Last year a report by a House of Commons committee warned that the government had “failed to protect the interests of legitimate students, the taxpayer and...providers who may be performing well.”

The government says it has cracked down on the suspect establishments. It has also introduced a cap on recruitment, more stringent English-language tests and tougher quality assessments. But many high-quality providers complain that increased regulation leaves them struggling to compete. “Fantastic alternative providers have been tarred by the same brush,” says Alex Proudfoot of StudyUK, a lobby group. Meanwhile, critics argue that the government only intervenes in the case of fraud, rather than in cases of substandard education, and that it won’t be possible properly to assess the success, or otherwise, of the sector until more data on completion rates become available.

The challenge for the government is to find a way to level the playing field for good providers, while making life even harder for dubious ones, says Nick Hillman of the Higher Education Policy Institute. Despite the government’s optimistic rhetoric, few reckon the changes will prompt much of an influx of new providers. But bringing private providers into a common regulatory system should benefit high-quality institutions. After what happened last time the government sought to encourage the sector to grow, a more careful approach is probably for the best.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698685-government-hopes-encourage-more-private-higher-education-could-do-better/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Leisure activities

Dreading water

The number of people swimming has taken a dip

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



PERHAPS surprisingly, in the land of cricket and Premier League football, swimming has long been the most popular sport. More than 2.5m English adults take the plunge at least once a week, according to Sport England, the country’s community sports body. That is more than football, cricket, hockey, netball and both codes of rugby combined.

Wish I’d brought my bike

But while many Britons make waves, few have come to rule them. Team GB have won just three Olympic gold medals in the past 30 years, and two of them went to Rebecca Adlington in Beijing in 2008. Britain’s athletics stars, by contrast, collected three gold medals in a single evening at the London games in 2012. And Chris Hoy picked up three cycling golds on his own in Beijing. The contrasting fortunes of the sports’ elite athletes are reflected in participation levels. Inspired by Mo Farah, a runner, Jessica Ennis-Hill, a heptathlete, and Chris Froome and Sir Bradley Wiggins, two Tour de France cycling champions, more Britons are running and cycling than ever before (see chart).

Swimming, meanwhile, has taken a dive. In England, 750,000 fewer people are getting their togs on than a decade ago. The Amateur Swimming Association says that one in five English adults cannot swim, and half of all primary schoolchildren are unable to paddle 25 metres unaided, although it is a requirement in the national curriculum.

Some promising young swimmers are coming through the system now—Adam Peaty and James Guy both became world champions last year. Perhaps a big haul of gold medals at this summer’s Olympics in Rio de Janeiro might tempt more Britons to dive in.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698686-number-people-swimming-has-taken-dip-dreading-water/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

Donald Trump’s nightmare

Sadiq Khan’s win in London was a victory for enlightened, grown-up indifference

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



EVENTUALLY, every senior politician in Britain is invited to Buckingham Palace to join the Privy Council, the body that notionally advises the queen. In 2009 Sadiq Khan, then transport minister, was asked on which version of the Bible he wanted to swear his oath. He replied that, as a Muslim, he would like to use a Koran. Buckingham Palace had none, so he brought his own. Afterwards, when the palace tried to return it, he asked: “Can I leave it here for the next person?”

On May 5th Londoners voted to make Mr Khan their mayor. Except for the direct vote for the Portuguese and French presidents, he thus holds the biggest personal mandate in Europe. His landslide over the Conservatives (he took 57% of the vote to 43% for Zac Goldsmith, his posh Tory rival) was a rebuke to hardliners of all sorts. At a stroke it became harder for Islamic State’s recruiters to tour public housing estates in Europe and convince young Muslims from immigrant backgrounds that they have no place in the liberal West. The de facto capital of that liberal West had just entrusted its future to a mosque-going, gay-marriage-supporting, proudly Muslim family man with precisely such a hinterland.

His win was also a rebuke to Western nativists like Donald Trump and Nigel Farage, the leader of the UK Independence Party. It gave the lie to the nonsense spouted by visitors to Europe who see a woman wearing a niqab and assume the continent is under sharia law. Mr Trump announced on May 10th that Mr Khan would be exempt from his putative entry ban on non-American Muslims, which he then called “just a suggestion”. London’s mayor rejected the exemption: “This isn’t just about me. It’s about my friends, my family and everyone who comes from a background similar to mine, anywhere in the world.” Within days he had used the guff about “Londonistan” and “Eurabia” to become a global symbol of tolerance and religious pluralism.

Bagehot first crossed paths with Mr Khan almost a decade ago on the south London political scene, and long saw him in terms of the internal politics of the Labour Party: as a typical social democrat who, more ideologically flexible than most, had settled on the party’s centre-left at a time when, after a decade of liberal-right dominance under Tony Blair, that was trendy. On the terraced Victorian streets of SW16, Mr Khan was just “Sadiq”, the guy from the neighbouring constituency; the machine politician who had made Tooting—a mix of hard-up estates and comfortable suburbs—relatively safe for Labour when a lesser practitioner might have lost it to the Conservatives.

Mr Khan’s win on May 5th was truer to the MP-next-door that Bagehot knows than to the cosmopolitan emblem—or hardline Muslim—of global headlines. And therein lies the real hammer-blow to the Trumps and Farages. For the opposite of nativist populism is not hyper-liberalism but a battle for the epithet of “pragmatist”. It is a struggle over the sort of voter who simply yawns at grunting caveman obsessions about who is part of the tribe; about who belongs and who does not. The ultimate rebuke to a Trump rally is not the protest outside it but the citizen who strolls past, neither appalled nor enthused, and carries on with his life. Where once, “progressive” meant raising your fist, now it means shrugging your shoulders.

London’s election was strikingly normal. The capital is a conventional Labour city and Mr Khan a conventional Labour politician. His win was merely the natural order of things. Mr Goldsmith’s hints about his rival’s links with reactionary Muslims—which in defter hands might have raised valid questions about Mr Khan’s willingness to flex his principles to suit his electorate—looked crass and crazed. They had little effect. More interested in Mr Khan’s pledge to let them change buses without paying extra fares, Londoners rolled their eyes, voted Labour and inadvertently made history. To veterans of the capital’s politics the most interesting thing was not the election of a Muslim but the signs that Mr Khan did better than Labour usually does among white suburbanites and that Mr Goldsmith (despite his best efforts) benefited from the ongoing structural rise in the non-white Tory vote.

Keep Khan and carry on

According to Sunder Katwala of British Future, a think-tank, Mr Khan’s achievement alludes to the “depolarisation” of society. It will be judged on how he uses it. As mayor he has few big policy levers to pull. Talking to Bagehot before the election, he insisted that he wanted to strengthen these. That is encouraging: devolution is to be welcomed. But the greatest impact he could have as mayor would be further to normalise his initial achievement. On that, the signs are as good as they could be: as one generation gives way to the next, and non-white Britons move out of the cities and into the suburbs, ever more British voters use civic factors (social and political behaviour) rather than ethnic ones (family roots and race) to define their national identity.

According to an estimate published by Demos, a think-tank, by 2045 Britain will be as proportionally non-white as the United States. The country has much work to do to prepare itself for this shift. Pockets of segregation must be integrated. In some corners of Britain, Muslims are dangerously cut-off and not like Mr Khan at all. The old, simplistic ideal of multiculturalism must give way to something more sophisticated: integration not just as a local responsibility but a national one that should occupy even the prime minister and his cabinet.

As mayor, Mr Khan has a unique platform, not confined to the city or even Britain, that he should use to promote a pluralistic sort of nationhood, ease tensions between ethnic and religious groups and highlight failures and successes of integration. Donald Trump will probably lose to Hillary Clinton. But his final defeat, in Britain at least, will come when Mr Khan’s copy of the Koran in Buckingham Palace is well-thumbed—and no one cares.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21698682-sadiq-khans-win-london-was-victory-enlightened-grown-up-indifference-donald-trumps/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



International





Infectious diseases: Yellow plague

Malaria vaccines: Buzzing





Articles Sections Next

Infectious diseases

Yellow plague

An outbreak of yellow fever in Angola could go global

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



IT OCCUPIES a strange place on the spectrum of infectious tropical diseases. Not as important as malaria. Not as terrifying as Ebola. Not as revolting as elephantiasis. Yet yellow fever is a grave illness, incurable once contracted. It kills 80,000 Africans a year. And that is a scandal, both because it can be prevented by a single inoculation and also because yellow fever now risks spreading to Asia, where it has never before taken hold.

This is the background to the latest epidemic of the disease, in Angola. Since December, around 2,300 suspected cases have been reported there, with nearly 300 deaths. Set against 80,000 deaths, this may not sound like many. But experience suggests that, for each case brought to the authorities’ attention in a country where health care is as fragmentary as it is in Angola, between 50 and 500 probably go unreported.

Yellow fever is spread by Aedes aegypti, the mosquito that also carries dengue and Zika. Its early symptoms—a high temperature, nausea, vomiting and muscle pain—are reasonably mild and usually last only a few days. In about 15% of cases, however, the disease later returns with a vengeance. Patients experience severe abdominal pain, become jaundiced and bleed internally and from their eyes, mouth and nose. About half of these people die.

The UN and the World Health Organisation (WHO) have shipped 9m doses of vaccine to Angola, enough for about a third of the population. But that is around a fifth of all the vaccine held worldwide at any one time. If the epidemic spreads, stocks will rapidly run out.

And spread it might. Almost 6m people in Luanda, Angola’s capital, should now be immune, and the number of Angolan cases being reported to the WHO has indeed dipped in recent weeks. Yet vaccination rates outside Luanda remain low, and the efforts have not stopped the disease from crossing borders.

Laboratory analyses have linked a few cases in Kenya to the Angolan outbreak. More worrying is the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). On May 2nd the WHO reported 453 suspected cases of the disease there, including some in the capital, Kinshasa. Less than 30% of the country’s population was thought to have been vaccinated before today’s outbreak. A booming trade in forged vaccination certificates could also let infected people slip past border checkpoints from Angola into Zambia and Namibia, which reported its first case on April 28th.

The best way to contain the disease now is to vaccinate all those at risk as soon as possible. Every day increases the chance that one of the thousands of Asian workers in Angola will carry the disease home, sparking a full-scale outbreak on a continent that has yet to experience one.

Deployment of the vaccine in all African countries where yellow fever is endemic could slash the number of cases. The Yellow Fever Initiative, which is led by the WHO and UNICEF and funded by GAVI, an international public-private alliance that provides vaccines to poor countries, aims to cover the continent by 2020, at a cost of $300m. More than 100m people have been vaccinated since it started in 2007. With more funding, it might have averted this outbreak: Angola was not among the 12 countries that were considered most susceptible to the disease.

Production of yellow-fever vaccine has increased in the past five years, but it would be difficult to raise further. It has only four sources: Sanofi Pasteur, a French drug company, and institutes in Brazil, Senegal and Russia. “That leaves us in a very vulnerable position,” says Peter Piot, the director of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. If yellow fever did take hold in Asia, he says, then the numbers at immediate risk would rise from tens of millions to 100m or more.

The world’s emergency stockpile of 11m doses, which is held on top of normal supply to enable a rapid response to outbreaks, is already being depleted to control the one in Africa. If the disease takes hold in Asia, says William Perea of the WHO, there would be little choice but to limit inoculations to a fifth of a standard dose so as to make supplies of the vaccine stretch further. Small studies give reason to hope that this would protect adults, but the efficacy of a low dose for children is unknown.

Ill winds

International trade and migration mean that the chances of yellow fever spreading to Asia are higher than ever before, warns John Woodall of the Programme for Monitoring Emerging Diseases, an online-alert service. Cool weather has meant that up till now there have been few mosquitoes in China to spread the disease. Even so, the country has already reported its first 11 cases, and summer is approaching. All those diagnosed had returned from Angola, home to an estimated 100,000 Chinese workers.

Once yellow fever is established in a tropical country, it is almost impossible to eradicate. Monkeys infected by the virus act as a reservoir for the disease. People who travel to the jungle can carry it back to towns and cities, where mosquitoes quickly breed—A. aegypti lays its eggs in standing water, meaning that even a discarded food tin could be a breeding ground.

Why Asia has never had a large outbreak of yellow fever is something of a mystery. A. aegypti is found across much of southern Asia (see map), and the continent’s jungles have monkeys that would seem an ideal reservoir for the disease. One possibility is that antibodies against dengue, a related disease, partially protect survivors against yellow fever. A second is that the Asian type of A. aegypti may be less able to carry the virus than its African cousin. But it is not immune. The fear is that a traveller who has returned from Africa with yellow fever will be bitten by an indigenous mosquito, which then spreads the disease.



America, which has not had an outbreak in more than a century, is at risk, too. Yellow fever used to be common there: Philadelphia suffered one of the country’s worst outbreaks in 1793, when the disease killed 5,000 people, then about a tenth of the city’s population. In New Orleans in 1853, 9,000 died. The port cities of Europe also suffered outbreaks: one in Barcelona in 1821 killed thousands.

But by the middle of the 20th century yellow fever was gone from the northern hemisphere, as fumigation was used to beat the mosquito back. In Cuba the same remedy, and more effective sanitation, also removed the source of many of America’s epidemics. Vaccination campaigns in France’s west African colonies between 1933 and 1961 caused yellow fever virtually to disappear from the continent—until decolonisation, when vaccination rates plummeted and the disease reappeared.

In South American cities yellow fever was once kept at bay by mosquito-control measures. But international arrivals add to the threat from travellers who have visited remote jungle areas, in some of which the disease is endemic. For many places now free of yellow fever, a few infected visitors at the height of summer, and some bad luck, could mean its unwelcome return.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21698597-outbreak-yellow-fever-angola-could-go-global-yellow-plague/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Malaria vaccines

Buzzing

Another blow is struck in the long fight against malaria

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Bring out the big guns

THE toll of malaria is hard to comprehend. In Africa, parts of the Middle East, southern Asia and Melanesia, humans have been killed by the parasite, which is transmitted by mosquitoes, for thousands of years. Its bloody traces are visible on the human genome itself, in the form of mutations that allow some people to survive infection. Yet despite much recent progress, malaria still kills more than 400,000 people a year. Most are children. Most live in Africa.

Several drugs are available that prevent infection while they are being taken. Others fight the parasite in the body, after it has been transmitted. The cheapest and most widely used of these is a combination of artemisinin, a substance derived from the sweet wormwood plant, and modern pharmaceuticals such as mefloquine and lumefantrine. But there are signs that resistant strains are emerging.

So it was a big step when the first vaccine against malaria—and the first against any parasitic disease—was licensed last year. It took the developers, GlaxoSmithKline, a drug company, and the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, a biomedical research arm of America’s Department of Defence, three decades to find a candidate promising enough to test in large groups in affected areas. The parasite that causes malaria is a moving target. It has an intricate life-cycle: after infecting a human, it moves between the liver and blood, changing its form all the while. Large-scale implementation pilots are expected as early as next year.

But RTS,S, as the vaccine is known, is only partly effective. Trials involving 15,000 babies and young children in seven African countries showed that four doses in early childhood—a demanding regimen—will cut cases in children, but only by 27-39%. Researchers insisted, though, that this was only to be expected of a first-generation vaccine, and that subsequent versions would be better.



INTERACTIVE: The shrinking malaria map

They have now been proved right. On May 9th the results of a small, early-stage trial of another vaccine, known as PfSPZ, were published in Nature Medicine, a journal. Five of nine volunteers were completely protected 14 months afterwards. Stephen Hoffman, the boss of Sanaria, the firm developing the vaccine, says it hopes to increase this share, though this might demand multiple doses. “It’s not perfect, but it shows just how huge a challenge malaria poses,” says Mike Turner of the Wellcome Trust, a British medical-research charity.

A year of moderate protection is still worth having, and might make the new vaccine useful in the worst-affected countries—such as the Democratic Republic of Congo and Nigeria, which together account for two-fifths of malaria deaths. It will also appeal to visitors and migrant workers in malarial regions. The goal of a single-dose, highly effective vaccine is still some way off. But the recent advances give hope that malaria will one day be defeated.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21698654-another-blow-struck-long-fight-against-malaria-buzzing/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Special report: The Arab world





The Arab world: The clash within a civilisation

Sykes-Picot and its aftermath: Unintended consequences

The nature of the state: Mamluks and maliks

The economy: Black gold, white gold

Religion: The new strife

Religious subdivisions: Which Islam?

Foreign intervention: From Beirut to Baghdad

Israel and Palestine: Israel’s villa in the jungle

The future: What is the Arabic for democracy?





Articles Sections Next

The Arab world

The clash within a civilisation

A hundred years after the Sykes-Picot agreement carved up the Ottoman empire, a new Arab history is being written in blood. Anton La Guardia examines the failures of the region’s states

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



CLEAVING TO A barren mountainside above the plain of Nineveh, the Syriac Orthodox monastery of Mar Mattai (pictured above) offers a bleak view of the cataclysm that grips the Arab world. Established in the fourth century near the city of Mosul, it stands on a natural boundary. Here, the Mesopotamian plain begins to crease into the Zagros mountains, and Arab farmers come up against Kurdish tribes. Beneath, the folded rocks stretching southward to Oman hold some of the richest stores of oil.

Mar Mattai has seen the passage of many armies: Sassanian, Arab, Seljuk, Mongol, Safavid and Ottoman. The British incorporated Mosul into a new entity called Iraq, which they ruled when the Europeans dismembered the defeated Ottoman empire after the first world war. Their creation, though, would always prove violently restless.

Now Mar Mattai stands witness to the disintegration of Iraq, and of much of the modern Arab order. On the ridge of a nearby hill a line of crude black banners, proclaiming “La illaha illa allah” (there is no God but God), delineates the frontier between two of the new worlds that are emerging from the wreckage. To the west the bloodthirsty jihadist group that calls itself Islamic State (IS)—known as Daesh to most Arabs—controls Mosul and long stretches of the Tigris and Euphrates valleys, out to Raqqa and Deir Ezzor in Syria. To the east Kurdish fighters, the Peshmerga (“those who confront death”), hold the cities of Erbil, Sulaimani and Kirkuk, and the mountain fastness beyond. On one side Daesh claims to have restored the pure law of God and the ancient Islamic caliphate; on the other the Kurds live by modern man-made democracy (of sorts) and nationalism, hoping soon to win their own state.

An American drone buzzes overhead. Explosions rumble in the distance. Mosul, the prize of the war, lies in the haze. The detritus of improvised ordnance fired by the jihadists, including a cooking-gas canister welded on a rocket, suggests they may be short of material. But their readiness to die in suicide missions remains a powerful weapon. “The Peshmerga have limited capacity, but we are defending the whole of humanity and the democratic world,” says General Bahram Yassin, the local Kurdish commander.

This is less a clash of civilisations than a clash within a civilisation. Increasingly the Arabs are a nation of refugees, exiles and migrants

A century ago on May 16th, European powers secretly concluded the Sykes-Picot agreement that led to the modern Arab states (see article). The colonisers would leave behind a dystopian system, prone to wars and coups, held together by secret policemen, torturers and petrodollars, and supported by cold-war sponsors and foreign soldiers. Arabs suffered poverty in a region of plentiful oil, and oppression in the name of Arab greatness. A land of great monotheistic religions has brought forth many who kill in the name of God.



This appalling world is now being swept away, but what is replacing it is often worse. One odious figure, Saddam Hussein, was toppled when America invaded Iraq in 2003, releasing its sectarian demons. Other leaders were ousted by their own people in the Arab uprisings of 2011: Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali of Tunisia fell in January that year, then Hosni Mubarak in Egypt in February. In Libya, Muammar Qaddafi was overthrown with help from Western air forces, then killed in October. In Yemen, Ali Abdullah Saleh, gravely wounded by a bomb, stepped down in November.

Only Tunisia has made a democratic transition, albeit a shaky one. In Egypt the army led a counter-revolution. In Syria Bashar al-Assad’s rump state has bombed and gassed its people in a murderous civil war that has progressively merged with the one in Iraq. Libya splintered into two rival administrations. In Yemen Houthi rebels toppled the government, and are in turn being pushed back by a Saudi-led coalition.

In places non-state militias are stronger than states, whereas state forces have degenerated into ragtag militias. Sectarianism has become acute. The contest between Saudi Arabia, the self-appointed champion of the Sunnis, and Iran, the leading Shia power, makes everything worse. Outsiders have been sucked in. America leads the air campaign against IS and is sending more special forces; Russian forces prop up Mr Assad. This is less a clash of civilisations than a clash within a civilisation. Increasingly the Arabs are a nation of refugees, exiles and migrants.

This special report will examine the factors that led to the collapse of the Arab order. First, the region’s autocratic political model has failed, though monarchies have stood up better than republics. Second, the rentier economic system, based on natural resources, has become unsustainable, not just in oil-producing states but everywhere. Third, Islam, and the Sunni variety in particular, is in tumult over the place of religion in politics and the role of jihad (holy war). And fourth, destabilising interventions by America have been followed, under President Barack Obama, by destabilising detachment from the region.

The Arab world is suffering a crisis of legitimacy. Arab states were seen as the illegitimate offspring of colonialism, and many of their leaders as playthings of the imperialists. The main ideologies of the Arab world—Arabism, Islamism and now salafi-jihadism—sought to overcome the hated Sykes-Picot borders. Nationalist leaders such as Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, who came to power in a coup in 1952, promised Arab unity and the liberation of Palestine but delivered neither.

Too little, too late

Except for oil monarchies that built glittering cities in the desert, most Arab economies were unable to deliver lasting prosperity. Their state-led models failed to harness the power of globalisation, their weaknesses concealed by oil money sloshing through the region. Regimes that belatedly sought to copy China’s model of relative economic liberalism combined with firm political control ended up with an upside-down version of the Soviet Union’s. In Russia the fall of communism led to crony capitalism; in the Arab world partial liberalisation in the 1990s brought first cronyism, then popular resentment that eventually brought down regimes.

Instead of trying to achieve legitimacy through democracy and the rule of law, rulers mostly relied on the power of the mukhabarat, the ubiquitous secret police, often the best-organised organ of state. In countries steeped in Islam, leaders benefited for too long from a religious tradition of obedience to the ruler, even a bad one, to prevent discord among Muslims. But now there is discord aplenty. Repression, jail and torture fed a doctrine that Arab rulers are, in fact, unbelievers.

Amid such upheaval, it is tempting to reach for historical parallels. Early on, some saw the Arab uprisings as a replay of the democratisation that followed the fall of communism in Europe after 1989; later a better comparison would be with the violent break-up of the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s.

It could be argued that the current mess is the latest phase in the collapse of the Ottoman empire. Its European provinces broke away in the 19th century, the Arab ones in the 20th, and the resulting Arab states are now crumbling in the 21st. Arabs today are still confronted with the same question as their forefathers in Ottoman times as they grappled with modernity and European supremacy: why has a world of glorious, cosmopolitan Islamic empires become so abject?

For those who think it is because Western civilisation has proved superior, the remedy is to adopt Western norms of secularism, rationalism and, above all, democracy. Yet for those who believe that Muslims have suffered because they failed to keep God’s ordinances, the only response is to return to the religious purity of the early caliphs. As Khaled al-Dakhil, a Saudi commentator, sums it up: “We have a chronic problem of governance that is more than 1,400 years old. Who is the rightful successor to the Prophet? The question is still hanging over our heads.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21698444-hundred-years-after-sykes-picot-agreement-carved-up-ottoman-empire-new-arab/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sykes-Picot and its aftermath

Unintended consequences

The Sykes-Picot carve-up led to a century of turbulence

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



THE MODERN FRONTIERS of the Arab world only vaguely resemble the blue and red grease-pencil lines secretly drawn on a map of the Levant in May 1916, at the height of the first world war. Sir Mark Sykes and François Georges-Picot were appointed by the British and French governments respectively to decide how to apportion the lands of the Ottoman empire, which had entered the war on the side of Germany and the central powers. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Sazonov, was also involved. The war was not going well at the time. The British had withdrawn from Gallipoli in January 1916 and their forces had just surrendered at the siege of Kut in Mesopotamia in April.

Still, the Allies agreed that Russia would get Istanbul, the sea passages from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean and Armenia; the British would get Basra and southern Mesopotamia; and the French a slice in the middle, including Lebanon, Syria and Cilicia (in modern-day Turkey). Palestine would be an international territory. In between the French- and British-ruled blocs, large swathes of territory, mostly desert, would be allocated to the two powers’ respective spheres of influence. Italian claims were added in 1917.

But after the defeat of the Ottomans in 1918 these lines changed markedly with the fortunes of war and diplomacy (see map). The Turks, under Kemal Pasha Ataturk, pushed foreign troops out of Anatolia. Mosul was at first apportioned to France, then claimed by Turkey and subsequently handed to Britain, which attached it to the future Iraq. One reason for the tussle was the presence of oil. Even before the war, several Arab territories—Egypt, north Africa and stretches of the Arabian Gulf—had already been parcelled off as colonies or protectorates.

Even so, Sykes-Picot has become a byword for imperial treachery. George Antonius, an Arab historian, called it a shocking document, the product of “greed allied to suspicion and so leading to stupidity”. It was, in fact, one of three separate and irreconcilable wartime commitments that Britain made to France, the Arabs and the Jews. The resulting contradictions have been causing grief ever since.

In the end the Arabs, who had been led to expect a great Hashemite kingdom ruled from Damascus, got several statelets instead. The Maronite Christians got greater Lebanon, but could not control it. The Kurds, who wanted a state for themselves, failed to get one and were split up among four countries. The Jews got a slice of Palestine.

The Hashemites, who had led an Arab revolt against the Ottomans with help from the British (notably T.E. Lawrence), were evicted from Syria by the French. They also lost their ancestral fief of the Hejaz, with its holy cities of Mecca and Medina, to Abdel Aziz bin Saud, a chieftain from the Nejd, who was backed by Britain. Together with his Wahhabi religious zealots, he founded Saudi Arabia. One branch of the Hashemites went on to rule Iraq, but the king, Faisal II, was murdered in 1958; another branch survives in a little kingdom called Transjordan, now plain Jordan, hurriedly partitioned off from Palestine by the British.

Israel, forged in war in 1948, fought and won more battles against Arab states in 1956, 1967 and 1973. But its invasion of Lebanon in 1982 was a fiasco. The Palestinians, scattered across the Middle East, fought a civil war in Jordan in 1970 and helped start the one in Lebanon in 1975. Syria intervened in 1976 and did not leave Lebanon until forced out by an uprising in 2005. More than two decades of “peace process” between Israel and Palestine, starting with the Oslo accords of 1993, have produced an unhappy archipelago of autonomous areas in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.

Morocco marched into the western Sahara when the Spanish departed in 1975. The year after Iran’s Islamic revolution of 1979, Iraq started a war that lasted eight years. It then invaded Kuwait in 1990, but was evicted by an American-led coalition.

The Suez Canal and vast oil reserves kept the region at the forefront of cold-war geopolitics. France and Britain colluded with Israel in the war against Egypt in 1956 but were forced back by America. Yet America soon became the predominant external power, acting as Israel’s main armourer and protector. After Egypt defected from the Soviet camp, America oversaw the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty of 1979. It intervened in Lebanon in 1958 and again in 1982. American warships protected oil tankers in the Gulf during the Iran-Iraq war. And having pushed Iraq out of Kuwait in 1991, America stayed on in Saudi Arabia to maintain no-fly zones over Iraq. In response to al-Qaeda’s attacks on Washington and New York in September 2001, America invaded Afghanistan in the same year and then Iraq in 2003.

“Lots of countries have strange borders,” says Rami Khouri of the American University of Beirut. “Yet for Arabs, Sykes-Picot is a symbol of a much deeper grievance against colonial tradition. It is about a whole century in which Western powers have played with us and were involved militarily.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21698442-sykes-picot-carve-up-led-century-turbulence-unintended-consequences/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The nature of the state

Mamluks and maliks

Why Arab monarchies have survived uprisings better than republics

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Best of friends

IN HIS CAIRO office overlooking the Nile, a businessman keeps his mobile phone in a glass jar on his desk. Elsewhere in the city a writer keeps hers in the fridge. If smartphones were once the tools of young revolutionaries across the Arab world, the fear is that they have become the means for the mukhabarat, the secret police, to eavesdrop on dissenters by hacking into their telephones and turning them into bugging devices. These days a journalist working across the Arab world needs a phone packed with the latest encrypted communications apps. Egyptians like Signal; Saudis prefer Telegram; the Lebanese are content with the more common WhatsApp.

The deep state in Egypt was dislocated only slightly by the uprising that swept away Hosni Mubarak in 2011. Now it is back with a vengeance, the army having toppled the elected Islamist president, Muhammad Morsi. Under Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, the general who claims to be a son of the revolution, Egypt is more repressive than it had been under Mr Mubarak, and the economy is doing considerably worse. Protests are growing, particularly over Mr Sisi’s deal with King Salman of Saudi Arabia (both pictured) to hand over two islands in the Red Sea.

Many draw parallels with the repression during Gamal Abdel Nasser’s military rule, minus his heady rhetoric of Arab nationalism. Nasser, too, tried to crush the Muslim Brotherhood. And as with Nasser, there is a danger that Mr Sisi will turn political Islamists into violent jihadists. Islamic State (IS) has declared the Sinai peninsula, once a winter-holiday playground, one of its “provinces”. In October 2015 it brought down a Russian airliner that had taken off from Sharm-el-Sheikh.

Strikingly, all the Arab leaders who were overthrown in 2011 were heading republics, not monarchies. Arab presidents, it seems, are hard but brittle. Nasser’s Egypt was typical of what Jean-Pierre Filiu, a former French diplomat, calls the “Mamluk state”, after the self-perpetuating caste of slave-soldiers who ruled Egypt from the 13th to the 16th century. Mr Filiu applies the label to several other republics—among them Algeria, Syria and Yemen—with a long and mournful history of military domination of the state.

These “Mamluk” republics, mostly socialist-leaning with a penchant for central control of the economy, at first modelled themselves on the authoritarian nationalism of Turkey under Ataturk, though they did not fully share his militant secularism. Their internal-security systems, though, were more akin to those of the Soviet Union, with which they often aligned.

Radical nationalism also served to hide the sometimes narrow sectarian support base of the regimes: the minority Sunnis in Iraq and the Alawites in Syria. It is perhaps no surprise, then, that their regimes were among the most vile. Iraq was called the “Republic of Fear” by a dissident writer, Kanan Makiya; Syria was labelled “The State of Barbarity” by the late Michel Seurat, a French Arabist. Under Saddam Hussein, Iraq gassed the rebellious Kurds at Halabja in 1988; under Hafez al-Assad, Syria flattened the city of Hama in 1982 to crush an uprising by the Muslim Brotherhood. Algeria waged a dirty and bloody war against jihadists that started in 1992 and lasted a decade.

Fear and loathing

Under Mr Mubarak, Egypt was ruled with a lighter touch, perhaps because he was keen to maintain the support of his Western allies. Mr Sisi has had fewer scruples about shedding blood. Thousands have been killed in his suppression of the Muslim Brotherhood, and tens of thousands have been jailed.

According to one conspiracy theory, the Egyptian uprising of 2011 was manipulated throughout by the generals. They used the protesters to get rid of Hosni Mubarak, then the Muslim Brotherhood to sideline liberals, and finally exploited liberal protesters to get rid of the Brothers and introduce direct military rule. In reality their response seems to have been much more improvised, but the theory shows how the deep state is perceived.

And indeed the repression is both arbitrary and vicious. The courts are a law unto themselves. Mr Sisi’s quest for international respectability has not been helped by the torture and murder in February of an Italian PhD student conducting research on Egyptian trade unions, thought to have been committed by members of the secret police.

“ I do not think there is a state in Egypt today,” says Yezid Sayigh of the Carnegie Middle East Centre, a think-tank in Beirut. “There is a coalition of interest groups and institutions, each of which is above the state. They are working at cross-purposes and often undermining Sisi.”

The legitimacy of many republics has rested on two objectives: Arab unity and the liberation of Palestine. Neither has been achieved. And for all their republicanism, their rulers often succumbed to the temptation of establishing their own dynasties. In Syria, Hafez al-Assad was succeeded by his son, Bashar. Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak wanted to install his son, Gamal. In Yemen, Ali Abdullah Saleh was thought to be grooming his son, Ahmad. In Tunisia, the ousted president, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, was reckoned to be rooting for his son-in-law, Sakher El Materi.

Some mock these states as jumlikiyat, an Arabic neologism combining jumhuriyat (republics) and malakiyat (monarchies). “It reached the absurd point that the state became like a car or apartment that they could give to their kids,” says Ghassan Salamé, professor emeritus at Sciences Po, a university in Paris. “This was a big trigger for the uprisings.”

The genuine Arab dynasties have fared much better, at least so far. In the days of nationalist tumult they seemed an endangered species: five Arab monarchs were toppled, from King Farouk of Egypt in 1952 to King Idris of Libya in 1969, and the rest felt threatened for decades. But now there seems to be something in the nature of Arab monarchy—maliks, emirs and sultans—that is more resilient than presidential autocracy.

Mr Salamé sees three main sources of legitimacy for Arab rulers: representation (none is freely elected), achievements (most republics have few to boast about) and provenance (currently the best qualification). “I rule you because I created you,” as Mr Salamé puts it. That is certainly true of the Saudi royal family, which, uniquely, has given its name to its country and can trace its rule in the central Nejd region back to the 18th century.

For the six oil-producing states of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC)—Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Oman—the key to survival has been money. Throughout the turbulence of the Arab spring the monarchies were splurging out, raising salaries and launching new projects to maintain popular support.



Moreover, all GCC states enjoy unspoken diplomatic and military support from outside as allies of the West (Qatar has a large American air base and Bahrain a naval one). After widespread protests in Bahrain, where a minority Sunni family rules a mostly Shia population, other Gulf states sent forces to the island to help shore up the monarchy.

Morocco and Jordan do not produce oil, but their kings, Mohammed VI and Abdullah II, derive some authority from religion, pointing to their descent from the Prophet Muhammad. They also claim political legitimacy: Morocco’s former sultan, Mohammed V, was exiled to Madagascar by the French, and the demand for his return became the rallying cry for Moroccan nationalists. The Hashemites, for their part, raised the flag of revolt against Turkish rule (with British help) in 1916.

Perhaps more important than heritage, though, has been the ability of both monarchies to adapt to changing times. Unlike the ruling families of the Gulf, where royals hold posts throughout the government bureaucracy, those of Morocco and Jordan tend to stand more aloof from day-to-day government. They have also shown a knack for co-opting some critics, or at least maintaining dialogue with them. During the Arab spring both made a show of responding to demands for greater freedom. Both countries introduced limited constitutional reforms and held parliamentary elections. Jordan is more tense. The Muslim Brotherhood boycotted the ballot, and the government is trying to split the movement. In Morocco, the Brotherhood-inspired Justice and Development for the first time won the largest number of votes of any party. Its leader, Abdelilah Benkirane, became prime minister at the head of a four-party coalition.

Arab history since the emergence of Islam in the 7th century is dominated by three empires: Umayyad, Abbasid and Ottoman. “The idea of dynasties is in the mindset of the people. If you held a referendum in Jordan, a vast majority would vote for the monarchy,” says Oraib Rantawi, director of the Al-Quds Centre for Political Studies, a think-tank in Jordan. Political parties in Jordan and Morocco have mostly agreed to abide by the rules, above all acceptance of the monarchy. Elsewhere, says Mr Rantawi, “bloody regimes create bloody oppositions.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21698437-why-arab-monarchies-have-survived-uprisings-better-republics-mamluks-and-maliks/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The economy

Black gold, white gold

The rentier system is in trouble, in the big oil-producing states and beyond

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Profitable at almost any price

FROM THE AIR, the red sand dunes of the Empty Quarter stretch out beyond the bend of the earth, like countless piles of powdered brick. Between the mounds the winds have exposed patches of grey: salt flats that encrust the rock, and great riches of oil. The Empty Quarter was once the passage for camel caravans carrying precious frankincense across the southern Arabian peninsula. These days Saudi Aramco, the giant state-owned oil company, has laid roads and pipelines in the wilderness to carry the much-prized Arabian extra light crude and gas to the refineries and export terminals hundreds of kilometres further north.

Shaybah, a small town of 1,500 people, emerges from the sand. Those who work there say the winds never move the dunes, yet they quickly cover anything that has cut through them, such as the airstrip, which must be cleared regularly. Everything, including sand for construction (the local stuff being too fine), had to be brought by long convoys of lorries. Drilling through the dunes is impossible, so oil wells start from the patches of salt flats and then push out horizontally to get at the oil. Aramco is one part of the Saudi state that works impressively well. In fact, it is more of a state within a state, with its own schools and air services.

Aramco’s executives dismiss the idea that the slump in oil prices, from a peak of about $115 a barrel in 2014 to little more than $45, spells doom for Saudi Arabia’s oil economy. Shaybah was developed when oil was at $15 a barrel, and its fields would still be profitable at $10 a barrel, Aramco claims. The company continues to drill exploration wells to keep up its proven reserves and is investing both upstream and downstream. Producers of more expensive oil, including some from shale in America, will be driven out of business long before before Aramco is in trouble, its managers say; as global production falls and demand recovers, the price is bound to rise again.



Abundant and easily accessible, oil has been the basis of the Gulf’s rentier model of the state: the ruling family collects the rent from oil and distributes the proceeds generously, in the form of public goods, welfare and subsidies, in return for compliance from the population.

This model applies across much of the Arab world. Its economies can be divided into three broad categories: resource-rich, labour-poor Gulf sheikhdoms with lots of oil and gas but few people; resource-rich, labour-abundant states, such as Algeria and Iraq, that have natural resources and larger populations; and resource-poor, labour-abundant countries, notably Egypt, that have little or no oil and gas but lots of mouths to feed (see charts).



It was once thought that the middle group, with the resources and manpower to industrialise, would do best; in fact it has done as badly as the oil-poor grouping. And those middling states tend to be more nakedly authoritarian: they may not have enough oil to buy the quiescence of their people, but plenty to pay for the machinery of repression.

To a degree the whole Arab world is an oil-driven economy: all three groups tend to rise and fall with the price of oil. Millions of Arabs from resource-poor countries are guest workers in oil-producing states. Conversely, high-spending Gulfies like to holiday in places like Cairo and Beirut. Grants and loans from Gulf states help sustain poorer Arab countries.

Some countries, such as Egypt and Jordan, also enjoy “strategic rents”: subsidies provided by Gulf states and the West because their stability is deemed essential to regional order. Egypt, for instance, has been heavily supported by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates since the coup in 2013.

Saudis may not be the richest people in the Gulf, but their country remains the world’s largest exporter of oil. And for all of Aramco’s bullish talk about the prospects for oil, there is anxiety about the future. The regional contest with Iran is keeping output high and oil prices low. Saudi Arabia says it will curtail production only if Iran does; Iran insists it has every right to return to pre-sanctions levels of output. The inconclusive war in Yemen, and support for governments and Sunni groups elsewhere, do not come cheap.

The Saudi budget deficit is forecast to reach 13.5% of GDP this year even after a raft of money-saving measures, including cuts to energy subsidies. The government is drawing down its large pile of reserves and is borrowing on international capital markets. But as Simon Williams, an analyst at HSBC, a bank, points out, “Saudi reserves of wealth do not offer a solution. They only buy time.”

What goes for Saudi Arabia applies, to a greater or lesser extent, to all members of the Gulf Co-operation Council. Qatar, the wealthiest of them, is likely to be least affected; Bahrain and Oman, with less oil, will be in deeper trouble. Plans to start taxing Gulf citizens are in the pipeline, starting with a 5% value-added tax in 2018.

Beyond oil

Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states will have to do what they have long promised but for the most part failed to achieve: diversify away from oil. Not every country can become a tourism and services centre like Dubai. Prince Muhammad bin Salman, the Saudi ruler’s 30-year-old son and the power behind the throne, has spoken most ambitiously about the change he wants to bring about through his “Vision 2030”, a plan to wean his country off oil by that date, if not sooner.

To listen to Saudi ministers, their answer to the ineffectiveness of the Arab state is to sidestep it as much as possible. Prince Muhammad intends to make wholesale use of the private sector, even to provide basic services such as education and health care, and wants to sell stakes in state assets including Aramco, the crown jewel and probably the biggest company in the world. The government talks of selling valuable land to developers, mining other sorts of minerals, creating a defence industry and greatly expanding tourism—but for pious Muslims, not the Western sort.

All this is likely to bring wrenching social change for which Saudi society may not be prepared. A generation of men that expected to be paid for do-nothing government jobs will have to learn to work. The talents of women, who already make up the majority of new university graduates, will have to be harnessed better. But for now even the limited reforms to give women more opportunities have gone into reverse. To achieve its goals, Saudi Arabia will have to promote transparency and international norms, which will mean overcoming resistance from the powerful religious establishment and the sprawling royal family.

But perhaps the biggest problem looming for Saudi Arabia is the need to find jobs for a rapidly rising population. Real output per person in the Gulf is lower today than it was in the 1970s (partly because of migration). Well over half of Saudis are 30 or younger. Public-sector jobs are a form of unemployment benefit that was unsustainable even when oil prices were high. This is a common problem across the Arab world. An abundance of young workers should prove a boon, but in many Arab countries the peak of the youth bulge in the 1990s coincided with a long period of stagnant output, high debt and painful economic adjustment.

Import-substitution models under which countries sought to promote domestic production behind protectionist barriers survived longer in the Arab world than elsewhere because oil and other rents masked the inefficiencies of its economies. Where Arab countries belatedly started to promote non-oil exports, they found that more competitive Asian countries had got there first. Still, the macroeconomic numbers gave few hints of the looming political explosion in 2011. In the preceding years growth had picked up, unemployment was stable (though high) and inequality seemed manageable.

The crisis seems to have been precipitated by two factors. First, the economic adjustment brought cutbacks in public-sector jobs and services; and second, part-liberalisation appeared to favour only the well-connected. This fed resentment of corruption. Of the three slogans of Egypt’s revolution—“bread, freedom, social justice”—two had an economic component. “Middle-class families were not able to maintain their living standards,” notes Amr Adly of the Carnegie Middle East Centre, a think-tank in Beirut. “People did not have the same opportunities as their parents, even though they were better educated.”

The turmoil of the five years since the Arab uprisings has dealt a blow to all the non-oil Arab economies, even if lower oil prices have provided some slight compensation. HSBC estimates that collectively they have lost about 15% of potential GDP. Egypt’s budget deficit has widened to more than 10% of GDP. Manufacturing has stagnated and tourism has suffered (see chart). Part of the crisis stems from the country’s self-inflicted shortage of dollars, induced by the government’s reluctance to allow the currency to fall to its market value. In a bid to keep down domestic prices for staples—Egypt imports much of its food—the central bank is, in effect, rationing the supply of dollars. This is at the expense of manufacturing industry, which cannot import the components it needs and finds its exports priced out by the high exchange rate.



Rather than unfetter the economy, Egypt persists in announcing grandiose projects: the expansion of the Suez Canal, a gleaming new city in the desert and even a bridge over the Red Sea to link Egypt with Saudi Arabia. If all this is to become reality, it will have to be financed by the Gulf. An audiotape of an unflattering conversation leaked last year allegedly captured Mr Sisi exclaiming: “Man, they have money like rice.”

For all of Egypt’s considerable advantages—comparatively early industrialisation in the 19th century, extensive irrigated agriculture thanks to the waters of the Nile, good transport provided by the Suez Canal, a large internal market and proximity to European ones—the country has been unable to seize the opportunity of globalisation. “We are still trapped in the time of Gamal Abdel Nasser, with state-led development and state-dependent workers,” says Mr Adly.

An instructive example is Egypt’s troubled cotton industry, once the country’s “white gold”. Premium-quality long-staple Egyptian cotton was brought to European markets in the early 19th century by a Frenchman, Louis Alexis Jumel, who gave his name to luxury cotton. Production of Egyptian cotton for British and French mills increased rapidly, boosted by the interruption of cotton trade with America during the civil war of 1861-65.

Under Nasser the industry was nationalised. Egypt tried to boost industrialisation by building a vast state-owned mill at Mahalla, in the Nile delta. The production of cotton was favoured over domestic food crops, and farmers had to sell below international market prices.

The premium varieties were exported for foreign currency, and the lower-quality medium- and short-staple cotton was used to make cheap clothes for local consumption. But as international textiles markets opened up, the inefficient Egyptian mills began to lose money. Growing labour unrest at the mills, culminating in a deadly riot in 2008, was an important precursor to the Tahrir Square demonstrations in 2011.

A rising star in the west

In Morocco, by contrast, the mood is hopeful. A smaller country than Egypt, and far from the upheavals to the east, it has been more successful than most other Arab states at holding on to its all-important tourist industry. It is building up its manufacturing sector by seeking to link into the European supply chain, doing for French industry, in particular, what eastern Europe has done for German companies. Renault-Nissan and PSA Peugeot Citroën have built new car-assembly plants in Morocco, and plans are in hand to develop a wider network of local suppliers.

Even more ambitiously, Morocco is working to build an aircraft industry, based outside Casablanca’s international airport. Emerging from the embryo of Royal Air Maroc’s engine-maintenance business, an early step was the manufacture of high-specification electrical wiring for aircraft. On the factory floor of Matis Aerospace, red-veiled women are hunched over the cables—Boeing on one side of the main aisle, Airbus on the other.

Nearby a subsidiary of Safran, a French technology group, is making carbon-fibre casings for jet engines. Bombardier, a Canadian aircraft-maker, is setting up shop to make parts for its airframes. The government is part-funding a vocational training school for the aeronautical industry.

Hamid Benbrahim el-Andaloussi, the president of GIMAS, the aerospace industry’s trade body, says Moroccan factories can make components 30% more cheaply than European or American ones without any loss of quality. At present the industry consists of about 100 companies with 11,500 employees and $1 billion-worth of exports; by 2020, he predicts, it will more than double in size.

Morocco still has far to go. Much of its agriculture, which employs about 40% of the workforce, is rain-fed, and a drought this season has knocked back growth from 4.5% in 2015 to a forecast 2% or less this year. Foreign investors must contend with entrenched incumbents, including the royal family’s large holdings through firms that go by such names as Ergis and Siger (anagrams of “Regis”, Latin for “of the king”). Even so, Morocco shows a dynamism that is sorely needed across the Arab region.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21698438-rentier-system-trouble-big-oil-producing-states-and-beyond-black-gold/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Religion

The new strife

There is but one God, yet different forms of Islam are fighting for their own version of him

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Still mourning for Hussein

THE BOMBASTIC POSTERS and statues of Saddam Hussein disappeared long ago. Now the most visible iconography in Baghdad is of Ali and his son, Hussein (pictured)—revered by Shias as two of the rightful leaders of Islam after the death of the Prophet Muhammad. Once the seat of the great Sunni caliphate under the Abbasid dynasty, Baghdad has become a visibly Shia city.

In Saddam’s time Shias were arrested for trying to go on the 100km pilgrimage from the capital to Karbala; now the city’s main roads are closed to cars for Ashura, a big Shia festival, because so many people set off on the long walk. The coffins of Shia fighters killed in battles against the Sunni jihadists are loaded onto cars and taxis and driven in procession to be buried in Najaf, another holy city in the south about 160km away. Sunnis in Baghdad—those that remain, that is, after years of communal violence that has driven many of them out—find such Shia triumphalism distasteful, even deliberately intimidating.

The two branches of Islam split during the great fitna, or strife, over the succession to the Prophet Muhammad. Sunnis claim that the leadership passed down the line of the four rashidun (rightly guided or perfect) caliphs who had been the Prophet’s companions: Abu Bakr, Omar, Uthman and only then to Ali, the Prophet’s cousin and son-in-law. After that the mantle passed to the Umayyads in Damascus, followed by the Abbasids in Baghdad. Shias say the succession was usurped. It should have passed through the family of the Prophet, first to Ali and later Hussein. But Ali was murdered in Kufa and buried nearby in Najaf, whereas Hussein was killed in a battle against the Umayyads in Karbala and buried there—hence the importance to Shias of the two cities. Shia leadership then passed down a chain of imams that broke off at different points, according to their sect—eg, the Zaydi “Fivers”, the Ismaili “Seveners” and the majority “Twelvers”. Twelver Shiism became the state religion of the Persian Safavid empire, which is why hardline Sunni Arabs tend to regard the Shias as foreign enemies, even non-Muslims.

Shias are given to emotional commemorations of the martyrdom of Ali and Hussein, including public self-flagellation. They are often accused of revelling in al-madhlumiya, or “victimhood”. These days, though, it is often Sunni Arabs who feel and behave like the underdogs. Though they make up the majority of Muslim Arabs, Sunnis often feel disenfranchised in the Arab heartland—sidelined by the Shia majority in Iraq, under murderous attack by the regime of Bashar al-Assad in Syria (dominated by Alawites, an offshoot of Shiism), intimidated in Lebanon by Hizbullah (a powerful Shia militia), and dispersed and occupied by Israel in Palestine. In Yemen, they have been ejected from power by Houthi fighters, issued from the Zaydis.

International brigades of Sunnis and Shias now confront each other in Syria. Those fighting for Mr Assad include Shia recruits from Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan, led by Hizbullah and senior officers of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC). Against these stand two broad groups: the jihadists of Islamic State, made up of volunteers from many countries, and looser alliances of Syrian Sunni rebel groups supported to varying degrees by neighbouring Sunni states, mainly Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Jordan. Suicide-bombings, the poor man’s guided missile, were first adopted by proto-Hizbullah in 1983; they were copied by Palestinian Islamists and are now a favourite tactic of Sunni jihadists.

Islam is more than ever the cause for which everyone claims to be fighting. But which Islam? Eugene Rogan of Oxford University argues that the fate of the Arab world will be determined by the contest between three versions of Islam: the Muslim Brotherhood and salafi-jihadism (both Sunni) and the Shia doctrine of the “rule of the jurisprudent”. At least two other trends are important, too (see box, next page).

Islam holds great political power. Muhammad was not only a religious prophet but also a temporal ruler and warrior. Islam was spread by both the word and the sword. For many Muslims Islam is not just a personal faith but also a blueprint for organising a perfect society. The Western notion of separating religion from politics is regarded as nonsensical. Muslims regard their religion as God’s final revelation and the Koran as his actual word. Some groups thus tend towards literalism. Muslim reformers seek to play down the “sword verses”—eg, “slay the idolaters wherever you find them”—but jihadist ideologues dismiss this as fake Islam.

It is often said that Shias cannot believe they have won power and Sunnis cannot accept they have lost it, which perhaps makes the strife more vicious

In the early years after independence, Arab monarchies enlisted the support of the Muslim Brotherhood against nationalists and leftists. Islamism flourished after the 1967 war, when Israel’s victory discredited nationalists. The year 1979 was particularly eventful: Egypt signed a peace treaty with Israel (for which its president, Anwar Sadat, was assassinated by Islamists); Ayatollah Khomeini came to power in Iran, energising Muslim radicals of all sorts; Juhayman al-Otaybi led a group of radical gunmen in seizing the grand mosque in Mecca and calling for the overthrow of the House of Saud; and the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, which prompted the Saudis (and America) to support those waging jihad against the communists.

The arrival of American troops in Saudi Arabia in 1990 to eject Iraqi forces from Kuwait, and for years to keep Saddam in check, set Osama bin Laden on the road of jihad against America. Al-Qaeda’s attack on that country in 2001 provoked George W. Bush’s decision to topple Saddam, overturning the sectarian balance in Iraq and in the region.

It is often said that Shias cannot believe they have won power and Sunnis cannot accept they have lost it, which perhaps makes the strife more vicious. Iraqi jihadists deliberately provoked the Shias. An intercepted letter from the late Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of al-Qaeda in Iraq and forefather of today’s Islamic State, argued in 2004 that the fight against American occupiers would be easy. The real danger, he said, was the Shias, “the crafty and malicious scorpion”. He would goad the Shias into a sectarian war that would “awaken” the Sunni world.

Zarqawi’s other obsession was to declare an “Islamic state”. This had been a distant objective for both al-Qaeda and for the Brotherhood, but Zarqawi and his followers wanted to hasten its coming. Various incarnations of his group carried the name, though many senior recruits came from Saddam’s Baath party. After breaking away from al-Qaeda in early 2014, and capturing Mosul in June that year, the “caliphate” was declared by IS’s leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi: “Rush, O Muslims, to your state. Yes, it is your state.” His pretensions to a caliphate, disregard of Islamic tradition and sectarian tactics were disavowed even by al-Qaeda. Though weakened, it is IS that makes the headlines and gets the recruits. According to Stephane Lacroix of Sciences Po in Paris, “Al-Qaeda and Islamic State are like Trotsky and Stalin: one wants to wait for world revolution, the other wants to build ‘socialism in one country’.”

The emergence of IS was a startling comeback for a group that had been all but destroyed by America’s military “surge” in Iraq in 2007-08. Its revival was rekindled by three factors: America’s withdrawal in 2011; the disenfranchisement of Sunnis by the Shia prime minister, Nuri al-Maliki, who packed the army with loyalists and cut off the Sunni tribal forces created by America; and the violent breakdown of Syria, which allowed IS to establish a strong base.

Marching for the caliphate

The merging of the Syrian and Iraqi wars into one conflict makes for strange alliances. Iran acted to defend both the governments in Baghdad and in Damascus; America is allied with Iraq but, at least in theory, against the Syrian regime. Russia says it is fighting IS but is mostly saving Bashar al-Assad from other rebels; Syrian Kurds are allied with America against IS; and with Russia against other rebels.

Sunni rulers, especially the Al Sauds, see themselves encircled by malign Shias, from Iran’s perceived attempt to stir up Shias in Bahrain to Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen. “Iran wants to re-establish the Persian empire,” says one senior Saudi official. Saudi Arabia went to war in Yemen after the Houthis seized the capital, Sana’a, and moved to take the port city of Aden. In Syria, meanwhile, Saudi Arabia had worked closely with Turkey to turn the mainstream Syrian rebels into a more coherent force, helped by deliveries of American-made anti-tank missiles. One reason the Al Sauds act as the champion of the Sunni cause, says one insider in Riyadh, is that they are trying to draw young Sunnis away from Daesh.

Iran, for its part, is grateful to Syria as the only Arab country that stuck with it during the long war against Iraq, and sees it as a vital bridge to Hizbullah. But it usually favours strong client militias within weak states, as in Lebanon. And these days Hizbullah’s claim to be the main shield against Israel for all Muslims is unconvincing; instead it has become the spear-tip of the Shias.

Even where there is no Shia-Sunni sectarian divide, there are still proxy conflicts. Turkey and Qatar are the prime supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood; Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and, to a lesser extent, Saudi Arabia oppose them. In the divided politics of Libya, the pro-Brotherhood allies support the “Dawn” government in Tripoli, while the others back the “Dignity” coalition in Benghazi.

Since the coup in Egypt in 2013 the Brotherhood has been on the back foot. Its exiles in Istanbul and Doha bemoan the incompetence of Muhammad Morsi, Egypt’s short-lived Brotherhood president. By forcing through a contested constitution and alienating liberals he created the climate for the army to oust him. Some fellow Brothers from other countries had urged him to be more conciliatory. “Had the Muslim Brotherhood played their cards differently, they might have avoided the coup entirely,” says H.A. Hellyer of the Atlantic Council, an American think-tank. “They were thrilled—wrongly—by the idea they were living in a new age, and no longer needed to hold back.”

In Tunisia, Ennahda, a party inspired by the Brotherhood but no longer part of it, moved more cannily. It had won a plurality of votes in the constituent-assembly election of 2011 and ruled in a broad coalition. As jihadist violence gathered pace and Mr Morsi was overthrown, Ennahda eventually yielded on several points of the constitution, allowing it to become more secular than the party had wanted. It handed over to a technocratic government in January 2014, after the constitution was agreed upon.

Morocco largely avoided street protests in 2011, and the king appointed an Islamist-led government in November of that year. As part of a broad counter-radicalisation effort after a spate of terrorist attacks in Casablanca in 2003, the Moroccan state has been gradually seizing direct control of the mosque. A new school for imams, including foreign ones from sub-Saharan Africa as well as France and Belgium, opened in Rabat in 2015. It seeks to promote a moderate form of Islam, based on Morocco’s Maliki school of thought and, crucially, acceptance of the king’s traditional status as “Commander of the Faithful”.

It has also begun a pioneering programme to train women as mourchidas (spiritual counsellors). One of them, who did not want to be named, explained that her task was to work with women and children on a range of issues, including literacy and fighting drug abuse. “We sometimes come across preachers who promote a radical message. We have to intervene to tell them to change their discourse. When we started there was more religious radicalism; we have noticed that it has dropped.”

The risk is that all this will be dismissed by some Muslims as phoney “state Islam”. Still, the campaign seems to be having some impact. Take the experience of Abdelkrim Chadli, a Salafist preacher who was arrested after a series of suicide-bombings in Casablanca in 2003, accused of inspiring jihadists (which he denies) through his writings. Pardoned by the king in 2011, he is now urging fellow salafists to join a royalist shell party called the Democratic and Social Movement (founded by a former police commissioner). Within three or four years, he hopes, it could win elections and hasten the process of Islamising society. It is a striking transformation of Islamists’ stance, brought about in part by fear of the sort of chaos seen elsewhere, in part by the firm limits set by the king, and in part by his good sense in giving Islamists a political outlet. “Today all salafists are the first defenders of the monarchy,” says Mr Chadli, “We consider Morocco to be an Islamic model—even with the drinking bars.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21698440-there-one-god-yet-different-forms-islam-are-fighting-their-own-version/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Religious subdivisions

Which Islam?

Five main strands of Muslim politics

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

The Muslim Brotherhood. Founded in Egypt in 1928 during the struggle against British rule, the Brotherhood is a broad-based Sunni movement with branches in many countries. It seeks to transform society through da’awa (proselytising) and by winning power through elections. Although a Brotherhood government was toppled in Egypt in 2013, moderate offshoots are still in power in Tunisia and Morocco. Its armed Palestinian branch, Hamas, rules the Gaza Strip. It can be pragmatic and gradualist in its approach to sharia (Islamic law).

Quietist salafism. An ultra-conservative Sunni movement that seeks to emulate the Prophet Muhammad and his earliest followers, al-salaf al-salih (the pious forefathers). It seeks to strip Islam of the traditions accumulated over the centuries. Salafists increasingly take part in elections. They are financed by petrodollars from countries such as Saudi Arabia, whose royal family rules in alliance with the puritanical salafi movement, the Wahhabis. The quietist brand of salafism can be intolerant on social matters and might support military jihad abroad. But such salafists generally do not challenge Sunni Arab rulers directly in their own countries. “Hard on the people and soft on rulers,” sums up one ex-Wahhabi in Saudi Arabia.

Salafi-jihadism. Al-Qaeda and Islamic State (IS), among others, have elevated violent jihad as the main pillar of Sunni Islam. They typically denounce elections as placing man’s law above God’s. Their main foes are the “near enemy” (Arab rulers), the “far enemy” (the West) and Shias. Their ideology is an extreme hybrid of the more radical doctrines of the Muslim Brotherhood and the salafists, and their tactics are more aggressive than either. Traditional Sunni Islam usually forbids rebellion against a ruler, even an evil one, because, as the Koran puts it, “fitna is worse than killing.” One way out of the conundrum is takfir, or the declaration that certain people, or categories, are unbelievers—some of whom may or even should be killed.

Muslim Brotherhood extremists, such as Sayyid Qutb, limited takfir to Arab rulers such as Gamal Abdel Nasser (who had Qutb jailed, tortured and executed). For salafists, the unbelievers potentially extend to a much wider group, including the Shias. The question is whether non-violent Islamism acts as a barrier to jihadists, or a gateway.

Rule of the jurisprudent. Velayat-e-faqih (rule of the jurisprudent) is a doctrine that supreme political leadership should be exercised by a senior Shia Islamic scholar. It was adopted in the constitution of Iran after the Islamic revolution of 1979 and embodied by the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Overseen by the supreme leader, the system allows for semi-democratic elections for the day-to-day offices of government—though the candidates have to be vetted by the religious authorities.

Iran sponsors a range of parties and militias, ranging from Hizbullah in Lebanon to several Shia parties that dominate the current Iraqi coalition, whether or not they explicitly subscribe to velayat-e-faqih.

The Marjaa. A distinct and sometimes rival Shia trend revolves around the Marjaa (religious reference), the group of the most senior Shia figures. Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani, based in Najaf in Iraq, is the spiritual leader of most Shias, especially Iraqi ones. He appears to regard velayat-e-faqih as an aberration from Shiism’s quietist tradition and has backed democracy as the means to consolidate Shias’ empowerment. He tried to restrain Shia militia reprisals for jihadist attacks and gave his blessing to the replacement of Iraq’s divisive former prime minister, Nuri al-Maliki, by the more inclusive Haider al-Abadi. An undeclared battle for the succession to the 85-year-old cleric has started. “Thank God Sistani is here,” says a Western diplomat. “But for how much longer?”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21698443-five-main-strands-muslim-politics-which-islam/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Foreign intervention

From Beirut to Baghdad

America is tired of policing the Arab world, and vice versa. But pulling out could be just as bad

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

The end of an embassy, and an era

THE LEBANESE ARE doing their best to forget about their civil war—if only the fighting across the border in Syria were not so worryingly close to home. Their monument to the victims of the war of 1975-90—a great tower of tanks and artillery pieces stacked atop each other and semi-encased in concrete—is tucked out of sight, up the mountain overlooking Beirut. The old front line through the city centre is being built over; even the Ottoman-era stone buildings are being allowed to rot, to be replaced by luxury flats for rich visitors from the Gulf.

The outside world, too, has mostly forgotten about the Lebanese war. Yet it contains many forewarnings about the agony the Arab world today. Its strife was once thought of as exceptional. Now much of the Fertile Crescent is a bigger and nastier version of Lebanon: an ancient land with myriad quarrelling ethnic and religious groups. Those who thought the Syrian dictator, Bashar al-Assad, would quickly be overthrown did not reckon with the network of minorities—among them Christians and Kurds along with his Alawites—that he could call on for survival.

If Arabs are said to remember too much history, Americans remember too little. Lebanon was a warning about the dangers of military intervention in pursuit of a grandiose mission in the Middle East. When George W. Bush recklessly invaded Iraq in 2003—thinking that removing Saddam Hussein would make the world safer from terrorists and spread democracy to cure the ills of the Arab world—he did not heed the lessons of America’s blunders in Lebanon two decades earlier.

Then America sent forces to Beirut at the head of a multinational force to oversee the evacuation of Palestinian fighters after Israel invaded in 1982. Provoked by Palestinian attacks, Israel sought to use military supremacy to transform the region: it would evict the PLO and Syrians from Lebanon; install a new Lebanese president, Bashir Gemayel, under whom a peace treaty with the Jewish state would be signed; and push Palestinian radicals to adopt the idea that Jordan—not the Israeli-occupied territories—is Palestine. Having facilitated the departure of the PLO in August 1982, American and European forces left Lebanon. But they returned after a bomb (presumably planted by Syria) killed Gemayel and, in revenge, Phalangist militias from his Maronite Christian community massacred hundreds, if not thousands, of Palestinian civilians in front of Israeli forces.

America’s effort to broker a short-lived settlement between Israel and Lebanon in May 1983, and reinforce Lebanese government forces against Syria and its allied militias, sucked it deeper into the war. In place of Palestinian groups there emerged a new and more vicious religious force, Hizbullah, an Iranian-sponsored Shia militia. It pioneered the use of spectacular suicide-bombers in the Arab world. The American embassy on the corniche was blown up in April 1983 and the US marine base was destroyed in October that year. The French and the Israelis were also attacked, and the international forces soon withdrew. In 2000 Hizbullah harried the Israelis out of south Lebanon, earning kudos across the Arab world.

There is little left of America’s traumatised passage through Beirut. The ruins of the embassy building have been replaced by a block of luxury flats. The old Marines base is now a car park. American diplomats work and live in an improvised fortified compound on the slopes of Mount Lebanon, with anti-sniper walls to protect them as they walk from one building to another.

Among those who survived the 1983 embassy bombing was the then head of the political section, Ryan Crocker. He later served as America’s ambassador to Iraq and was celebrated as “America’s Lawrence of Arabia” for his role during the American “surge” of forces that helped to salvage the failing military enterprise. “In all my time I have learnt two things,” he says. “Be careful what you get into, and be at least as careful what you get out of.” He thinks that the American intervention in Lebanon set in motion a chain of events America could not control, as did its invasion of Iraq. America’s hurried departure from Lebanon also set a precedent, showing that the superpower could be defeated by terrorism and proxy actors. “Syria, Iran and Hizbullah learnt the lesson and played it back to us in Iraq,” says Mr Crocker. Syria facilitated attacks on American troops in Iraq by al-Qaeda, and Iran supported the Mahdi Army, a Shia militia.

Under Barack Obama, elected on a promise to end the war in Iraq, America’s full withdrawal from the country in December 2011 now looks reckless. Mr Obama declared at the time that America was leaving behind a stable country. But Iraq’s Shia, Sunni and Kurdish politicians reverted to narrow sectarian instincts in which, as Mr Crocker puts it, “compromise is a concession, a concession is a defeat and defeat is death.”

Mr Obama’s reluctance to be drawn into another war in Syria is understandable. “Don’t do stupid shit” became his mantra. But Syria perhaps also shows the dangers of extreme inaction. Mr Obama resisted pressure to take military action against the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, even after Mr Assad in 2013 crossed Mr Obama’s “red line” by using chemical weapons. It was only when the jihadists of Islamic State, having taken control of eastern Syria, swept across Iraq in 2014 that Mr Obama felt compelled to send American forces back into Iraq.

If Mr Obama has had a priority in the Middle East, it has been to pursue an agreement with Iran to halt its nuclear programme, or at least suspend it for a decade or more. Mr Obama has sometimes entertained the hope that the deal might strengthen moderates in Tehran and make Iran a more tractable partner. More realistically, he wants to achieve a more balanced relationship between Iran and the Arabs, saying that they will have to “share” the region. To America’s traditional allies, both Arab monarchies and Israel, this looks as though America is abandoning the Middle East to Iranian influence: its inaction in Syria has emboldened America’s foes, they say; its readiness to dump Hosni Mubarak in Egypt has rattled its friends.

Mr Obama is plainly weary of America’s long commitment to the region, from defending the Gulf’s oil supplies to trying to mediate a seemingly impossible peace between Israel and the Palestinians. Asked whether Saudi Arabia was America’s friend, Mr Obama once replied: “It’s complicated.” His relations with Israel, too, have been far from straightforward. By trying to pull back from the region, Mr Obama has left space for others to step in. Saudi Arabia is engaged in an increasingly bitter proxy contest with Iran. Russia has also moved in, deploying aircraft and other forces to support the Syrian regime. For the moment, it is Russia that is playing the role of hegemon in the Middle East, seeking to set the rules of the war and the peace to follow.

America’s friends hope that the new president to be elected in November will take a more active role. Certainly Hillary Clinton, the Democratic front-runner, has sounded more hawkish. She has advocated arming anti-Assad rebels and imposing no-fly zones in Syria. Donald Trump, the Republican candidate, has sharply criticised the Iran deal and speaks of the need to wage “a war against radical Islam”, yet also says America should refrain from intervening abroad and work better with Russia.

In reality, the options for intervention have narrowed, now that Russia is on the ground and in the air in Syria. The American public has little wish to place large numbers of troops at risk in another Arab country. And America can now do without Arab oil, though it remains exposed to global energy prices and its effects on the world economy. So the next president’s actions may not differ much from those of Mr Obama, who is sending more special forces to Syria. Having long denounced American interference, Arabs may find that its absence is even worse.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21698441-america-tired-policing-arab-world-and-vice-versa-pulling-out-could-be-just/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Israel and Palestine

Israel’s villa in the jungle

Israel’s foes have weakened, but Palestinians are winning the battle of the womb

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



SURPRISINGLY, PERHAPS, ISRAEL claims to be taking no sides in the Syrian conflict that rages in full sight of its outposts on the Golan Heights. If shot at it will shoot back; anyone smuggling advanced weapons to Hizbullah in Lebanon will be a fair target; and if Hizbullah comes too close to the Golan border, it will also be hit. For the most part, though, Israel’s view is best summed up by a quip in 1980 by Israel’s then prime minister, Menachem Begin, on the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war: “We wish both sides the greatest success.”

Israeli security folk see much good news in the Arab world’s convulsions. Israel’s deterrence is holding. No state directly threatens it. There is no Syrian army to speak of; Iran’s nuclear programme has probably been neutralised for a decade or more by its accord with America; and Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi is the most pro-Israeli Egyptian leader ever. Friendly Arab monarchies have survived and are moving towards a tacit alliance with Israel against Iran.

The Palestinians are weak and divided. The nationalist Fatah movement that rules the West Bank is at daggers drawn with Hamas, which holds Gaza. Both are co-operating (up to a point in the case of Hamas) to prevent attacks on Israel. At a time when the frontiers of the Middle East are being questioned as never before, the “1967 border”, which defines the Israeli-occupied territories, might become less inviolable (Israel says the world should now recognise its annexation of the Golan). Verily, says one securocrat, this is a land of miracles.

Yet there are still worries aplenty. Radical factions in the ungoverned spaces around Israel might turn their guns on it. Jordan, which implicitly protects Israel’s flank to the east, may yet be consumed by turmoil all around. And by saving the Syrian regime, Russia is strengthening Israel’s arch-foe, Iran.

Arabs, too, recognise that events are favouring Israel. Some otherwise sensible Arabs even suspect that the turbulence, including the emergence of Islamic State, are all somehow part of a Zionist conspiracy. That said, these days conversations about the state of the Arab world can go on for hours before the word “Palestine” is uttered.

Compared with his ever more right-wing coalition, the Israeli prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, comes across as a moderate. He pays some lip service to the “two-state solution”, the creation of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip (and part of Jerusalem) alongside Israel, but the “peace process” is at a dead end. Many in his government say this is no time for territorial concessions. Palestinians retort that the failure to reach a just settlement is sure to feed radicalism.

Never mind that the Arab world’s attention may be turned away from Palestine, says Husam Zomlot, a senior Palestinian official: “Israel has 99% of the day-to-day cards, but the Palestinians have the strategic cards.” The occupied land Palestinians claim is disappearing under Israeli roads and settlements in the West Bank. But the Palestinians are winning what some call the “battle of the womb”. The number of Arabs between the Mediterranean and the Jordan river (in Israel and the occupied territories) roughly equals that of Jews, at about 6.3m each, and may soon overtake it.

If Israel holds on to the occupied territories permanently, it cannot be both a full democracy and a Jewish state; the comparisons with apartheid are bound to intensify. An idea gaining strength among the pro-settler nationalist-religious right is to allow Gaza to become near-independent, even with its own sea port. That would hive off nearly 2m Palestinians. Some think Hamas might just be tempted to take this opportunity to claim an achievement after three damaging wars with Israel since 2008.

All this might explain why Israeli right-wingers are, unusually, complaining that Mr Sisi has been too tough on the Palestinians by cutting traffic and tunnels between Gaza and the restive Sinai peninsula. Just as some Israelis want to turn Gaza into Palestine, Egypt is dumping it back in Israel’s lap.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21698439-israels-foes-have-weakened-palestinians-are-winning-battle-womb-israels/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The future

What is the Arabic for democracy?

Endless obstacles to political freedom remain

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

If only

“THE REVOLUTION WAS for nothing. We changed one family of thieves for many families of thieves. This country depends on tourism. Now there are no tourists.” Such is the harsh judgment of one stallholder on Avenue Habib Bourguiba in Tunis, scene of many protests during the 2011 revolution.

On the face of it, Tunisia has made an admirable transition to democracy. Its political parties have kept the consensus for pluralism, contested two rounds of elections and abided by the result. But the economy has languished, and protests are simmering once more in the deprived interior of the country. To an extent, Tunisia has been unlucky. It is feeling the instability next door in Libya: migrant workers have lost their jobs there, while the all-important tourism industry has been ruined by repeated terrorist attacks. An attempt in March by Islamic State to seize the town of Ben Guerdane, close to the Libyan border, rattled the country. But the coalition is fractious. It is struggling to enact economic reforms. And the ruling party, Nidaa Tounes, has split after little more than a year in power. In part this is because of the return of a bad old habit: President Beji Caid Essebsi seems to be trying to install his son, Hafedh, as his political heir.

Still, Tunisia counts as success compared with the mess in other countries that cast off their leaders in 2011. For all the disappointment and sorrow in the years after the Arab uprisings, it is difficult to imagine the region reverting to the immobility of the decades before 2011. Authoritarianism is back, but many states are too weak and fragmented, and access to information too ubiquitous, for it to go unchallenged for long.

This special report has argued that the collapse of the post-colonial Arab system is, at its heart, a crisis of legitimacy. The impact of colonialism, often blamed by Arabs for their woes, should not be an impediment; the world is full of countries with bleak histories and odd borders. Arab governments will have to regain the trust of their citizens. First, they will have to deliver better standards of living by overcoming the rentier system. Gulf states will have to get over their dependence on oil. All should do much less subsidising and controlling of production, and much more safeguarding of the market to make sure that cronies do not capture the economy. Second, governments have to gain consent through democracy. Monarchies have done better, but they still cannot claim the right to rule on the basis of inheritance.

That said, democracy in the Arab world faces two peculiar hurdles. The first is the fear of Islamist parties taking power. But suppressing them can be worse. Algeria lamentably cancelled a general election to head off a victory by Islamists in 1992, unleashing a long insurgency. With their semi-autonomy, Palestinians fell into a pale version of Arab authoritarianism; the refusal by the nationalist Fatah movement to accept the victory by Hamas in the parliamentary election of 2006 led to internal strife, and the severing of Gaza from the West Bank. The military coup against the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, meanwhile, has created an even more oppressive and dysfunctional state.

Tunisia’s luck was to have a better army (it stayed in barracks) and better Islamists (more able to work with secularists). “Any state has an army; in Egypt the army has a state,” notes Rached Ghannouchi, the leader of Ennahda in Tunisia. He no longer likes to be called a political Islamist; he prefers “Muslim democrat” because, he says, there are Muslims who are not democrats. He stresses the need for co-operation with other parties: in Egypt the post-revolution constitution was forced through by Islamists; in Tunisia, though, it passed with the backing of secularists. “In a normal, stable democracy, ruling with 51% is enough. But in a nascent democracy of transition it’s not enough. You need consensus.”

A second stumbling block for democracy is the diversity of Arab peoples. In good times it makes for an admirable multiculturalism. But these days all groups behave like embattled minorities. In “Representative Government”, John Stuart Mill argued in 1861 that “free institutions are next to impossible in a country made up of different nationalities” because, as he put it, “the same incidents, the same acts, the same system of government, affect them in different ways; and each fears more injury to itself from the other nationalities than from the common arbiter, the state.” In the Arab world each group fears that rivals will capture the state, its economic resources and above all its guns.

For all the disappointment after the Arab uprisings, it is hard to imagine the region reverting to the immobility before 2011

In theory, secession, federalism and decentralisation might offer some reassurance to minorities. Under a modern-day Sykes-Picot agreement, Iraq might be broken up into a Kurdistan in the north, Shiastan in the south and Sunnistan in the west. Syria could split into an Alawistan along the Mediterranean and a Sunnistan to the west, which might merge with the Iraqi one (as Daesh has already done). In Saudi Arabia the more liberal Hijazis on the Red Sea and the Shias in the Eastern Province might be glad to be rid of the Wahhabis from the central Nejd.

One problem with such notions is that most of the oil would be in the hands of Shias. A bigger difficulty is that homogeneity is impossible in lands where ethnicity and sect can change from one village to the next. Shifting the lines may create as many injustices as it resolves, and could lead to new atrocities as each side tries to grab what it can and cleanse territory of unwanted minorities. The partition of Palestine, the exchange of populations between Turkey and Greece and the Balkan wars are a warning of how easily this can happen.

Troublesome as they have been, the post-colonial borders have proved durable partly because few have dared to change them; and a century has been long enough for national identities to take root to some degree. The spread of the Arab uprisings may have demonstrated the strong bonds among Arabs in different countries, but the demand on the street was for change within national frontiers, not the abolition of the modern state. Even in Ottoman times, large parts of the empire were more or less autonomous. Attempts to merge modern states failed—notably the fusing of Egypt and Syria in the United Arab Republic of 1958-61. For the most part, Arabs seem content with multiple national, linguistic and religious identities.

Especially in the highly heterogeneous Fertile Crescent, part of the solution will lie in devolving a range of powers from central government to regions and provinces to ensure that specific groups do not feel tyrannised by the majority, or even by other minorities. Most Arabs reject federalism. “We have reached the point where maps are being drawn,” bemoans Walid Jumblatt, Lebanon’s Druze leader. “This is the old Zionist dream to dislocate the whole Middle East into sectarian cantons. I want to be part of a greater Arab world.”

So far, attempts to decentralise power have not worked well. The peculiar communally based politics of Lebanon under the Taif accords of 1991 may have kept the peace, but has led to paralysis. The country has been unable to elect a president for the past two years, or even pick up the rubbish in some areas.

Nor has Iraq’s federal model salved its wounds. The Kurdish region and the federal government in Baghdad are waging a bureaucratic war over oil revenues. And even among the Shia there have been turbulent protests against the corrupt muhasasa spoils system under which power is distributed to maintain ethno-sectarian balance and each party seeks to milk the central government through contracts and appointments. Many Shias, who once supported federalism, now embrace centralisation. But some Sunni Arabs, now the underdogs, belatedly advocate the creation of a Sunni federal region.

Arab states could do with more supranational integration to open markets and spur growth. As a political body, the Arab League is a failure. But many Arabs admire the European Union, even as it loses its appeal to a growing number of Europeans, not least because of Arab refugees. European history provides some solace to Arabs: before the continent united, it waged wars even bloodier than those the Arabs are enduring. And as some are starting to acknowledge, there is another lesson from Europe: democracy is the basis for future unity.

Democratic progress and economic reform should be encouraged in Tunisia and Morocco. These are small countries, but the uprisings of 2011 show that small countries can serve as a model for others. Next, pressure needs to be exerted on Egypt to return to the path of reform. One in four Arabs is Egyptian. If the country does well, it will lift the region; its collapse would be a threat to all, including Europe.

It will be hard to make real progress before the many Arab wars are stopped. Optimists hope that the political ruin can be reconstructed, piece by piece. A UN-sponsored unity government is trying to establish itself in Libya. Maybe the latest ceasefire in Yemen will hold. Perhaps the Syrian peace talks will get somewhere. There may be some hope in the sight of Iraqi Shias denouncing their politicians and the sectarian muhasasa system. And in Syria, when ceasefires allow a breathing space, citizens have taken to the streets in rebel-held towns to demand freedom in defiance of both the regime and powerful jihadists-tinged militias. But right now it is easier to see new crises erupting than existing ones being resolved. To take a few: Algeria could fall apart once its near-invisible president, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, passes away; Lebanon and Jordan might succumb to war contagion; and the cold war between Iran and Saudi Arabia might turn hot over some incident.

If the civil war in Lebanon is anything to go by, the war in Syria could last for another decade. The Lebanese agony was brought to a close in 1990 by sudden geopolitical change: Syria was permitted to crush the last remaining Christian resistance in Lebanon in return for joining the war to liberate Kuwait from Saddam. But in Syria there seems to be no external force—not even Russia—that is willing or able to tip the balance sufficiently to ensure a victory by any one side. Outside powers will not be able to fix the Arab world, even if they wanted to. But the attacks in Paris, Brussels and Istanbul show that the world cannot afford to ignore the Arabs’ existential crisis.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21698436-endless-obstacles-political-freedom-remain-what-arabic-democracy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Business





Office communication: The Slack generation

Binod Chaudhary: Peak tycoon

French weapons-makers: Going great guns

Crocodile farming: Snappy dressers

Planemakers: The eye of the storm

Tobacco firms: Snuffed out

Schumpeter: Island story





Articles Sections Next

Office communication

The Slack generation

How workplace messaging could replace other missives

May 14th 2016 | SAN FRANCISCO | From the print edition



STEWART BUTTERFIELD, the boss of Slack, a messaging company, has been wonderfully unlucky in certain ventures. In 2002 he and a band of colleagues created an online-video game called “Game Neverending”. It never took off, but the tools they used to design it turned into Flickr, the web’s first popular photo-sharing website. Yahoo bought it in 2005 for a reported $35m.

Four years later Mr Butterfield tried to create another online game, called Glitch. It flopped as well. But Mr Butterfield and his team developed an internal messaging system to collaborate on it, which became the basis for Slack. In Silicon Valley, such a change in strategy is called a “pivot”; anywhere else it is called good fortune. Today Slack is one of the fastest-rising startups around, with $540m in funding and a valuation of around $3.8 billion.“I guess the lesson should be, pursue your dream and hope it fails, so you can do something else,” says Cal Henderson, Slack’s chief technology officer.

It is rare for business software to arouse emotion besides annoyance. But some positively gush about how Slack has simplified office communication. Instead of individual e-mails arriving in a central inbox and requiring attention, Slack structures textual conversations within threads (called “channels”) where groups within firms can update each other in real time. It is casual and reflects how people actually communicate, eschewing e-mail’s outdated formalities, says Chris Becherer of Pandora, an online-music firm that uses Slack.

Its other selling-point is efficiency. A survey of users, admittedly conducted by the firm itself, suggests that team productivity increases by around a third when they start using the software, primarily by reducing internal e-mail and meetings. Slack has decided to open itself up to other apps, becoming a platform by which employees can log into and use other software tools. Today it has 2.7m daily active users, up from 1m last June. Around 800,000 of them are paying subscribers; their firms pay around $80 or more a year for each employee using the service. The firm has $75m in annual recurring revenue and is breaking even, says Mr Butterfield.

Slack’s rise points to three important changes in the workplace. First, people are completing work across different devices from wherever they are, so they need software that can work seamlessly on mobile devices. Messaging naturally lends itself to this format. Second, communication is becoming more open. Just as offices went from closed, hived-off rooms to open-plan, Slack is the virtual equivalent, fostering a collaborative work environment, says Venkatesh Rao of Ribbonfarm, a consultancy. Slack’s default setting is to make conversations public within a firm.

Third, software firms are trying to automate functions that used to be done by people in order to make employees more productive. Slack has made a big push into “bots”, algorithms that can automate menial tasks which used to be done by humans. Slack offers bots that compile lunch orders and projects’ progress reports, or generate analytics on demand. In the future employees will be able to chat with software agents to get more done, working alongside bots as well as their peers.

Mr Butterfield is not the typical leader of a striving startup. Called “Dharma” by his hippie parents, he spent his early years on a commune with no running water or electricity; he changed his name to Daniel Stewart when he was 12. A self-professed introvert, which is fitting for a company that sells itself on textual communication, he values efficiency and candour. After Yahoo bought Flickr, he worked there for a few years. “Everything was horrible, ugly, slow, difficult to use and confusing,” he says, frankly.

Dharma chameleon

In retrospect, Flickr was sold too soon. The sale marked the beginning of the technology industry’s resurgence after its crash in the early 2000s. Now Mr Butterfield has a second chance. Investors do not want to see him sell Slack too early. Earlier this year there were reports that Microsoft considered bidding around $8 billion for the company. Mr Butterfield says that Slack has never received a formal offer from anyone and is planning to go public. Last year it started submitting itself to voluntary audits, in what appears to be preparation for a public debut. But it seems even more likely that a large tech giant will see the strategic value of Slack and try to snap it up first for an even splashier sum.

Mr Butterfield says that Slack could achieve $10 billion in revenue if it signs up 100m knowledge workers, of which there are around 850m worldwide. That is far easier said than done. For one thing, Slack still needs to woo larger companies outside the technology world. Currently it holds particular appeal among workers at firms in the internet, media and advertising industries, and among teams of software developers within larger firms. Conquering traditional businesses may prove harder. Slack’s yearly minimum of $80 per employee is steep for companies with tens of thousands of workers.

For another, Slack has rising competition to fend off. Already, rival products are taking aim at the market for workplace collaboration, including one, Atlassian, from an Australian software company, which is called HipChat, and bundled with its other services. There is also Symphony, a rival startup backed by several banks that specialises in highly regulated industries such as financial services, which require more compliance controls. Tech giants such as Microsoft, Oracle and Facebook have collaborative work apps, but these are only modestly successful.

Slack’s greatest challenge may be people’s own habits. To some, its endless stream of chatter may be worse even than e-mail, because the barriers to commenting rapidly are lower. The introverted Mr Butterfield should welcome the chance to appeal to people who do not want constant interaction, even when it comes in textual form.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698659-how-workplace-messaging-could-replace-other-missives-slack-generation/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Binod Chaudhary

Peak tycoon

How to win friends and influence people in Nepal

May 14th 2016 | KATHMANDU | From the print edition

Used his noodles

REACHING the top is difficult in Nepal, as any mountaineer will tell you. But scaling the heights of business is scarcely easier: the landlocked kingdom, which in recent decades has swung between kleptocratic monarchy and chaotic democracy, can be as tough for entrepreneurs as the upper Himalayas are to trekkers. Only the hardiest—and those perhaps willing to take a few cunning short cuts along the way—will succeed. Binod Chaudhary, whose interests range from noodles to cement by way of hotels and banking, has trodden the trail and come out as Nepal’s sole billionaire, according to Forbes.

Most tycoons seek to downplay the role of political connections in their ascent. Not Mr Chaudhary. In an autobiography recently updated for an English translation, he offers candid advice: “In Nepal, you do not need great ideas to become a great person. All you need to do is to hobnob with the right people.” His account of which palms were greased or whose son-in-law co-opted leaves little to the imagination.

The Chaudhary Group (CG) he now runs traces its roots back to the 1880s, when Binod’s grandfather migrated from India to sell textiles. Forays into construction and Nepal’s first department store provided a base from which the current patriarch, now 61 years old, could build. An astute early investment was Copper Floor, Kathmandu’s most elegant nightclub in the 1970s, which gave Mr Chaudhary access to the connections he came to depend on, starting with the royal family.

Financing the royalists’ campaign in a pro-democracy referendum in 1980 was rewarded with lucrative licences to import booze and sell paper, for example. Two years later, handing over half a steelmaking venture to the then-king’s brother “was the main reason for my success”, he writes, exposing himself better than many investigative journalists might have managed.

The profits generated by such quid pro quo deals helped finance an industrial mini-empire in a country in which few things are made domestically. A knack for efficient execution has undoubtedly been part of the mix, as even critics acknowledge. The group’s Wai Wai instant noodles, originally a means to soak up excess flour at a biscuit factory, have proved a hit in Nepal and beyond: over two billion packets are now sold every year.

CG claims 10,000 employees, many of them based at an industrial park in the south of the country turning out cigarettes, assembling televisions and lots more besides. Nabil Bank, a lender taken over by an offshore CG proxy in a manner that peeved Nepal’s central bank (“My detractors’ allegation that I circumvented the law is not completely untrue,” concedes Mr Chaudhary), is one of the few listed entities of an otherwise privately-held group.

But Nepal is smaller than Mr Chaudhary’s ambitions. Despite a ban on Nepalis investing abroad, CG has diversified internationally, notably since its royal chums were given the boot in 1990. CG now has eight noodle plants in India, and more are in the works in Serbia, Kenya, Saudi Arabia and Bangladesh. Hotels dotted around Asia, power projects and cement plants in East Africa and property developments in the Gulf add up to a group with a self-assessed value of $2 billion.

Even outside Nepal, much still depends on relationships. CG seeks opportunities where others fear to tread, often for good reason. Mr Chaudhary says his group thrives in places which operate today in ways similar to the Nepal of the 1970s. Iraq and Afghanistan are seen as ripe for investment. Conversely, CG is a “misfit” in fuddy-duddy America, too regulated and structured for Mr Chaudhary’s taste. The group’s single investment there, a share of a Hilton hotel near JFK airport in New York, has clearly disappointed him.

Prodded on whether all this makes for sound business in an age obsessed with corporate governance, Mr Chaudhary is unapologetic: when in Rome, do as the Romans do. Tough environments deliver good returns. He wishes things might be different, he says, but they are not. While businessmen like him have good intentions, when there is no other way of getting things done, what other options exist?

Though two of his sons are abroad, in India and Singapore, the eldest and heir-apparent looks after the business in Nepal from Kathmandu. Power, telecoms and infrastructure are priorities for Mr Chaudhary’s first-born, not coincidentally sectors where relationships with government matter. CG still has connections that count: during the interview, Mr Chaudhary twice offered to introduce your correspondent to the prime minister of Nepal, with whom he was meeting next.

Having served in parliament before and advised governments of all stripes, Mr Chaudhary today barely hides his own political ambitions. He admires tycoons who thrived in office, such as Thaksin Shinawatra, the former Thai prime minister, and praises the showmanship of Donald Trump. In the right circumstances, he thinks he could help Nepal’s economy. But serving as prime minister wouldn’t promote CG’s interests, he says. Business and politics, after all, are best left separate.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698664-how-win-friends-and-influence-people-nepal-peak-tycoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

French weapons-makers

Going great guns

Booming exports lift the spirits of Gallic defence firms

May 14th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



BIG European defence firms had cause for gloom not long ago. Austerity limited military spending on the continent, and no obvious external threat justified raising it. Terrorism deserved most attention. Officials in NATO countries promised to devote 2% of GDP to defence, but Europeans generally fell well short, with Germany allocating just over 1% to it. Exports of weaponry were steady but unspectacular.

How times change. On May 4th François Hollande, France’s president, attended a ceremony in Qatar to mark the sale of 24 Rafale combat jets, plus missiles, to the United Arab Emirates, worth an estimated €6.3 billion ($7.2 billion). Though a bigger order for 70 jets had previously been considered, that was still a boost to Dassault Aviation, the jet’s builder, and MBDA, a pan-European missile-maker. In April last year India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, came to France to order 36 Rafale jets, worth some $9 billion. Political turbulence in India has since stalled that deal, but another, agreed with Egypt last year, should see 24 jets, plus a frigate, sold for €5.2 billion. Malaysia is also wondering whether to buy Rafale jets.

More substantial was the decision by Australia’s government, late in April, to award DCNS, France’s naval shipbuilding firm, a huge tender to replace its ageing fleet of submarines with 12 Shortfin Barracuda A1 boats. The firm, founded in 1631, pushed aside rivals from Japan and Germany, nabbing a contract worth A$50 billion ($37 billion) over several decades. Much of the “steel bashing” will happen in South Australia, concedes one man who helped to lead the bid, but “hundreds” of high-end jobs for French designers, instructors, engineers and others are now secured in places like Cherbourg. Thales, a hefty defence-electronics firm, expects to provide the sonar system for the submarines, at roughly €100m a boat.

All this dealmaking adds up to a boom in Gallic military exports. Orders from abroad had typically been worth roughly €7 billion a year in the decade to 2016 (see chart). But export orders rose to €8.2 billion in 2014 and then to a record €16 billion last year, according to the defence ministry. Depending on how the Australian deal is measured, 2016 will probably exceed that.

Various factors explain brightening prospects for the arms firms. First, in Europe, Russian aggression has proved a spur to NATO members. Douglas Barrie, of the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, notes that since fighting began in Ukraine in February 2014, “14 of the 26 NATO member states have increased defence spending.” Several European countries are expected to reach the 2%-of-GDP target for defence spending before too long.

Second, particular French success could be a quirk of timing. Defence acquisitions are cyclical and decisions on relatively mature products, in particular the Rafales, have chanced to occur at roughly the same time. Other considerations helped. Potential clients were able to see French firms’ hardware in regular use—thanks partly to French military activity in west Africa and Syria, where jets fly frequent raids.

Third, French politicians cannily played on old diplomatic relationships with allies in the Middle East and Asia, which accounted for nearly 70% of exports from 2010 to 2014. Egypt has been heavily re-equipping its armed forces with French gear in the face of regional instability and to avoid over-reliance on kit from America alone. Nor did the French bidders hesitate to promise—unlike their Japanese rivals, say—to build submarines in Australia, and to transfer “everything, in terms of technology” to its ally, says a figure involved in the bid. DCNS is unlikely to be so forthcoming as it tries to sell similar submarines to India and Malaysia.

Longer-term prospects for the French firms depend on developing newer technology, and on their readiness to share this with others. Some in the industry suggest sales of satellites with military uses, optronics (night vision), cyber-security and other communications systems will prove to be the next boom areas. Mr Barrie points out that French firms, which tend to have “more liberal” policies on releasing technology to others, have another advantage. They can sell systems unrestricted by International Traffic in Arms Regulations, known as ITAR, a set of export-control rules that limit activities of American rivals. But even if rapid growth in exports by defence firms cannot be sustained, at least one corner of the French economy has offered some recent cause for cheer.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698662-booming-exports-lift-spirits-gallic-defence-firms-going-great-guns/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Crocodile farming

Snappy dressers

Why breeding the brutes may help their wild brethren

May 14th 2016 | SINGAPORE | From the print edition



SOME 30,000 crocodiles bask at Izintaba, a farm sprawled across 100 acres near the South African city of Pretoria. Sold to tanners for bags, belts and watch straps, the best croc skins can fetch more than $600. The job requires long hours but is not particularly dangerous, says Pit Süssmann, its manager. He worries more about armed thieves, who sometimes come prowling for cars and equipment.

Business is good for farmers of crocodilians, who will gather this month with conservationists and other boffins at a biennial powwow not far from Mr Süssmann’s farm. Worldwide exports of croc skins jumped by about 30% to 1.8m in 2013, the last year for which data are readily available (see chart).



That is partly owing to increasing demand, which had fallen during the financial crisis as exotic-skin lovers dumped crocs for cheaper reptiles, such as pythons. It was probably also boosted by clement weather in America, a big producer, where many farmers rely not on captive breeding but on eggs collected in controlled harvests from the wild.

Over 20 countries export crocodilian skins, according to statistics from the UN Environment Programme. More than half the global tally is from caimans and alligators farmed in Colombia and the United States. The skins are largely sold to tanners in Italy and France, and also in Singapore.

The industry has grown apace since the late 1970s, when conservationists began loosening an export ban designed to defend the animals from hunting (the trade is still controlled under CITES, an intergovernmental effort to protect endangered creatures). Grahame Webb, a biologist, says that many of the 5,000 or so farms are tiny set-ups in Asian villages. The largest outfits, however, now boast as many as 70,000 crocs. Some are getting snapped up by big leather-buyers at fashion houses such as Hermès and Louis Vuitton.

Crocodile farming is tricky. The industry’s novelty means that research into feeds and disease prevention remains limited, at least compared with more ancient forms of husbandry. Space and attention are crucial, because even the slightest scarring—from scraps with rivals, for example—can greatly reduce the value of skins. The need to keep hatchlings warm eats up capital, as does the several years it can take a new farm to start producing. Regulatory costs make it very difficult to earn much cash from exporting cheap incidentals, such as crocodile teeth.

There are other headwinds, too. A slower economy in Russia has dragged down demand for macho kit such as croc-skin waistcoats, which sell for as much as $80,000, reckons Geoff McClure, an Australian consultant. Mr Süssmann faces stiff competition in South Africa, where croc-skin exports have tripled in a decade; ambitious businessmen in low-wage countries such as Vietnam and Cambodia are also hoping for a bigger bite.

The greatest challenge is persuading consumers, and some lawmakers, that croc-farming is not a grubby trade. Last year PETA, an animal-rights charity, said it had found evidence of cruelty at a Texan farm—prompting Jane Birkin, a singer, to ask Hermès to remove her brand temporarily from a bag named in her honour.

The industry’s best argument is that, with a few exceptions, wild crocodile populations have rebounded strongly in the decades since farming was sanctioned. Mr Webb says that those in Australia’s Northern Territory are now 20 times more numerous than they were at their lowest point. Don Ashley, a consultant in Louisiana, says the trade encourages landowners to protect precious wetlands. Environmentalists caution that farming is unlikely to benefit other endangered species, such as tigers and rhinos, and may only create demand for the ineffectual “medicines” made from them. But the results for crocodiles, at least, are worth smiling about.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698705-why-breeding-brutes-may-help-their-wild-brethren-snappy-dressers/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Planemakers

The eye of the storm

Building a new plane to take on Airbus would be a huge risk for Boeing

May 14th 2016 | SEATTLE | From the print edition



BOEING’S factory at Everett, near Seattle, is the largest building in the world, as befits the world’s biggest planemaker. From within its cavernous halls a new passenger jet emerges every working day. After an empty fuselage enters at one end of the factory, it can take as little as a month for some models to emerge as a working aircraft at the other end. Still, Boeing’s lead in the field of commercial airliners, which looked almost unassailable a decade ago, is under threat from Airbus.

Since 2012 the European firm has won more orders than Boeing, and may eventually outpace it in annual deliveries. For Boeing, which celebrates its centenary this year, staying ahead of a competitor which has been in business for less than half that time is a matter of pride as much as it is a commercial imperative.

One option under consideration at Boeing is to build a new plane for the “middle of the market”, to replace its ageing 757. An aircraft that would carry between 220 and 280 passengers on routes up to 5,000 miles would plug a gap in its fleet, between short-haul narrow-body jets and wide-bodied planes for long-haul travel. But Boeing should be wary of the risks involved. Airbus has outclimbed its American counterpart largely because Boeing made such a mess of developing another new plane, the 787 Dreamliner, a long-haul jet that entered service in 2011.

The Dreamliner programme, announced in 2003, was supposed to cost $6 billion and see the plane take to the air in 2008. The final bill was closer to $32 billion; and the 787 arrived three years late, the result of a combination of technical failures and supply-chain snafus. With engineers, designers and other resources diverted into getting the Dreamliner aloft, plans for the rest of its fleet were delayed.

That gave Airbus an opportunity to take a lead in narrow-bodied jets. Boeing’s 737 and Airbus’s A320 family of planes typically carry 120-200 passengers on shorter hops of up to 3,000 miles. These planes are the biggest sellers at both firms. Two-thirds of the planes delivered by Boeing last year and nearly four-fifths of Airbus’s were narrow-bodies.

In 2010 Airbus took Boeing by surprise with the announcement that it would update its A320 with new engines and tweaks to its design, making it 20% more fuel-efficient than previous models. Preoccupied with the 787, Boeing was slow to respond with its own revamp, the 737MAX. Airbus now has 5,479 orders for its family of A320neo planes, the first of which entered service this year. Boeing has just over 3,000 orders for its new plane, the 737MAX, which is not destined for first delivery until next year.

Boeing’s troubles with the 787 also helped Airbus in the market for wide-bodied jets. Boeing remains ahead of Airbus, with 1,357 orders for its fleet compared with 1,267 for Airbus’s range. Although the pair sell far fewer of them, wide-bodied planes bring handsome rewards. Some 80% of Boeing’s revenues came from wide-bodies in 2014, though they account for just a third of production by number of planes. The delays and cost overruns of the Dreamliner programme mean that, although it is selling well, it is not profitable and a write-down is likely. There have been knock-on effects: a new variant of Boeing’s 777, the 777X, is not due until 2020, giving Airbus’s A350 time to win orders.

Analysts think Boeing’s engineers have enough to do until 2020 revamping the 737 and 777 successfully, without other distractions, says Jason Gursky of Citi, a bank. And the damage inflicted by the 787 will make Boeing think twice about designing a new plane to sit between its long- and short-haul models. Airbus’s experience with the A380 superjumbo, developed at huge expense but not yet with enough orders to justify its existence, offers another warning. It is also unclear that the market will be big enough to justify a new plane: some airlines are already ordering long-range versions of Airbus’s A321neo or smaller versions of the A330 to plug the gap. (Putting a new engine on the plane, a much less risky option, is impossible with the 757, because the airframe is too old to accommodate new fuel-efficient engines.)

Cutting aside

Other routes to boosting Boeing’s market share lie open. Cost reduction is one. Airbus out-competes Boeing by using a fifth fewer employees to build each plane. So Boeing is slimming. In March the firm said it would cut the workforce in its commercial-jet division by 10%—a loss of 8,000 jobs—and investors are demanding more. Machines are replacing manpower: robots rather than humans now rivet together and seal the wings for the 737 and 777.

Changing working practices will improve productivity too, says Walter Odisho, Boeing’s vice-president for manufacturing. Moving production lines of the sort seen in car factories are being rolled out by the planemaker in Seattle. And to save time workers spend walking round the factory floor, employees are being given hand-held computers and automated trollies, so they can communicate with their managers and get the tools they need without stepping off the production line.

The planemaker says that it is unlikely for several years to take a firm decision on whether to proceed with a new plane. But Boeing has two overriding instincts: developing new planes and beating Airbus. It will need to resist the first for a while in order to do the second.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698706-building-new-plane-take-airbus-would-be-huge-risk-boeing-eye-storm/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Tobacco firms

Snuffed out

How not to regulate e-cigarettes

May 14th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

Thank you for vaping

THE interests of cigarette-makers and regulators rarely align. To date, most rules have been bad news for Big Tobacco. Change came on May 5th, when America’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announced new requirements for electronic cigarettes.

The vapour industry is small—less than 0.1% of the tobacco market—but expanding fast. Global sales grew 11 times over in the five years to 2014, according to Euromonitor, a data firm. In America sales soared even more rapidly. To some, that raises an exciting prospect. E-cigarettes might help smokers inhale nicotine without the deadly stuff that comes from burning tobacco. On April 28th Britain’s Royal College of Physicians argued that e-cigarettes could help prevent death and disease.

Yet e-cigarettes are not totally harmless. Nicotine seems to meddle with the development of adolescent brains, for example. Some vapour devices deliver dangerous chemicals, including formaldehyde. The evidence for e-cigarettes’ broad effects is still slight. Smokers may give up traditional cigarettes for electronic ones, but teenagers may do the opposite.

This month regulations in America and Europe were settled, after years of debate. To be effective, the rules should serve three goals: promote a basic standard of quality, nudge tobacco-smokers to try the electronic kind and discourage non-smokers, particularly children, from taking up e-cigarettes. The new rules, however, do something rather different.

On May 4th the European Court of Justice upheld a broad set of tobacco regulations. E-cigarette-makers must, among other things, notify regulators before they introduce a new product; cap nicotine levels; and warn users of nicotine addiction. John Britton of the Royal College of Physicians supports quality control, but says limiting nicotine may make e-cigarettes less appealing to tobacco-smokers.



In many rich countries, smoking is being firmly stubbed out

The FDA goes further. Uncontroversially, it bans the sale of e-cigarettes to children. In 2011, 1.5% of teenagers had smoked an e-cigarette in the past 30 days; in 2015, 16% had. More incendiary, e-cigarettes that were not on the market in 2007—that is, almost all of them—must be approved by the FDA as “appropriate for the protection of the public health”. Products still unapproved by August 8th 2019 must be pulled from store shelves.

The FDA “recommends” that companies provide certain information when they apply—such as clinical evidence of health risks, research on which flavours appeal to various consumers and details on the training of workers who make them. In all, the FDA reckons that preparing an application might take up to 5,000 hours, though the average is estimated to be closer to 1,700.

Under this standard, the FDA may indeed protect Americans from the perils of e-cigarettes. But the agency also shelters Big Tobacco. Because it will be costly to bring new devices to market, the rules will discourage product tweaks that might prompt smokers to ditch tobacco in favour of e-cigarettes. Large tobacco firms also may be the only ones with the resources to apply at all.

Cigarette-makers have started selling vapour products. Reynolds American markets Vuse, for example; Altria’s Nu Mark sells MarkTen and Green Smoke. Combustible cigarettes still account for the vast majority of Big Tobacco’s sales and profits. That leaves the vapour market in an awkward position. E-cigarettes may help smokers give up tobacco; but the vapour market may well be run by firms keen to sell it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698704-how-not-regulate-e-cigarettes-snuffed-out/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

Island story

Globalisation may be out of favour. Jamaica provides a surprising example of its value

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



[T IS EASY to succumb to the romance of Jamaica over dinner with Chris Blackwell in GoldenEye, his boutique hotel in the grounds of Ian Fleming’s Caribbean retreat. Mr Blackwell’s mother was Fleming’s mistress, muse and supposedly the model for Pussy Galore. Mr Blackwell’s record label, Island Records, turned Bob Marley, among many others, into a star. In 1989 he sold Island for £180m ($300m) and bought eight hotels in Miami Beach, which was then run-down. Now he is focusing on his Jamaican properties instead.

There are some reasons to think that Mr Blackwell’s nose for the market has not deserted him. Jamaica has produced a striking number of global superstars (such as Marley and Usain Bolt) and global brands (including Blue Mountain coffee and Jamaican Lion marijuana). The weather is warm, the beaches idyllic. A brand new toll road, built by a Chinese company, links the south with the north. But there is a darker story. Over the past 30 years Jamaica’s growth rate per person has averaged just 1%. A third of young people are unemployed. One of the island’s most famous products, marijuana, is illegal and controlled by criminal gangs. The murder rate is ten times that of the United States. On the weekend upon which Schumpeter arrived, the dumped bodies of two American missionaries were discovered.

How can Jamaica’s virtues be encouraged to triumph over its vices? A surprising answer lies in globalisation. It has not been kind to the country in the past: Jamaica served as a fulcrum of the slave trade and a haven for pirates. Yet today four global forces, the IMF, mass tourism, the communications revolution and social entreprise, promise something much better. Taken separately, none of these would put an end to stagnation; taken together, they just might.

The IMF reform programme is imposing some much-needed discipline. The government’s record of economic management has been catastrophic. That 1% growth rate conceals wild swings; the country’s accumulated public debt recently reached 140% of GDP. Thanks to the IMF’s straitjacket, Jamaica has now reduced its public debt to 126% of GDP and trimmed its public-sector wage bill from 11% of GDP to 10%.

Jamaica can capitalise on this discipline only if the private sector becomes more dynamic. In the past business life has been dominated by cliques. But more recently the country’s insular ways have come under assault from two industries that connect Jamaica to the outside world.

The first is tourism. Gordon “Butch” Stewart is a white Jamaican whose rich local accent attests to his family’s deep Caribbean roots. The son of a bar owner, he got his start in business importing air-conditioners. Now he operates from a suite of offices in the back of an electronics shop. But he is nonetheless a tourism magnate: he owns 19 hotels in the Caribbean, under the Sandals and Beaches brands.

Mr Stewart’s hotels are designed to capitalise on Jamaica’s biggest assets (sun, beaches and cheap labour) despite its biggest problems (violence and aggressive begging) by creating gated communities along the northern coast. Guests pay a single lump sum, and then forget their wallets. The biggest hotels have over 500 rooms and more than a dozen restaurants; the poshest provide personal butlers. Those with sea-legs can stay offshore in the safety and comfort of liners operated by companies such as Carnival Cruises. The government may not want tourists to be walled off from the rest of Jamaica, but it can hardly expect the industry to adopt a different model if it can’t provide law and order.

The second dynamic industry centres on connectivity. Fifteen years ago Denis O’Brien, an Irish telecoms entrepreneur who sold his business to BT for $2.8 billion, decided that the Caribbean was ripe for technological innovation: incumbents such as Cable & Wireless were sleepy, service was poor and costs were exorbitant. His company, Digicel, quickly established itself as a pace-setter in bringing mobile-phone services to the region, having learned how to operate in even tougher markets such as Papua New Guinea. The firm is rapidly transforming itself from a mobile-phone company into a digital giant, wiring the region with fibre-optic cable, creating its own TV channels and establishing call centres. Broadband gives Jamaica a chance to take advantage of some of its most important resources—the English language and a time-zone shared with America’s east coast—and to capture its share of the growing market in outsourced knowledge work, such as accounting or legal tasks.

Let’s get together and feel all right

Jamaica is even learning from global models in dealing with its two biggest problems: poverty and crime. Poor areas such as Trench Town used to be run by government bosses whose job was to bring benefits (notably public housing) in return for votes. Today social entrepreneurs offer a different model, using methods drawn from global business. Henley Morgan, a former consultant, has established a social company, the Agency for Inner-City Renewal (AIR), complete with a CEO, a chairman and various business divisions, to try to revive Trench Town. AIR provides training, acts as a middle man between companies and locals and teaches people how to establish businesses. It has also formed an alliance with Sagicor, an insurance company, to offer micro-loans. Trench Town is no longer a war zone: Marley’s old neighbourhood is being dolled up; local recording studios churn out gangsta reggae; a few intrepid tourists venture into the area.

Turning round a country with a history of mismanagement and violence will be painful. The government needs to resist resorting to its bad old ways. In particular, abandoning the IMF’s programme just when it is beginning to work would be disastrous. Betting on globalisation does not guarantee a boost in the growth rate. Betting against it does guarantee sclerosis.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21698639-globalisation-may-be-out-favour-jamaica-provides-surprising-example-its-value-island/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Finance and economics





Inequality in China: Up on the farm

Buttonwood: A chronic problem

Saudi Arabia’s oil policy: Beyond OPEC

European banks: Triple whammy

Lending Club: Membership revoked

Value-added tax in Europe: Freedom fighters

Stockmarket regulation in Canada: Not seeing the wood or the trees

The appeal of the euro: SELL signals

Free exchange: A fare shake





Articles Sections Next

Inequality in China

Up on the farm

Rising rural incomes are making China more equal

May 14th 2016 | HANGBU | From the print edition



THE main street of Hangbu, a town in Anhui, one of China’s poorer provinces, features the usual mix of rural businesses. Shops selling seeds and fertiliser; others stocked with tools and machinery; a few simple restaurants and a motel. And then there is a shop with a shiny display of iPhones and iPads.

The gadgets are a clue that rural China, long overshadowed by the country’s booming cities, is beginning to do better. More controversially, it also suggests that inequality, epitomised by a huge gap in wealth between cities and the countryside, may be declining. “I would not have opened up if people didn’t have money to buy,” says Yuan Yue, owner of the shop selling iPhones. “The money comes from sweat and toil, but incomes are rising.”

The gains from China’s remarkable growth of the past 35 years have not been evenly shared. Studies, both official and independent, show that the country has changed from a very equal society into a deeply unequal one. The most commonly used measure of income inequality is the Gini coefficient, a number between 0 and 1 (0 means that all people have the same income, while 1 means that one person has everything). Officially, China’s Gini went from less than 0.3 in the 1980s, making it one of the world’s most equal countries, to nearly 0.5 today, making it one of the least.

Other sources indicate that the deterioration has been even more severe. In a widely cited survey, China’s Southwestern University of Finance and Economics concluded that the Gini had soared to 0.61 by 2010, in the same league as the world’s most unequal countries, such as South Africa. The discrepancy arises in large part because private surveys try to capture a broader range of income sources, including business and investment revenue, whereas official numbers focus on wages.

However, China’s Gini, though high, has started to decline. Officially it has been falling for seven years, from 0.49 in 2008 to 0.46 last year. The Southwestern University survey records only a tiny dip, from 0.61 in 2010 to 0.6 in 2014, but nevertheless corroborates the view that the worst might be past. “Even if official data understate the degree of inequality, the trend of lessening inequality is believable,” says Li Shi of Beijing Normal University.



From a national perspective, the biggest contributor to rising inequality had been the chasm between the countryside and cities. Now it appears to be the main reason for the decline in inequality. In 2009 the average urban income was 3.3 times higher than the average rural income. The gap has since narrowed to 2.7 times, following six consecutive years in which rural incomes have grown more quickly (see chart). Many of these rural folk in fact work in urban areas, staffing factories or toiling in basic service jobs, but China’s restrictive residency system prevents them from settling permanently in cities.

One explanation for the improving fortunes of such migrants is China’s demographic shift. The country’s working-age population has started to shrink. That has helped fuel wage growth for blue-collar workers. Another factor is that companies searching for cheap labour have moved farther inland, reaching parts of the country that are relatively deprived. Mr Yuan says he started selling iPhones in Hangbu after the arrival of a small cluster of electronics factories just outside the town. Along the road to Hangbu’s industrial zone, a man sits at a stall trying to recruit workers. Salaries of 3,000 yuan ($460) a month are just a bit lower than the norm for similar jobs in cities. “Trying to find employees is basically a year-round activity. It comes down to salary. If they aren’t happy, they leave,” says the recruiter.

This exemplifies a theory laid out in 1955 by Simon Kuznets, a Nobel-prize-winning economist. He argued that as a country starts developing, a big gap opens between those lucky enough to work in better-paid jobs and those languishing in agriculture. But as growth continues, enough people are eventually absorbed into modern parts of the economy to reduce inequality again. Although the theory breaks down as countries get even richer, China seems to be following it for now.



Household income inequality: ladders to climb

Yet the shift has not occurred entirely spontaneously. It stems in part from redistributive policies. Over the past decade China has expanded basic health insurance and welfare, made the first nine years of school free in rural areas and abolished a centuries-old agricultural tax.

Much more can still be done. Government spending on rural areas is still too low, especially through the state pension system. More fundamentally, Chinese law condemns country people to second-class status. In addition to the restrictions on moving to cities, they cannot sell their land, depriving them of what would otherwise be their most valuable asset. Without changes, inequality will continue to plague China. “If we purely rely on economic development, inequality won’t truly fall,” says Gan Li of the Southwestern University of Finance and Economics.

Moreover, the idea that income inequality may be declining is not obvious to many. Inequality of wealth (what people own, as opposed to what they earn) remains extreme. China has more dollar billionaires (596) than America (537), according to the 2015 Hurun rich list. A study by Peking University earlier this year found that the top 1% of Chinese households controlled a third of the country’s assets.

Ostentatious displays of wealth are less frequent since Xi Jinping took over the Communist Party in late 2012 and began a crackdown on corruption. But sports cars, ritzy restaurants and luxury clothing stores are still common in big cities. They are reminders of the riches of a small urban elite, even if the odd rural iPhone points to rising incomes in the countryside.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698674-rising-rural-incomes-are-making-china-more-equal-up-farm/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

A chronic problem

Ideas for reducing the debt burden

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



DEBT levels grew spectacularly in the rich world from 1982 to 2007. When the financial crisis broke, worries about the ability of borrowers to repay or refinance that debt caused the biggest economic downturn since the 1930s.

It could have been worse. The danger was that, as private-sector borrowers scrambled to reduce their debts, the resulting contraction in credit would drive the world into depression. Fortunately, this outcome was averted. First, the governments of rich countries allowed their debts to rise, offsetting the reduction in private debt. In addition, emerging markets (notably China) continued to borrow. So there was no global deleveraging; quite the reverse (see chart). Central banks also helped, slashing interest rates to zero and below. Although lower policy rates have not always resulted in cheaper borrowing costs (in Greece, for example), debt-servicing costs have fallen in most developed countries.

Although this approach has staved off disaster, it has not got rid of the problem, as a research note from Manoj Pradhan, an economist at Morgan Stanley, makes clear. “High debt forces interest rates to stay low, which encourages yet more debt,” Mr Pradhan writes. Central banks dare not push interest rates up too quickly for fear of causing another crisis; hence the stop-start nature of the Federal Reserve’s statements on monetary policy. The developed world seems stuck with sluggish growth and low rates.

In health terms, the disease is chronic, not acute. A lurch into another global crisis, Mr Pradhan reckons, would require three ingredients. First, the assets financed by the debt build-up would need to fall sharply in price or prove uneconomic. Second, the debtors would have to be concentrated in big, globalised economies. Lastly, global investors would have to be heavily exposed to the debt in question. All this was the case in 2007-08, as debt secured by American housing turned bad, raising doubts about the health of the Western banking system.

This time round the debtors are in different places. Some of them are emerging-market governments and commodity producers. But, except for China, none of these is crucial to the world economy. And China’s debts are mainly in domestic hands, rather than widely dispersed in the portfolios of international banks, pension funds and insurance companies.

Large, rich countries are systemically important, and their government debt is at the heart of most institutional portfolios. If a President Trump were to follow through on his confusing statements about buying back Treasury bonds for less than face value, that would trigger a crisis. In the absence of such a cataclysm, and with the support of central banks, governments that have borrowed in their own currency should not face an imminent problem.

But that doesn’t mean getting rid of the debt will be easy. Debt has been inflated away in the past, but central banks are still struggling to meet their current inflation targets of 2% or so. It is not clear that governments, which set the mandates central banks must follow, would be willing to put up with the high rates of inflation needed to reduce the real value of debt substantially, even if central banks could find a way of generating it. Debt forgiveness (the old idea of a jubilee) sounds good in theory. But writing off either private-sector or government debt could cripple the financial sector, creating the very crisis the measure was designed to avoid.

Morgan Stanley has some alternative suggestions. One would be to replace debt with equity-like capital. In the public sector, governments could issue GDP-linked bonds, akin to the inflation-linked debt that America, Britain and others already offer. If a bond’s repayment value is linked to real GDP, then governments would be spared the crippling surge in debt-to-GDP ratios that occurs during recessions. Governments could also issue irredeemable debt, or “consols”, which eliminate the risk of a refinancing crisis.

In the private sector, equalising the tax treatment of equity and debt would be a good idea, although tricky to implement. Creating “shared-responsibility mortgages”, in which lenders take an equity stake in the homes they finance, would make borrowers less vulnerable to house-price declines.

All these ideas seem sensible, but they can be applied only to newly issued debt, not to the mass of obligations that has already been accrued. So they will help only over the long term. The next global debt crisis will almost certainly occur before they become widespread.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698669-ideas-reducing-debt-burden-chronic-problem/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Saudi Arabia’s oil policy

Beyond OPEC

The kingdom’s new oilman-in-chief will have less time for the cartel

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



KHALID AL-FALIH is a busy man. When he met The Economist in Riyadh in April, he was sitting in the sprawling office from which he was running the health ministry. But the subject was the part-privatisation of Saudi Aramco, the world’s biggest oil company, whose board he also chairs. And then there was the big football match—Manchester City v Real Madrid—to rush home to watch.

Since then his focus has narrowed a little. On May 7th the 55-year-old was moved from the health ministry to what had been known as the oil ministry, but is being renamed the Ministry of Energy, Industry and Mineral Resources. That gives him oversight of the kingdom’s ambitious drive to take its economy beyond oil. It also makes him the de facto head of OPEC, the oil cartel. He is only the fifth person to head the ministry, after legendary predecessors such as Ali al-Naimi, who kept prices from rocketing during the second Gulf war, and Zaki Yamani, who devised the Arab oil embargo of 1973. Those men were defined chiefly by their influence over OPEC, and hence over global oil markets. Mr Falih will hope for a different legacy.

Speculation is already rife that his appointment marks the start of a new Saudi push to pump more oil. The abrupt removal of Mr Naimi follows his effort last month to forge an agreement to freeze oil production between OPEC and non-OPEC producers such as Russia—an effort that was foiled by Muhammad bin Salman, the deputy crown prince. King Salman’s son, and the power behind the throne, saw no reason to freeze output unless Iran, the kingdom’s strategic rival, did likewise. Shortly afterwards Amin Nasser, Aramco’s chief executive, cheered oil-price bears by saying the company would raise output by 250,000 barrels a day from its Shaybah oilfield.



INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability

But Mr Falih (pictured) comes across as too measured to create uproar. Although Prince Muhammad calls the shots, it is possible that he will listen to the soft-spoken, Texas-educated technocrat who has been in the oil industry longer than the 30-year-old prince has been alive. The new minister may want to expand Saudi Arabia’s output, but not so much to intensify the price war as to give himself the capacity to respond to seasonal surges in domestic demand and to fend off competition from Iran and Iraq to export to China and India. Mr Falih says Saudi Arabia will look at the “most responsive ways” to meet its customers’ needs. For instance, it typically sells oil through long-term contracts, but recently made its first spot sale in response to Asian demand.

What is more, shaping the global oil market may become less of a priority because Mr Falih has a huge new responsibility at home: preparing an initial public offering of Aramco. He is also in charge of plans to develop domestic refining, petrochemicals and other industries and to boost the production of renewable energy. This will require big improvements in the rule of law and corporate governance—not Saudi Arabia’s strengths. Prince Muhammad says he is agnostic about oil prices, because his aim is to move beyond oil. Whether or not he achieves that, Mr Falih’s focus will be beyond OPEC.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698695-kingdoms-new-oilman-chief-will-have-less-time-cartel-beyond-opec/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

European banks

Triple whammy

Low interest rates, market turmoil and restructuring: it’s too much

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



IF YOU think America’s banks are having a rough year, take a look at Europe (see chart). American lenders’ share prices, having rallied from their trough in mid-February, are 6% lower than at the start of 2016; European ones are over 20% down. So miserable has the first quarter been that investors have applauded figures that beat dire expectations. On May 10th Credit Suisse, a Swiss giant, reported a second successive quarterly loss—and was rewarded with a 5% bounce in its shares.

Europe’s banks are struggling with a triple squeeze. First, ultra-low interest rates are thinning their staple diet, the margin between borrowing and lending. Monetary policymakers argue that by stimulating the economy and hence demand for loans, super-cheap money is also good for banks. For most, not yet. Commerzbank, which styles itself as German companies’ house bank, calls demand for loans “subdued”: the operating profit of its Mittelstand division fell by more than 40%, year on year, in the first quarter.

Second, other rations have also been short. The market turmoil of the first six weeks of the year walloped investment-banking revenues on both sides of the Atlantic. The Europeans broadly came off worse; Barclays’ 4% decline almost counts as a triumph. European banks lack the scale of the Americans, and that may be counting against them. Huw van Steenis, an analyst at Morgan Stanley, expects that this year their investment-banking revenues will tumble by 12%, twice as fast as those of their American rivals.

Market volatility dampened non-interest earnings in retail banking, too. With their savings earning zilch, Europeans should be keener to buy mutual funds in search of higher returns. That would mean more commission for banks, which in Europe are big sellers of investment products. But jumpy share prices have given savers pause. (American banks, by contrast, rely more on credit-card and account fees, so have not suffered in the same way.)

Rich customers have been as unadventurous as humbler ones. In the first quarter UBS, Switzerland’s biggest bank, which a few years ago scaled back its investment bank to concentrate on wealth management, attracted a staggering SFr29 billion ($29.3 billion) of net new money, the most for eight years, much of it from Asian clients. But because the wealthy too sought the safety of cash, UBS did not scoop the juicy transaction fees that come with shuffling portfolios. Pre-tax profit at its wealth-management divisions fell by 23%. That said, the squeeze on non-interest revenues should ease, now that markets are steadier.

The third cause of European banks’ pain is bad timing, often their own. With income tight—and with regulators demanding that they build up their capital ratios—control of costs matters all the more. More basically, so does choosing which businesses to be in and which to quit. Alas, only now are some of Europe’s biggest lenders, under new leaders, taking on the spring-cleaning American banks carried out within a few years of the financial crisis. For both investors and bankers, that is making 2016 extra-painful.

Deutsche Bank, Germany’s biggest, will slough off Postbank, a retail business it bought in 2008 and never fully integrated, and is cutting back its once-swaggering investment bank. It will not pay a dividend for 2016 and although it eked out a first-quarter profit of €236m ($260m) it expects only to break even this year.

Credit Suisse is hurting most. Its boss, Tidjane Thiam, an ex-insurer, is tilting it, like UBS, further from investment banking towards wealth management, with special emphasis on Asia. He has made an uncertain start. Having announced one strategic overhaul, he had a second crack in March, speeding up the disposal of investment bankers and ditching risky products he at first planned to keep. On his watch the share price has dived by more than 40%. It jumped this week partly because the cull is ahead of schedule. Parsimony used to be a dirty word in banking. It isn’t now.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698696-low-interest-rates-market-turmoil-and-restructuring-its-too-much-triple-whammy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lending Club

Membership revoked

The sacking of the CEO of the leading peer-to-peer lender jolts the industry

May 14th 2016 | New York | From the print edition



FEW companies can claim to have started an industry. Lending Club was not the first peer-to-peer, or marketplace, lender to match investors and borrowers online. But it is the industry’s flagship firm—the first to go public and the largest in terms of the loans it has facilitated. In the process, Lending Club and its founder, Renaud Laplanche, also helped to foster broader enthusiasm for fintech.

This week Mr Laplanche abruptly resigned, for reasons that remain unclear. According to the company, Mr Laplanche mishandled an investigation into problems in a $22m loan portfolio that had been purchased by Jefferies, an investment bank; and was insufficiently forthcoming about his own stake in Cirrix Capital, which purchased Lending Club loans and received a separate investment directly from the company.

Mr Laplanche’s sudden departure comes at a particularly difficult time. The firm’s shares have been heading south ever since its 2014 listing (see chart). The peer-to-peer business model is based on fees; that means they have to keep bringing in new investors and borrowers. But institutional money, on which peer-to-peer firms have been growing more reliant, are suspicious about credit quality. A review of the fourth-quarter book of both Lending Club and Prosper, a rival lender, by PeerIQ, an analytics firm, shows a slight uptick in defaults. Both firms have raised interest rates in response, but over time that risks putting off borrowers.

Investors’ concerns will only be aggravated by the idea that Lending Club’s operating model is not as squeaky-clean as had been thought. From its inception, it had described itself as a neutral marketplace that avoided taking credit risks. The involvement of the company and Mr Laplanche in a fund holding these loans suggests it was not quite as neutral as it claimed. Worse still, the possibility that data tied to loans could be erroneous, and perhaps intentionally so, adds to concerns. Both Jefferies and Goldman Sachs have reportedly put off purchases of Lending Club loans that would have been packaged up for resale.

Rivals are not rejoicing in Lending Club’s travails. One groused that it was a gift for the banking lobby and regulators vexed by the rise of an efficient market for credit that they did not control. On the day after Mr Laplanche’s exit, the Treasury issued a white paper calling for tougher oversight of peer-to-peer lenders. Institutional investors will demand more in the way of disclosure, asset reviews and independent evaluations. That will encourage Lending Club and others to turn back towards less flighty retail investors. Mr Laplanche built an industry; his departure will continue to shape it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698698-sacking-ceo-leading-peer-peer-lender-jolts/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Value-added tax in Europe

Freedom fighters

Reforms to VAT may lead to a more democratic but convoluted system

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Depends on where you are

IN THE battle to smash the patriarchy, feminist campaigners have found an unlikely ally: the European Commission. Their gripe is with the tampon tax, the minimum 5% rate of value-added tax (VAT) on sanitary products imposed by European law. This is tantamount, in their eyes, to a tax on women—and worse, one which European governments have no power to undo. But new proposals on VAT reform from the commission may change that.

The European Union has no authority over income and payroll taxes, but great authority over VAT. Members must apply a standard VAT rate of no less than 15%; they can have up to two concessionary rates, of at least 5%, but these can only be applied to certain goods, including food, books and medical equipment. There are numerous exceptions to these rules (Ireland exempts tampons from all VAT, for instance), but they were negotiated by the countries concerned upon joining the EU.

Depends on where you are

This system of centrally imposed exceptions is an odd compromise between two sensible but incompatible goals. It is not very flexible or democratic, as governments have only limited scope to modify the system. But it is not simple or coherent either: rates on a single item can vary wildly (see chart). Moreover, the past 40 years have seen 750 court decisions interpreting VAT law. Surely the European Court of Justice has better things to do than mull Poland’s refusal to levy VAT on disinfectants or France’s low rate on early performances at theatres with bars?

The effort to minimise the variation in rates stems from a time when VAT was charged according to the rate in a product’s country of origin, rather than where it was bought. The commission did not want countries to give their manufacturers a leg-up (or to poach firms from other members) by setting lower VAT rates on their wares. But since it is now the VAT rate in the purchaser’s country that applies, there is no longer any risk of that. Consumers, after all, are relatively immobile, despite the odd cross-border shopping trip.

The commission has proposed two options for reform, both of which hand more VAT-setting power to national governments. The first would maintain a central list of items on which reduced rates are allowed, but expand it and review it more often. It would also rationalise the rules, by letting any country charge the lowest rate on a given item that applies anywhere else in the EU. Britain, for example, could exempt tampons from VAT, as Ireland does.

The second option is more radical: it would scrap the list, and transfer VAT-setting powers to national governments. There would be limits—if countries started applying sweeping carve-outs in an effort to entice shoppers over the border, the commission might intervene—but otherwise countries would be free to adopt as many rates and exemptions as they liked.

No country currently applies the minimum 15% standard rate (the average is 21%), so it seems unlikely that governments would take the opportunity to lower rates across the board. Rather, they would probably tinker: since the crisis there has been an increase in the number of countries using two reduced rates, from 14 out of 28 in 2007 to 19 this year. Analysis from the Centre for Social and Economic Research found that in 2013 countries sacrificed a median of 11.3% of potential VAT revenue via reduced rates. If the current restrictions were lifted, discounts and exemptions would presumably proliferate, to the delight of special interests.

Although such concessions may be good politics, they are sloppy economics. The more exemptions there are, the higher the standard rate has to be to raise the same amount of revenue. Different rates also distort people’s spending, penalising some industries and rewarding others. It is an inefficient way to redistribute: when Sir James Mirrlees, a Nobel-prize-winning economist, reviewed Britain’s tax system, he found that the government could scrap all concessionary rates, compensate the losers and still bring in £3 billion ($4.8 billion) more.

Grzegorz Poniatowski, an economist, notes that a proliferation of reduced rates provides more scope for tax dodging by misclassifying products as low-rate items. For Patrick Gibbels of the European Small Business Alliance, “there is too much fragmentation.” Encouraging a multitude of different systems could create an administrative burden, which would be particularly onerous for small businesses of the sort that Europeans are keen to cultivate. He prefers the first, more cautious option.

But Pierre Moscovici, the commissioner in charge of VAT, prefers the more radical option. Even if governments do not use the extra freedom wisely, there is a case for letting them make their own mistakes.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698694-reforms-vat-may-lead-more-democratic-convoluted-system-freedom-fighters/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Stockmarket regulation in Canada

Not seeing the wood or the trees

Regulators hunt for the foreign assets of a Canadian firm—again

May 14th 2016 | OTTAWA | From the print edition

Securities regulators disagree

TWENTY years ago, when the rich lode of gold discovered in Indonesia by Bre-X Minerals turned out to be fictitious, prompting the company’s collapse, Canadian securities regulators passed a flurry of new rules meant to prevent further such embarrassments. Yet there are more than a few similarities between Bre-X and Sino-Forest, the company whose hearing for fraud in front of the Ontario Securities Commission enters its final phase this week, including the likelihood that shareholders will not recover any of the billions the firm was once thought to be worth.

Both firms had Canadian headquarters and Canadian directors and were listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange. In both cases, the company’s assets (timber plantations in China in the case of Sino-Forest) were on the other side of the world, making it hard to confirm their value. Each soared to a market capitalisation of C$6 billion ($4.7 billion at current rates).

Underwriters, analysts and regulators long ignored signs of trouble, before suddenly losing faith. That happened with Bre-X when its chief geologist fell or jumped out of a helicopter en route to meet the due-diligence team of a prospective buyer. The trigger for Sino-Forest’s bust was less spectacular but just as damaging: a report published in 2011 by Muddy Waters, an American research firm, which labelled it “a multibillion-dollar Ponzi scheme”. Lawyers for senior managers of Sino-Forest say that any overstatement of assets was unintentional, and that Canadian regulators do not understand Chinese business culture.

There have been lots of cases in which foreign assets used to raise money on Canadian exchanges were not what they seemed, says Neil Gross of the Canadian Foundation for Advancement of Investor Rights, an advocacy group. “We’re getting a rerun of a bad movie we’ve seen before,” he says. Various reasons are put forward for the sequels, including a lack of vigilance on the part of regulators, fines that pale in comparison with the money to be made and a preference for relatively lenient regulatory enforcement rather than criminal prosecutions. But the biggest problem is Canada’s fragmented securities regulation. Alone among big economies, Canada does not have a national securities regulator, but 13 separate ones in each of its ten provinces and three territories.

The provincial securities commissions have limited powers, budgets and staff, so naturally struggle to get to the bottom of complicated frauds that span the globe. One remedy, says Anita Anand of the University of Toronto, would be greater use of criminal sanctions in cases of securities fraud. Underwriters, analysts, advisers and exchange staff would be more vigilant, she argues, if they faced the prospect of a long stint in jail. Deterrence is important because of the difficulty in collecting financial penalties once a fraud is proved; the money has usually vanished long before the justice system renders its verdict and would anyway be especially hard to recover from abroad. But criminal prosecutions require a higher burden of proof than the balance of probability enshrined in securities law. Collecting the necessary evidence would be tricky without a tough national regulator.

The Supreme Court knocked back an effort by the previous government to create such a body. But the new government is trying again. On May 5th it released for consultation a draft law that would grant the federal government a role in addressing systemic risks in capital markets and criminal enforcement—both areas which the Supreme Court conceded were under federal jurisdiction. Most provinces support the idea, but Alberta and Quebec, always steadfast defenders of provincial prerogative, show no signs of relenting.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698697-regulators-hunt-foreign-assets-canadian-firmagain-not-seeing-wood/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The appeal of the euro

SELL signals

Joining the euro is still attractive to some

May 14th 2016 | VILNIUS | From the print edition

Another blissful day in the euro zone

HAS the euro crisis dissuaded other countries from adopting the single currency? Not a bit of it. Since 2009, when euro-zone GDP shrank by 5%, four countries—Slovakia, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania (let’s call them the “SELLs”) have joined. Their experience suggests that the euro still has its benefits, but also some familiar risks.

Many thought that joining the euro would spur the SELLs’ foreign trade, by removing the friction of exchanging currencies. The Slovakian central bank, for example, predicted a boost of 50%. That was wildly over-optimistic: the euro has made little difference to Slovakia’s imports and exports. The problem may have been a confusion of cause and effect. Growing trade between nations is likelier to lead to the formation of a currency union than vice versa. Baltic firms, meanwhile, have not significantly increased exports to the euro zone, even though the closure of its largest market, Russia, thanks to sanctions in 2014-15, forced many to search for new trading partners. Instead they have exported more to places like the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia.

Happily, a perceived downside of adopting the euro was also overblown. The worry was that shopkeepers would use the changeover as an excuse to put up prices, particularly if doing so got them to a price ending in a “99”. But the changeover in Slovakia seems to have boosted inflation by just 0.3 percentage points. In Estonia large retailers joined a snappily titled campaign, “The € will not increase the price”. (In fact, a prod to inflation would have been no bad thing for the SELLs, which have fallen into deflation in the past year, thanks to cheaper prices for energy and food.)

The euro does seem to have helped the SELLs’ financial stability. Their banks and central banks now have access to emergency funding from the European Central Bank. They are also less vulnerable to turmoil associated with “currency mismatch”. On average, roughly 70% of their private-sector debt was denominated in foreign currency (largely euros) prior to joining. Any depreciation of their currencies would have made those debts much harder to bear—a risk the adoption of the euro has eliminated.

Rimantas Sadzius, Lithuania’s finance minister, says euro membership also allows his government to borrow more cheaply. Debt-interest payments have indeed fallen. But had Lithuania joined a decade ago, Mr Sadzius would have been even happier. In the early 2000s, according to the IMF, euro membership was associated with a two-notch improvement in the credit ratings handed out by Standard and Poor’s. Since the crisis this premium has shrunk dramatically.

Even as some benefits have dwindled, some drawbacks have got bigger. As a condition of joining, the SELLs are supposed to contribute to the euro zone’s bail-out funds. For the man on the street the thought of rescuing Greece is an unwelcome one: its minimum wage is 70% higher than Slovakia’s and it is richer than the Baltics. In fact, for the most part members of the euro zone do not pay directly for bail-outs; instead, they guarantee loans or provide collateral for them. And the bail-out funds have benefits as well as costs. The SELLs could turn to them too if they ran into trouble.



Explore our interactive guide to Europe's troubled economies

The big question for the future is whether the SELLs can avoid the mistakes made by other euro-zone countries. In the 2000s low borrowing costs helped inflate a credit bubble in southern Europe. Happily, the SELLs are not on a borrowing binge, as the Baltics were in the 2000s. Their current accounts are more or less in balance. Private-sector debt has actually fallen since the crisis. Their big banks are now supervised by the ECB. Local management has improved too, says Erik Berglof of the London School of Economics.

Despite this, the SELLs face a familiar problem: declining international competitiveness. Ageing populations and emigration are creating a shortage of skilled workers. The population of the SELLs is expected to decline by 4% by 2030. The result is that wages are rising faster than productivity. In the past year the minimum wage across the SELLs has risen by 9% on average. Joining the club may have contributed, by inducing workers to push for wages more in keeping with the rest of the euro zone, says Robert Juodka of PR1MUS, a Lithuanian law firm.

Governments in the SELLs say they are trying to respond by bringing in structural reforms, such as freeing labour and product markets, to boost productivity and thus maintain competitiveness. With devaluation not an option, such reforms have assumed new importance. There is still plenty to do. Much of Lithuania’s labour code is inherited from Soviet times, says Rokas Grajauskas of Danske Bank, which makes hiring and firing difficult. The Slovakian labour market has in recent years become considerably less competitive, according to the World Economic Forum, in part because of misguided tax changes. The euro zone’s newest members may avoid the same problems that befell southern Europeans in the 2000s—but the single-currency club still makes its members pay their dues.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698699-joining-euro-still-attractive-some-sell-signals/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

A fare shake

Jacking up prices may not be the only way to balance supply and demand for taxis

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS a familiar ritual for many: after a late night out you reach for your smartphone to hail an Uber home, only to find—disaster—that the fare will be three times the normal rate. Like many things beloved by economists, “surge pricing” of the sort that occasionally afflicts Uber-users is both efficient and deeply unpopular. From a consumer’s perspective, surge pricing is annoying at best and downright offensive when applied during emergencies. Extreme fare surges often lead to outpourings of public criticism: when a snowstorm paralysed New York in 2013, celebrities, including Salman Rushdie, took to social media to rail against triple-digit fares for relatively short rides. Some city governments have banned the practice altogether: Delhi’s did so in April.

Uber is sticking with surge pricing for now, but Jeff Schneider, one of its machine-learning experts, recently suggested that the company is interested in developing systems that rely on technology, rather than price, to allocate cars. Even if such a technological fix proves elusive, however, local governments do not need to regulate or ban surge pricing to reduce its sting.

Surge (or dynamic) pricing relies on frequent price adjustments to match supply and demand. Such systems are sometimes used to set motorway tolls (which rise and fall with demand in an effort to keep traffic flowing), or to adjust the price of energy in electricity markets. A lower-tech version is common after natural disasters, when shopkeepers raise the price of necessities like bottled water and batteries as supplies run low. People understandably detest such practices. It offends the sensibilities of non-economists that the same journey should cost different amounts from one day or hour to the next—and more, invariably, when the need is most desperate.

Yet surge fares also demonstrate the elegance with which prices moderate a marketplace. When demand in an area spikes and the waiting time for a car rises, surge pricing kicks in; users requesting cars are informed that the fare will be a multiple of the normal rate. As the multiple rises, the market goes to work. Higher fares ration available cars by willingness to pay: to richer users, in some cases, but also to those less able to wait out the surge period or with fewer good alternatives. Charging extra to those without good alternatives sounds like gouging, yet without surge pricing such riders would be less likely to get a ride at all, since there would be no incentive for all the other people requesting cars to drop out. Surge pricing also boosts supply, at least locally. The extra money is shared with drivers, who therefore have an incentive to travel to areas with high demand to help relieve the crush.

A recent analysis published by Uber illustrates how the system is intended to work. Jonathan Hall, head of economic research at Uber, Cory Kendrick, a data scientist at the firm, and Chris Nosko, of the University of Chicago, compared two high-demand cases in New York city to illustrate how surge pricing is intended to work. In March 2015 it kicked in after a sold-out concert by Ariana Grande, a singer, in an arena in the middle of Manhattan. As the show came to an end, the number of people in the area opening the Uber app quadrupled in just a few minutes. Uber’s algorithm swiftly applied surge pricing; the average waiting time for a car rose only modestly, while the “completion rate”—the share of requests for rides that are met—never fell below 100%. On New Year’s Eve in 2014, in contrast, Uber’s surge-pricing algorithm broke down for 26 minutes, leaving New York without surge pricing. The average wait time for a car soared from about two minutes to roughly eight, while the completion rate dropped below 25% (see chart).

The comparison may overstate the power of surge pricing. Even without the help of algorithms, cab drivers know to converge on a venue as an event finishes; more Uber drivers than normal were surely in the area at the end of Ms Grande’s concert in expectation of the extra business. Yet the possibility of earning a surge fare may also strengthen drivers’ incentives to anticipate and respond pre-emptively to high demand. Ironically, the better Uber’s surge-pricing algorithm works, the less the company will need to use it, since drivers’ pre-emptive responses will tend to eliminate the demand imbalances that make surge pricing necessary in the first place.

There are tantalising hints that Uber hopes to follow this logic to its conclusion. Mr Schneider noted that clever machine-learning tools could process Uber’s piles of data and determine when and where demand is likely to outstrip the supply of cars. There would be no need to wait until demand starts to rise, nor for drivers to scan concert schedules. The ability to anticipate demand would be of some use to Uber today: it could tell drivers where they are likely to be needed. But they would presumably not respond as rapidly as they do to the inducement of surge fares. Eventually, however, Uber hopes to replace its human drivers with autonomous vehicles, which could be directed around the city by the company’s computers without any pecuniary incentives. (The company still has an incentive to maximise earnings, though, so it might opt to keep surge pricing even if technology made it redundant, at the risk of further public rage.)

Apps and downs

Whether Uber remains a big part of the transport network in future, and whether it retains surge pricing, depends in part on how well local governments manage the transport system as a whole. In districts or cities where travellers have appealing alternatives, in the form of good public transport or private competitors to Uber, users will be more sensitive to price. Surge pricing will therefore not generate a big financial windfall for Uber (or its drivers). But where public transport is thin on the ground, or where Uber has little private competition, it is a different story. In other words, surge pricing is really only as painful as local officials allow it to be.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698656-jacking-up-prices-may-not-be-only-way-balance-supply-and-demand-taxis/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Science and technology





Life and the Earth: The curious lightness of an early atmosphere

Plant science: Botany at bay

Climate change: Good vibrations

Anthropology: Not what they were

Recycling: A cracking yarn

Recycling: Technology correspondent’s job





Articles Sections Next

Life and the Earth

The curious lightness of an early atmosphere

Two new studies suggest that the young Earth may have been even less like today’s than was previously thought

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



“THE past is a foreign country. They do things differently there.” So wrote L.P. Hartley, in “The Go-Between”. He was speaking of human affairs, but replace the word “country” with “planet” and you have a succinct description of Earth almost 3 billion years ago. Viewed from the present it was then, indeed, a foreign planet. Just how foreign has been shown by two geological studies published this week.

Both hail from Australia, a land rich in ancient rocks. One is the result of painstaking measurements of little balls of quartz, calcite and chlorite found in lava that erupted 2.74 billion years ago, during the Archaean aeon. The other used saws and acid to winkle tiny meteorites out of limestone a mere 20m years younger. Though the questions the teams asked of their rocks seem, at first glance, to have little in common, and neither group was aware of the other’s efforts, by a quirk of scientific synchronicity their findings complement each other, shedding an intriguing new light on the planet that Earth once was.

Sanjoy Som and his colleagues at the University of Washington, in Seattle, were looking at lava to measure ancient atmospheric pressures. They chose lava as their barometer because it traps gas bubbles as it solidifies, and the size of those bubbles depends on the pressure they experienced.

At the top of a flow, this is the air pressure. At the base, it is the air pressure plus the weight of the lava above. So bubbles at the bottom—or rather, the mineral infills that have taken their places—are smaller. Measure how much smaller and, if you know the mass of the lava in between, you can calculate the atmospheric pressure experienced by the bubbles at the top. As the team report in Nature Geoscience, this suggests an air pressure no more than half of today’s, and probably only a quarter.

The limestone investigators at Monash University, in Melbourne, were also looking for spherical inclusions. Their prey, however, were not bubbles but micrometeorites. When Andrew Tomkins started the study, his objective was to calculate the rate at which the ancient Earth was being bombarded by space dust. Soon, though, he became less interested in counting the grains than in analysing their chemistry. As he and his colleagues report in Nature, this showed that the atmosphere which had melted them as they hit it may have been as rich in oxygen as today’s is. And that was completely unexpected.

Thin pickings

Viewed separately, these results are both weird. There is no obvious reason why the Archaean atmosphere should have been so much thinner then than it is today. And there is strong geochemical evidence that at this time it was oxygen-free. Put the results together, though, and in one way, at least, they reinforce each other.

Geochemistry mostly deals with the lower atmosphere. Micrometeorites are influenced by what happens at very high altitudes—75km or above. And it is quite possible to have oxygen at extreme altitude even if there is none lower down; you just have to generate it in situ, rather than have it waft up from below. Ultraviolet light drives a lot of chemistry in the upper atmosphere, and is quite capable of producing oxygen from sulphur dioxide or carbon dioxide. Dr Tomkins and his colleagues plumped for carbon dioxide as the most probable source of the oxygen for which they see evidence, but note that there is a problem: the chemistry of the micrometeorites suggests there was not much carbon monoxide around, while ultraviolet destruction of carbon dioxide would have produced a fair bit of it.

An alternative source of oxygen is water. Normally you would not expect water in the upper atmosphere; today’s stratosphere is more or less bone dry. But calculations by Raymond Pierrehumbert, a modeller of atmospheres at Oxford University, and his colleague Robin Wordsworth, at Harvard, suggest that the thinner an atmosphere is, the more water vapour leaks into its upper levels. And Dr Som’s results indicate that at this point in history the atmosphere may have been thin indeed.

That extra water, split by ultraviolet, might thus provide enough oxygen to account for Dr Tomkins’s results—which would also provide independent support for Dr Som’s. This does not, however, explain why the atmosphere was so much thinner than today’s.

Dr Som’s colleague David Catling lays the responsibility for that at the door of life itself. Life has a deep and abiding interest in nitrogen, the gas that makes up most of the atmosphere. Some bacteria specialise in taking atmospheric nitrogen and turning it into the sort of biological compounds necessary for building proteins and DNA; if they did not, there would be hardly any life on Earth.

Today almost all the nitrogen thus used is returned to the atmosphere through other biological pathways. But those pathways depend on there being oxygen around, because they need oxidised forms of nitrogen to work with. In the oxygen-free Archaean the mechanisms restoring life’s used nitrogen to the atmosphere are likely to have been a lot less effective. Ammonium ions, a reactive form of nitrogen, could have built up in the oceans, or been absorbed into various minerals; nitrogen-rich organic molecules could have accumulated in sediments.

This leads Dr Catling to suggest that air pressure on the early Earth might have followed a U-shaped curve. It could have started quite high, with most of the nitrogen in the atmosphere. When bacteria learned how to use that nitrogen the amount in the atmosphere would have dropped, possibly quite steeply, as the element shifted into the oceans and sediments. After the Archaean, when oxygen provided by photosynthesis changed the atmosphere’s chemistry, the nitrogen would have been flushed out of those sumps and returned to the air. How deep, wide and asymmetric that U might be are now subjects for further inquiry.

No pressure, then

The idea that changes in life’s nitrogen cycle could alter atmospheric pressure, possibly in step with changes in the oxygen level, is fascinating to those who study the early Earth. But the low pressures in the Archaean that the idea seeks to explain are also a problem for them.

Studies of stellar evolution suggest that in the solar system’s early days the sun was a lot less bright, and thus less warming, than now. Despite this, Earth was at least reasonably temperate. This implies that the ancient atmosphere must have provided the planet with a considerably stronger greenhouse effect than today’s does. What sort of greenhouse could have been strong enough to deal with this faint-young-sun problem, as it is known, has been a subject for academic debate for decades. Some think that a fairly straightforward mixture of carbon dioxide and methane in the nitrogen could do the trick. Others do not.

Everybody agrees, though, that a thinner atmosphere of the sort Dr Som describes would make the conundrum harder to explain. Greenhouse gases absorb more heat at higher pressures, so one solution to the faint-young-sun problem has been to suggest that Archaean air pressure, rather than being a quarter of today’s value, might have been twice as high as it is now. Dr Pierrehumbert says it is going to be “very hard to reconcile” low atmospheric pressure with an unfrozen Earth.

It may of course be that Dr Som’s result is wrong—it relies on but a single example, after all. His group and others will be trying to replicate it using lavas elsewhere. And other techniques can furnish “palaeo-barometers”; indeed, Dr Catling says he is working on one such. But however the details pan out, the idea that air pressure may have changed—and changed a lot—during the early history of the Earth is now firmly in play. The past may be a foreign country, but geologists are painstakingly assembling the dictionary needed to translate what is written there into language the present can understand.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698640-two-new-studies-suggest-young-earth-may-have-been-even-less-todays/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Plant science

Botany at bay

A report on the state of the world’s vegetation gives cause for concern

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Next time, a triffid?

WITH a maximum height of 4mm,Ledermanniella lunda is one of the smallest flowering plants known to science. Its existence was reported to the world in 2015 by an expedition run by the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, which had found it growing on rocks in a set of rapids on the Luachimo river, in Angola. It may, though, hold another record—for the swiftest passage from discovery to extinction. Satellite images show that the water at the site of its discovery has turned the colour of milky coffee as a result of diamond-mining upstream. Worse, a recently refurbished hydroelectric dam may by now have flooded those rapids.

Ledermanniella lunda is, or was, tiny and inoffensive. In contrast, another of last year’s discoveries is the stuff of nightmares—a carnivorous plant 1½ metres tall. Drosera magnifica (pictured) is a giant sundew, part of a group that trap insects and other unfortunate small animals on leaves covered with droplets of sweet and sticky goo. It is possibly the first botanical find made via Facebook. Its discoverer, Paulo Gonello of São Paulo University, in Brazil, saw its picture, taken by smartphone, on his news feed.

Such are some of the titbits revealed in “The State of the World’s Plants 2016”, the first of what it is hoped will be an annual series, put out by the Royal Botanic Gardens. Whether Ledermanniella lunda survives elsewhere than its now-wrecked home on the Luachimo is not known. It might. But either way, its precarious state is far from being an isolated example. According to the report, about a fifth of vascular plants (things botanical that are not algae, mosses or liverworts) are threatened with extinction.



Cataloguing the world’s plants

To conclude that, you have first to know how many species there actually are. The report’s authors therefore trawled the world’s botanical records, reconciling species names and deleting duplicates. They estimate that science recognises 391,000 vascular plants. Of these, 369,000 are flowering plants. The rest are conifers, cycads, ferns and so on, whose heydays were back in times like the Carboniferous or the Jurassic, before flowering plants began taking over everything during the Cretaceous.

According to the report, about 31,000 plant species are useful. More than 17,000 are employed medically and 9,000 are food for humans or fodder for animals. The authors suggest particular attention be paid to these, with wild relatives of crops catalogued so that their genetic virtues are known and available to breeders.

Satellites to record extinctions. Smartphones to record discoveries. It is all a far cry from the time of Kew’s foundation, in 1759. Then, an expedition in search of new species that might make useful crops or militarily important medicines was as likely as not to go off on board one of His Majesty’s warships, in case of interference by the French. Now, botanists can only dream of such political clout. Yet plants, and the photosynthesis that powers them, remain the very staff of human life.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698643-report-state-worlds-vegetation-gives-cause-concern-botany/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Climate change

Good vibrations

A new way to understand the behaviour of ice sheets

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Through thick and thin

POUR some water into a partly full bathtub and the level in the tub will rise. Calculating how much it will rise is straightforward, as long as the surface area of what was already there and the amount being added are known. The same should apply to working out how much the sea level will rise as the world’s ice sheets melt in response to rising global temperatures. But in practice it is not that easy. Though geographers know the surface area of the oceans, measuring how the masses of the world’s ice sheets are changing has proved hard. Aurélien Mordret of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, however, thinks he has found a way to make it simpler. He proposes to do it using the vibrations created by ocean waves.

At the moment, geographers monitor the mass of ice sheets in two ways. One employs aircraft to fly over such sheets and reflect laser beams from their surfaces, to record their topography. The other uses satellites to track gravitational fluctuations caused by variations in the amount of ice present. Both techniques work, but both have limitations. Laser overflights create high-resolution images but are expensive, so can be done only a few times a year. Satellites pass overhead more often, but generate fuzzier pictures.

Dr Mordret, however, knew from work conducted by other research groups that vibrations created by waves crashing onto the shore are transmitted inland through the Earth’s crust, sometimes travelling thousands of kilometres from the coast. These vibrations can be picked up by seismometers of the sort used to monitor earthquakes. He also knew that the speed at which the vibrations propagate varies with the amount of pressure being exerted on the crust by mountains or glaciers sitting above. That gave him his idea.

Propagation speeds vary because many types of rock have small voids within their structure. These lower the velocity of passing vibrations. The greater the proportion of a rock’s volume that is void, the more slowly vibrations will travel through it. If a piece of rock is dry, compressing it will shrink the voids and speed the vibrations up. Water, though, is famously incompressible—more so than most rock-forming minerals. If the voids are filled with water, they will thus resist compression. So, putting pressure on wet rock increases the relative volume of the voids, which slows down any passing vibrations.

Since an icy overburden will both fill the voids with water and compress the rock, Dr Mordret reasoned that changes in the speed of transmission in rocks under ice sheets will reflect the thickness of the overlying sheet. To test this idea, he and a team of colleagues set up an experiment which made use of existing earthquake sensors at seven monitoring stations in western Greenland, an island almost completely covered by ice sheets.

Using these devices, they were able to detect the crashing of ocean waves at all seven sites, and monitor the velocity at which the resultant vibrations were travelling throughout 2012, when an enormous amount of snow and ice melted during the warm months, and 2013, when there was not much melt and a lot of snow from the winter remained throughout the year.

The researchers found, as they had predicted, that the velocity of the vibrations was slowest several months after winter, when the crust was at its most compressed, after which it rose. But it rose differently in the two years in question. Between June and September of 2012 the velocity of the vibrations increased by 0.1%. By contrast, during the same months of 2013 the velocity increased by only 0.05%. To double check that their findings made sense, the team compared them with data collected by monthly satellite scans. The satellites generated much the same picture, albeit at lower resolution.

Based on these results Dr Mordret and his colleagues argue in this week’s Science Advances that if more sensors are put into place, then Greenland’s ice sheets (and, presumably, those of other places) can be monitored on a daily basis. This will yield a far higher-resolution image of how they are changing and help researchers better predict how much the level of the oceanic bathtub will rise.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698641-new-way-understand-behaviour-ice-sheets-good-vibrations/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Anthropology

Not what they were

Researchers can now watch human evolution unfold

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

STUDYING recent human evolution can be frustrating. Take lactose tolerance—the ability of some people, particularly of European descent, to digest this sugar, found in milk, even into adulthood. In the evolutionary past the gene for lactase, the enzyme that does the digesting, normally got switched off in adults. But one variant (known as an allele) of the gene that does the switching off instead leaves the system running, conferring adult lactose tolerance. That lets this allele’s bearers consume a diet rich in dairy products, a useful trick for a species beginning to domesticate milk-producing animals. Genetic analysis shows that lactose tolerance emerged between 5,000 and 10,000 years ago. In evolutionary terms, it is thus extremely recent. In human terms, though, that timescale means how it spread and how this process intertwined with the rise of dairy farming are lost in the mists of prehistory.

It would be nice, therefore, to have a technique that could look at human evolution on a scale of centuries, rather than millennia. And on May 7th a team led by Jonathan Pritchard, a biologist at Stanford University, announced they had come up with one. In a paper posted to bioRxiv, they describe it, and also how they have used it to track ways the inhabitants of Britain have altered over the past 2,000 years.

The team’s technique looks for changes not in alleles themselves, but in the DNA that surrounds those alleles. If a particular allele is more beneficial than other variants of a gene, it will tend, as lactose tolerance did, to spread through the population. As it does so, it will carry with it neighbouring DNA which is not strictly part of the gene and does not affect its function. This DNA can thus mutate without damaging the allele. And it is the amount of mutation this peripheral DNA has undergone which is the giveaway. DNA neighbouring an allele that has recently spread quickly will have had less time to accumulate mutations than that near one which evolution has been ignoring. By looking for evidence of mutations around particular alleles, Dr Pritchard and his team can reconstruct their history. Apply the method to lots of people, and it is possible to discern what evolution has been up to.

To test their method, the researchers turned to 3,195 genomes taken from the UK10K project, which has collected the genetic data of 10,000 Britons. The largest signal they found did indeed come from the allele for lactose tolerance, suggesting that evolution has continued to press the case for milk digestion well into recorded human history. They also found evidence of strong selection for blond hair and blue eyes. This, they speculate, may be a consequence of the sexual preferences of ancient Britons rather than any environmental influence.

Lactose tolerance and hair- and eye-colour are traits strongly influenced by small numbers of genes. But Dr Pritchard’s method can also detect “polygenic” selection, in which the accumulated effects of thousands of small variants conspire to produce a big change in a particular trait. One example is height, which is influenced by the combined actions of thousands of different genes.

Dr Pritchard and his colleagues found that in Britain evolution has, of late, been extremely keen on taller people. Selection for increased height appears to have taken place across nearly the entire human genome. They also found evidence that other ancient evolutionary pressures still operate in comparatively modern populations. Human babies have big heads to contain their outsized brains. Women, in turn, need wide hips to give safe birth to their big-headed offspring. Genetic variations associated with head circumference in infants, and wider hips in women, seem to have become noticeably more common even over the past couple of millennia.

Dr Pritchard’s technique thus adds evolutionary biology to the armoury of archaeological anthropology. His results confirm that modern Britons are subtly but definitely different from those who tried (unsuccessfully) to fight off the Romans. The effects of two thousand years of evolution, covering a hundred or so generations, are such that if ancient Britons were given all the benefits of a modern diet and modern medicine, they would still end up shorter than their modern counterparts, have narrower hips, and give birth to babies with slightly smaller heads.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698645-researchers-can-now-watch-human-evolution-unfold-not-what-they-were/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Recycling

A cracking yarn

How to put broken eggshells to use

May 14th 2016 | LEICESTER | From the print edition

Waste not, want not

LIKE any other businessman, Pankaj Pancholi abhors waste. In his case it was the mountain of broken eggshells he was paying some £45,000 ($64,000) a year to have carted away to be buried as landfill. Mr Pancholi is the founder of Just Egg, of Leicester, Britain, a firm that hard-boils up to 1.5m eggs a week for sale in supermarkets and for use in such foodstuffs as sandwiches, mayonnaise and Scotch eggs (a British culinary classic consisting of an egg wrapped in sausage meat). Surely, thought Mr Pancholi, the shells could be used for something, thus earning revenue rather than draining it? So, he teamed up with Andy Abbott of the University of Leicester, to hatch a plan to recycle them.

Pure eggshells consist almost entirely of a tough, crystalline form of calcium carbonate (the chemical of which chalk is composed). Just Eggs’s automated peeling equipment, though, removes not only the shell but also the membrane beneath, which is attached to the shell. The shells can contain broken bits of egg, too. All that makes the leftovers a potentially smelly industrial by-product, which is why they are buried. What Dr Abbott and his colleagues in the university’s chemistry department whisked up was a way to cleanse the shells and grind them into a fine powder that might be added to various plastics as a filler material to make them more hard-wearing.

What worked in a laboratory, however, had to be scaled up into an industrial process that could cope with the output from Just Egg’s busy production line. For that, Mike McNamara of Delta Engineering, a firm based near Grimsby, put together the necessary equipment to go into a special extension to Mr Pancholi’s factory. The whole caboodle has just been switched on.

The process begins with the shells travelling along a conveyor belt, to be tipped into tanks where they are mixed with water and attacked by rotating blades. The chopped material is then washed with a solvent to remove leftover protein. (Both the water and the solvent are recycled.) After this, the shells are dried and ground into a fine powder, the consistency of which can be varied according to the type of plastic to be filled.

Mr Pancholi is now egging Dr Abbott on to ask if flakes of membrane the process generates as waste can be useful, too. These flakes are rich in keratin, which is also the main substance of human skin, so they may have medical applications in, for example, wound dressings.

Moreover, Dr Abbot and Mr Pancholi are not the only ones enthralled by eggshells. Vijaya Rangari of Tuskegee University, Alabama, told a recent meeting of the American Chemical Society about his use of ultrasound to break eggshells up into particles mere billionths of a metre across. He and his colleagues found that by mixing such particles into polymers, including some derived from cornstarch, they could bolster both the strength and the flexibility of biodegradable plastics, making them more suitable for use as food packaging—including egg cartons. Faced with ever increasing costs for transport and landfill, finding such useful roles for shells makes Mr Pancholi eggstatic. (This is eggcruciating—Ed.)





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698644-how-put-broken-eggshells-use-cracking-yarn/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Technology correspondent’s job

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

The Economist is looking for a technology correspondent to work at its headquarters in London. Knowledge of the field, an ability to write informatively, succinctly and wittily, and an insatiable curiosity are more important attributes than prior journalistic experience. The successful candidate will understand that the terms “technology” and “information technology” are not identical. An engineering degree, or background in engineering, would be an advantage. Applicants should send a CV, a brief letter introducing themselves, and an article of about 600 words which they think would be suitable for publication, to techjob@economist.com. The closing date for applications is May 27th 2016.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21698642-technology-correspondents-job/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Books and arts





China’s Cultural Revolution: In the heat of the sun

Globalisation: Bridges versus borders

Britain and Europe: Historians and Brexit

Nigerian crime and corruption: No fantasy

Fiction: Gloom with a view

French television drama: Mishap on the Med





Articles Sections Next

China’s Cultural Revolution

In the heat of the sun

How Mao’s call for “disorder under heaven” tore China asunder

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



The Cultural Revolution: A People’s History 1962-1976. By Frank Dikötter. Bloomsbury; 382 pages; $32 and £25.

The Cowshed. By Ji Xianlin. Introduction by Zha Jianying. New York Review of Books; 188 pages; $24.95 and £14.99.

FIFTY years ago the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, as it was officially known, plunged China into Maoist madness. It left well over 1m people dead and wrecked the lives of many millions of others. It was Mao Zedong, then 72, who launched the “red terror”, as young participants proudly called it, partly to purge the party of officials who were sceptical about his radical policies. He feared that such waverers might expose him to the kind of posthumous condemnation that was heaped upon Josef Stalin after the Soviet leader’s death. Another of Mao’s motives was a Utopian one. He appeared to believe that people power, no matter how bloody, could turn China into a socialist paradise.

The Communist Party does not like to dwell on what happened. In 1981 it issued a formal pronouncement on the late chairman’s rule. It called him a “great” and “outstanding” leader, but said the Cultural Revolution, from 1966 until his death in 1976, had been a “catastrophe”, initiated and led by him. That, the party hoped, would be the end of the discussion. It did not want Chinese people to examine evidence that the Cultural Revolution was not just an aberration of Mao’s—the act of a man sadly misguided by his fanatical wife, Jiang Qing, and other members of the “Gang of Four”—but an event that had his imprint all over it, and one that revealed a profound flaw in Communist rule itself.

A new history of the period by Frank Dikötter of the University of Hong Kong describes the Cultural Revolution as “an old man settling personal scores at the end of his life”. But, as he notes, there were other forces at work, too: Mao’s colleagues settling scores of their own; citizens taking aim at anyone they disliked; and the support given by different military leaders to various factions, resulting in widespread armed clashes.

The book is the final volume in a trilogy about the horrors of Mao’s rule. The other two (“Mao’s Great Famine” and “The Tragedy of Liberation”) made illuminating use of numerous local archives in China to which Mr Dikötter had gained unusual access. These archives appear not to have shed as much light on the Cultural Revolution as they did on these earlier events. The book’s strength is more in the telling: the interweaving of insight from local documents with detail from a wide range of published memoirs and histories.

One work that Mr Dikötter omits from his lengthy bibliography is “The Cowshed”, the story of what happened during the period to an eminent scholar at Peking University, Ji Xianlin. It was published in 1998 in China, a rare exception to the party-imposed reign of silence. An English translation has now been released for the first time. With dozens of other academics, Mr Ji was kept under the thumb of a clique of Red Guards who had been his students and colleagues. For nine months he was shunted into a shanty—nicknamed the cowshed—on the university campus. He was forced to do hard labour, moving and stacking coal, and was given so little food he was always on the brink of collapse.

In his own introduction, Mr Ji, who died in 2009, says he felt compelled to write about his experiences because so many of the perpetrators of the Cultural Revolution were now pretending to be “upstanding citizens”. Some, he writes, are “waiting for the right opportunity to make a grab for power again”.

For all his praise of Mao, it is very hard to imagine China’s president, Xi Jinping, launching another Cultural Revolution. China at that time was dirt poor and all but cut off from the rest of the world; Mao did not worry about the global impact, or the economic one, of the “great disorder under heaven” he boasted of having created. Mr Xi appears to fear chaos more than anything else. And few Chinese people, leaders included, would be willing to sacrifice the enormous wealth the country has created since Mao’s death.

As Mr Dikötter describes, even during the Cultural Revolution there were signs that commitment to it was sometimes only skin deep. As general literacy declined, he notes, “opportunities to read forbidden literature paradoxically increased”. Red Guards quietly pocketed the sensitive works they confiscated; a “thriving black market” in such material sprang up. An illicit, hand-copied, book, “The Heart of a Maiden”, describing a student’s sexual encounters, “may well have been one of the most studied texts after the Chairman’s ‘Little Red Book’,” Mr Dikötter says.

But it is the pain, not the stolen pleasures, that persists in public memory. In a foreword to the English edition of “The Cowshed”, Zha Jianying, a China-born journalist who went on to live partly in America, says that during the 70th anniversary of the Holocaust last year, her thoughts often turned to China. A friend whose family was battered by the Red Guards told her: “We are the Jews in this country.” The analogy between the Holocaust and the Cultural Revolution is a bit stretched, Ms Zha says. Still, she encourages readers to imagine the impossible: that the Jews of Germany still had to live with Hitler’s portrait hanging in the main square of Berlin, and their tormentors went on unpunished. That, she says, is contemporary China. At least to some, mostly now elderly, Chinese, it is.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698632-how-maos-call-disorder-under-heaven-tore-china-asunder-heat-sun/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Globalisation

Bridges versus borders

How capitalism reshapes geography

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



Connectography: Mapping the Future of Global Civilisation. By Parag Khanna. Random House; 466 pages; $30. Weidenfeld & Nicolson; £20.

THE lines on a map of the world often bear little relation to reality. This can be a frightening realisation: Syria’s boundaries, for instance, do not correspond to how power is really exercised in the Middle East. But there is another, less pernicious, force which can erase national borders: global supply chains.

Parag Khanna wants to show how connected the world really is. Large chunks of his new book, “Connectography” (an apparent portmanteau of “connective cartography”), describe the infrastructure that knits the world together: container ships twice the length of an aircraft-carrier, motorways traversing entire continents. By some estimates, he says, people will “build more infrastructures in the next 40 years alone than it has in the past 4,000”. Theirs is a “non-state” world, he argues. European companies do research in America, manufacturing in China and back-office work in the Middle East. Factor all this in and as much as 40% of American exports contain imports. Products should carry the label “made everywhere”, he says.

Dubai is the locus classicus of Mr Khanna’s vision. As much as 90% of its population is foreign-born, more than double the rate in New York. Low taxes, openness to immigrants and good transport connections mean that people from all over the world converge on Dubai to do business. And what is true in Dubai is increasingly true everywhere. “[T]he supply of everything can meet demand for anything; anything or anyone can get nearly anywhere,” he gushes.

For those who fear that the world is becoming too inward-looking, “Connectography” is a refreshing, optimistic vision. (For people who dislike Dubai, the future will seem somewhat bleaker.) Yet in neither case does it matter. This cartoonish version of globalisation bears little relation to reality. Folk like Mr Khanna can jet around striking deals wherever they please, but most people have no such luck. The millions of refugees fleeing Syria are part of no global supply chain. The author enthuses about a “global expatriate horde”, yet his own data show that the number of migrants as a proportion of the world’s population is hardly higher than it was 50 years ago. One of the many maps included in the book, showing the railways, roads and electricity cables of Africa, implies that moving around and trading on the continent is a breeze. It is not.

“Connectography” takes little notice of recent developments. Global trade growth has slowed since the financial crisis. Mr Khanna also ignores a trend much discussed by economists: the “reshoring” of certain economic activities to rich countries as fears grow about political instability and as China gets too expensive. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, a potential deal between America and 11 other countries to free up trade, gets a glowing review—yet by failing to discuss the tortuous negotiations over the agreement he tells only half the story. Supply chains do not simply trample over governments. Just ask Russia or Ukraine, where a conflict over borders has prompted them to cut economic ties.

A bullish, exaggerated thesis is acceptable in a short article, but this book is more than 400 pages long. It is stuffed with sweeping, sometimes bizarre statements (“China wants to be a giant Germany”, or “Try to imagine Ethiopia’s nearly 100m people today without Chinese investment”) and jargon aplenty. Mr Khanna lists over 400 people in a nine-page acknowledgments section, and it feels as though he has included a few ideas from each one.

Perhaps the most convincing point in the book concerns policy prescriptions. To become part of global supply chains, Mr Khanna argues, it is essential to invest in infrastructure. China, in particular, has built a sprawling network of ports, canals and the like across the world to acquire and transport natural resources. By contrast, rich countries, especially America, now underfund capital goods, in an attempt to reduce public spending. This short-term skimping bodes ill for future growth. A reminder of the importance of infrastructure is helpful, but most of Mr Khanna’s ideas are half-baked.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698630-how-capitalism-reshapes-geography-bridges-versus-borders/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Britain and Europe

Historians and Brexit

For and against Britain leaving Europe

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

Britain’s Europe: A Thousand Years of Conflict and Co-operation. By Brendan Simms. Allen Lane; 352 pages; £20.

The EU: An Obituary. By John Gillingham. Verso; 281 pages; $19.95 and £12.99.

NEXT month Britons will vote on whether to leave the European Union. In the debate, some now use history to support their view. This week the British prime minister warned that Brexit posed a threat to peace. David Cameron cited the battles of Blenheim, Trafalgar and Waterloo and even the Spanish Armada as evidence that Britain can never afford to turn its back on Europe. But Michael Gove, the pro-Brexit justice secretary, wants Britain to disentangle itself from the continent. He prefers to rely on “Our Island Story”, a children’s history book from 1905 by Henrietta Elizabeth Marshall that plays up the British Empire.

In his spirited new book, “Britain’s Europe”, Brendan Simms, a historian at Cambridge University, argues that the whole notion of an island story is wrong. Britain’s history, he says, is above all about continental Europe. This is not just harking back to the Romans and Normans, or the 100 years’ war. Even in the 19th and 20th centuries, Europe mattered above all. Through repeated wars, the British found that the Low Countries were a vital national interest, that security was to be found on the Rhine or even the Elbe—and that the continent must never be allowed to fall under single control.

Mr Simms makes a powerful case. He quotes Edmund Burke, an 18th-century Anglo-Irish statesman and philosopher, as saying that Britain, far from being an island, was always part of Europe. Even its empire, the world’s biggest, was largely a product of European rivalries. In 1759, a glorious year of British victories from Canada to India, Britain still had more troops in Europe than anywhere else. And British concerns to stop any particular country dominating the continent were at the root of the Napoleonic wars and, a century later, both world wars.

The question this raises is why Britain then chose in the 1950s to stand aside from the nascent European project. As Mr Simms tells it, the answer lies partly in post-imperial illusions and partly in nervousness over sharing sovereignty. It may also have been because the club was dominated by France, and Charles de Gaulle was bent on keeping out baleful Anglo-Saxon influence. Contrary to claims by Mr Gove and his fellow Brexiteers, such influence has indeed grown further since Britain belatedly joined in 1973.

Only at the end of Mr Simms’s book does he become less persuasive. He describes Britain as the last European great power on the strange basis that France and Germany cannot be because they are locked in a failing single currency. He goes on to argue that the euro zone must become a full federation reorganised on Anglo-American principles, what he calls a “British Europe” (albeit without Britain). He is right that Britain is unlikely to join the euro, but the odds of a full-blown European federation seem almost equally tiny.

John Gillingham, a longtime American historian of the EU, is much more of a Eurosceptic. His two villains in “The EU: An Obituary”, both French, are Jean Monnet, the project’s first guiding spirit, and Jacques Delors, who as president of the European Commission from 1985 to 1995 pushed for the single currency. Mr Gillingham homes in on Europe’s economic woes, suggesting they cannot be ended unless the euro is abandoned. Unlike Mr Simms, he concludes that Brexit could be helpful because it would have a cathartic effect, forcing a rethink of the entire EU, which cannot otherwise be reformed.

His thesis might be more persuasive if his book were not littered with errors: Economic Council for European Council, Caucuses for Caucasus, Fritz Fischler for Franz Fischler. But even without these, it seems too apocalyptic to declare that the EU is dying or even already dead. As both authors say, it is certainly in deep trouble. But the political commitment to keeping both the euro and the EU going remains very strong—and it would surely survive even a vote for Brexit on June 23rd.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698635-and-against-britain-leaving-europe-historians-and-brexit/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Nigerian crime and corruption

No fantasy

Why it became so ubiquitous

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

A president who knows his people

This Present Darkness: A History of Nigerian Organised Crime. By Stephen Ellis. Oxford University Press; $29.95. Hurst; 312 pages; £20.

“FANTASTICALLY corrupt” said David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, talking about Nigeria with the Queen on May 10th. Their conversation, at a party, two days before an international summit on graft, has sparked a fuss. A spokesman for Nigeria’s president, Muhammadu Buhari, retorted he was “shocked”, though Mr Buhari later agreed with Mr Cameron’s assessment, adding that Nigeria wanted back stolen assets held in British banks.

Mr Buhari was elected last year to fight corruption. For decades Nigeria has suffered a doubly dubious reputation: recognised as a kleptocracy and notorious for its armies of imaginative criminals, formed into organisations with international reach. The two groups work in tandem: dodgy officials enable the crooks’ shady business; rich criminals often enter politics. In 1995 Colin Powell, a retired American general, said that Nigerians were “scammers” who “tend not to be honest”.

This state of affairs is ably documented and explained by Stephen Ellis—a British expert on African affairs, who died last year—in an excellent history of Nigerian organised crime, “This Present Darkness”. He sees four main areas where gangsters flourish. The biggest crooks of all are the “oil- management mafia”, who divert at least 10% of oil production for private gain. One estimate, in 2013, suggested that was worth $6.7 billion a year. Others are much higher. The central-bank governor said in 2013 that $1 billion in revenues were lost each month from Nigeria’s state oil company (though since then the oil price has collapsed). Ellis suggests dubious oil trading in Switzerland might enable the diversions.

Better-known frauds internationally, though smaller business, are “419” advanced-fee scams (named for a code in Nigerian law), that continue to dupe large numbers of victims. Private colleges in Lagos offer courses in credit-card and advanced-fee fraud, says Ellis. Gangs such as the “Yahoo Boys” send e-mails from Nigeria, but Nigerians abroad are most effective. Ellis describes 150 fraudsters (90% of them Nigerian) found in the Netherlands in 2008 after duping victims of over €150m ($171.2m). Extrovert Nigerians excel at this crime, says Ellis (a victim himself), because they are “top class” at creating trust.

Two other activities both involve smuggling. Southern Igbos dominate trade in hard drugs, proving adept at creating networks of buyers and sellers in the diaspora. Ellis describes “barons” who contract middle-ranking “strikers”, who run small-fry couriers. They proved successful in North America. Meanwhile people from Edo state mostly control trafficking of sex workers, notably to Europe. One diplomat told the author that 30,000 Nigerian women, mostly from Edo, are prostitutes in Italy. Most are bound by large debts, spiritual ceremonies and intense social pressure.

Ellis’s great contribution is in explaining why Nigerian crime became so ubiquitous. When the oil price fell in the 1980s, educated Nigerians flocked abroad (at least 15m are overseas), forming networks in which crime thrives. Strong student and secret societies bind people together. Importantly, he says, Nigerians show unusual agility in business and have strong social skills. Add a weak, corrupt state and organising crime appears all too easy.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698631-why-it-became-so-ubiquitous-no-fantasy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Fiction

Gloom with a view

A biting satire about America’s financial future

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition

The Mandibles: A Family, 2029-2047. By Lionel Shriver. Borough Press; 400 pages; £16.99. To be published in America next month by Harper; $27.99.

LIONEL SHRIVER has built a literary career on fictionalising her fears. She has written about her brother’s obesity (“Big Brother”), her parents’ death and sibling inheritance (“A Perfectly Good Family”), and children (“We Need to Talk About Kevin”, which won the Orange prize for fiction in 2005). Her latest book, “The Mandibles”, is about the financial world and the American economy. “The more we become economically literate, the more frightened we get. I’m writing out of that fear and exploring that fear,” she says.

Set between 2029 and 2047, the novel follows four generations of the Mandible family as they fend for themselves after the dashing, 97-year-old Douglas Mandible has his fortune wiped out. The dollar’s dominance as a reserve currency is undermined by a new currency, the “bancor”. Linking money to identity, Willing Mandible, the novel’s emergent protagonist, feels that he is “American as an adjective. He was no longer American as a noun.”

Drawing on Ms Shriver’s interest in the financial crisis of 2008 and global demography (an essay she wrote for Macmillan’s “Encyclopedia of Population” was recently reprinted as the lead article in the Population and Development Review) and the financial crisis of 2008, “The Mandibles” presents a bleak future for America. The GDP of Mexico is bigger than that of its northern neighbour and it arms its border to keep “Ameri-trash” out; the United States forces its citizens to be microchipped to ensure the people pay their taxes. Myanmar, meanwhile, looks to America for cheap labour, and white American women undergo facial surgery to resemble the Asians buying up half of Brooklyn. Ms Shriver has created an alter ego who is also her zaniest heroine: a slim, chilli-flake-eating exercise addict called Enola Mandi, an author who totes around a box of her own literary papers entitled “Foul Matter”.

“The Mandibles” is not perfect. Too much exposition and fact-heavy dialogue blunts its Orwellian bite. But what remains is a powerful work investigating the fragility of the financial world. Prescient, imaginative and funny, it also asks deep questions. Near the end, Willing Mandible asks: “What do you make of the proposition that the definition of a truly free society is a place where you can still get away with something?” What indeed?





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698634-biting-satire-about-americas-financial-future-gloom-view/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

French television drama

Mishap on the Med

“Marseille” was meant to be France’s answer to “House of Cards”. Oops

May 14th 2016 | PARIS | From the print edition



BELLY first, Gérard Depardieu (pictured) sways across the small screen, buttoned improbably into a waistcoat and a darkish suit. He is Robert Taro, the fictional mayor of Marseille, an old-school politician at the end of his career, wrestling with a cocaine habit, spiritual decline and a political protégé-turned-adversary named Lucas Barrès (Benoît Magimel). This young challenger’s treacherous decision to oppose the mayor’s legacy project, a regeneration scheme to build a glitzy casino in the city’s marina, sets up their rivalry. “I’m going to grab Marseille from your grasp,” hisses Barrès, “and you’ll end up alone, all alone, with nothing.”

Heavy expectations greeted “Marseille” when it was launched by Netflix to subscribers on May 5th, with the first two episodes shown on network French television from May 12th. The eight-part series is the American content-streaming company’s first European production, written and performed in French, and its flagship effort to establish itself on the continent. “Marseille” promised not only Mr Depardieu’s first role in a major contemporary TV series, but glossy big-budget cinematography, and an established writer (Dan Franck, a French novelist) and producer (Florent Siri, who directed “Hostage”, a thriller starring Bruce Willis).

French critics, however, have been savage. In Le Monde, Pierre Sérisier called it “cowshit”, and wrote that “to watch it is to suffer.” Pierre Langlais, a reviewer for Télérama, called “Marseille” an “in-house turkey”. This realisation, he went on, is “at first surprising, then dismaying and finally hilarious, thanks to the poverty of the screenplay, the laziness of the dialogue, the heaviness of the direction, and the weakness of the acting”.

This is harsh. But “Marseille” is certainly not “House of Cards” à la française. There is just enough to look at to distract from the laboured treatment. The setting, for one thing: a sun-bleached multicultural Mediterranean port which mixes fabulous villas with brutalist tower blocks, and where drugs disrespect the boundaries between the two. It is refreshing, particularly for a foreign-financed production, to move away from the cobblestones and boulevards of Paris to the gritty contradictions of France’s neglected second city. And it is striking to see a French series adopt the multiple story-arc structure common to the best American TV-drama series.

Yet “Marseille” disappoints. Its quirks feel more like gimmicks. It has neither the characterisation nor pace of the Danish political drama, “Borgen”, and none of the fine texture of HBO’s “The Wire”. Its attempt to capture the gang culture of the city’s peripheral housing projects—the notorious quartiers nord—lacks genuine menace or desolation. Mr Depardieu has his moments, but he cannot sustain the show by himself.

All of which is a shame, because there were hopes that Netflix’s investment might mark the emergence of quality French television fiction from the long shadow of the big screen. Drama on the small screen in France has struggled to earn the industry’s respect, large budgets or critical approval. This attitude lingers despite the creation of some promising recent TV series, such as “Baron Noir” (a political drama on Canal Plus partly set in the northern city of Dunkirk) and “Le Bureau des Légendes” (a series set in the intelligence services, starring Mathieu Kassovitz), or even the long-established critical success of “Engrenages” (a legal and police drama known in English as “Spiral”).

For now, the big screen remains the medium of choice for French directors and screenwriters. It is cinema that most often makes well-observed light political drama, such as Bertrand Tavernier’s “Quai d’Orsay” (2013), based on a fictional Dominique de Villepin, when he was foreign minister. And it is film that still finds aching drama in the peripheral housing estates of the city’s banlieues, beginning with the magnificent rage of Mr Kassovitz’s “La Haine” 20 years ago, and continuing with the desolate energy of “Entre les Murs” (2008), say, or the defiant girl power of “Bande de Filles” (2014). “Marseille”, for all its promise, does not look set to alter that equation.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21698633-marseille-was-meant-be-frances-answer-house-cards-oops-mishap-med/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Obituary





Obituary: Lucy Kibaki: Cherchez l’autre femme





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Lucy Kibaki

Cherchez l’autre femme

Lucy Kibaki, “Mama Lucy”, Kenya’s First Lady from 2002 to 2013, died on April 26th, aged 82

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



SHE had once been a headmistress, and you could tell. Her lips seemed perpetually pursed in disapproval, and she could chill at a glance. Grown men, from the toughest political operator to the chefs who cooked her husband’s food, quavered in her presence. For when Lucy Kibaki was in a temper, and she often was, there was no telling how things might unfold. The sack, a lash of the tongue, a public snub ostentatiously dealt, a flurry of fists; all were possible, unless you fled out of her way.

Her most infamous outburst came late one night in 2005, when she and her bodyguards burst into the offices of the Daily Nation, Kenya’s biggest newspaper. She had clearly been stewing all day over press reports of a visit she had made to a police station in an attempt to have her tenant, the World Bank’s representative, arrested for refusing to turn his music down.

Marching around the newsroom, she confiscated pens and notebooks from bewildered night editors, chased one journalist round his desk and then dealt a hefty slap to the face of a cameraman filming the scene. Summoning the Nairobi police chief, she demanded the arrest of the reporter who had written the offending article. That he worked at a different newspaper bothered her not a jot. She was still scolding just before dawn, five hours later. Her voice rising ever higher, she demanded to know how the press could have had the temerity to write that she had gone to the police station in her shorts. It was disrespectful, and anyway, the First Lady had the right to wear whatever she pleased when out and about; even a bikini.

Not so female officials at State House, the presidential seat in Nairobi. These were told to wear their hair frumpy and their dresses below the knee. Terrified that her husband Mwai’s eye would wander, Lucy could not tolerate even the most august of female dignitaries if she thought them pretty. The president had to meet Condoleezza Rice, then America’s secretary of state, at an office in the city centre for fear his wife would make a scene.

The source of all this angst was plain to see. Her bigamist husband’s second wife, Mary Wambui, persecuted her. She was not so much bothered that there were “three of us” in the marriage, polygamy being common enough in Kenya. It was that her rival was so uppity, and so unbecoming too, with her rural accent and obvious lack of education. Rather than being invisible, as became the junior wife, Mary would flaunt her position, tipping off the press when she was going shopping so that she would be filmed with the state bodyguards and cavalcade of limousines the president had given her. The goad worked. The First Lady could browbeat others; rarely did she get the better of Mary, a politician in her own right and more skilled, devious and ambitious than she was.

If that Other Woman was ever placed on the same footing as herself, she would turn into a hellcat. She flounced out of a New Year’s Eve reception after the doddery old vice-president introduced her as the “second lady” and, when the deputy secretary to the cabinet made a similar gaffe at a garden party, she slapped his face and then had him removed by the police.

She was a liability to the president, no question. But Mwai always forgave her, for he needed her. After he suffered a car accident and a stroke around the time he took office, she became his gatekeeper, controlling his diary and itinerary and sacking aides who got in her way. With her as chatelaine, State House became stifling and joyless. She shut down the bar where her husband and his powerful coterie of golf-club friends would meet. Her strict Presbyterian upbringing gave her a distaste for alcohol, and the buddies were no help in her battle to keep Mwai sober. Besides, they were much too close to Mary.

Lucy aligned herself instead with a faction of corrupt chauvinists from the First Family’s dominant Kikuyu tribe. Unwilling to share power, they were determined to scupper the constitutional reforms Mwai had promised; she helped them largely to spite Mary and those who sided with her. The reforms were shelved, laying the ground for the violence after her husband’s disputed re-election in 2007, when more than 1,000 people were killed.

The people’s friend

In some ways, though, Lucy was more politically astute than Mwai was. She had the common touch that he, genial but patrician, so patently lacked. He was awful on the stump, and when his ramblings lost the crowd he would turn to her to come to his rescue. On one occasion, fresh from his first presidential victory, he bewilderingly upbraided his constituency supporters as idle drunkards. Taking the microphone, she gently defused the situation, telling her husband that he was wrong: the people before him were hardworking, honest folk.

This explained why, for all her flaws, many Kenyans adored her. “I am Lucy, and I will never change,” she said. They did not want her to. She empathised with the poor as no elected politician could. She was passionate about women’s rights in a country where few existed: marry late, she would tell female students, have a career first. To public delight she would berate ministers for their failings, especially if ordinary people suffered as a result. In response Kenyans gave “Mama Lucy” exactly what she wanted: unquestioning respect.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21698625-lucy-kibaki-mama-lucy-kenyas-first-lady-2002-2013-died-april-26th-aged-82/print





Articles Sections Next



Economic and financial indicators





Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Looking for the exit

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698663-interactive-indicators/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698661-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698665-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698668-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Looking for the exit

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition



First Grexit, now Brexit. Google Trends looks at the number of queries for a certain word or phrase as a proportion of the total number of Google searches. Each data point is then indexed to the peak number of such searches over a defined timeframe. Grexit searches peaked last July, when Greece held a referendum to decide whether or not to accept bail-out terms; interest in Brexit rocketed in February after Britain’s prime minister, David Cameron, secured a deal with the EU that paved the way for an in-out referendum next month. The Irish are the most interested in Brexit after the Brits. Of the next eight most-interested countries, six are EU members that have trade surpluses with Britain.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698660-looking-exit/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

May 14th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21698647-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

TE20160514

The world this week





Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders





The breakdown of Arab states: The war within





An election in the Philippines: The dangers of Duterte Harry





Yellow fever: A preventable tragedy





Second homes: Stay away





Banks and state aid: The rule of flaw





Letters





On GDP, nuclear energy, Andrew Jackson, women and Islam, young voters: Letters to the editor





Briefing





The Philippines: Fist of iron





United States





Death and money: Looking up





The Republicans: Learning to love the Don





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





Scourge, rather than saviour: Scourge, not saviour





Zombie campaigns: Greenback from the dead





Campus life: Unclubbable





The Supreme Court: Slowing down





Lexington: Citizen Brandeis





The Americas





Brazil’s political crisis: An unplanned presidency





Bello: Mercosur’s missed boat





The Fort McMurray fire: The green and the black





Asia





India’s water nightmare: Unholy woes





Child poverty in Japan: Hidden blight





Taiwan readies for a new president: Sizing Tsai up





Kim Jong Un thrills North Koreans with hours of brilliance: Sport of Kims





Banyan: Despotic in Dhaka





China





The Cultural Revolution, 50 years on: It was the worst of times





Xi Jinping and the Cultural Revolution: Mao, diluted





Middle East and Africa





The Democratic Republic of Congo: The guide to the promised land?





Zimbabwe’s new currency: Who wants to be a trillionaire?





Closing the world’s largest refugee camp: Kenya says go home





Sierra Leone’s first post-war traffic light: Amber for recovery





Fighting Islamic State in Libya: The scramble for Sirte





Israeli agriculture: Desert wines





Europe





Russia and Syria: The withdrawal that wasn’t





German football: Red Bull gives you wingers





Austrian politics: Waltzing out of the door





France’s recovery: Ça va





Schools in Finland: Helsinking





Charlemagne: Europa all’italiana





Britain





Energy policy: Power hungry





Brexit brief: Security concerns





Public transport in London: Going underground





Corporate bonds: Not so sterling





Predicting election results: Fluttering in





Private higher education: Could do better





Leisure activities: Dreading water





Bagehot: Donald Trump’s nightmare





International





Infectious diseases: Yellow plague





Malaria vaccines: Buzzing





Special report: The Arab world





The Arab world: The clash within a civilisation





Sykes-Picot and its aftermath: Unintended consequences





The nature of the state: Mamluks and maliks





The economy: Black gold, white gold





Religion: The new strife





Religious subdivisions: Which Islam?





Foreign intervention: From Beirut to Baghdad





Israel and Palestine: Israel’s villa in the jungle





The future: What is the Arabic for democracy?





Business





Office communication: The Slack generation





Binod Chaudhary: Peak tycoon





French weapons-makers: Going great guns





Crocodile farming: Snappy dressers





Planemakers: The eye of the storm





Tobacco firms: Snuffed out





Schumpeter: Island story





Finance and economics





Inequality in China: Up on the farm





Buttonwood: A chronic problem





Saudi Arabia’s oil policy: Beyond OPEC





European banks: Triple whammy





Lending Club: Membership revoked





Value-added tax in Europe: Freedom fighters





Stockmarket regulation in Canada: Not seeing the wood or the trees





The appeal of the euro: SELL signals





Free exchange: A fare shake





Science and technology





Life and the Earth: The curious lightness of an early atmosphere





Plant science: Botany at bay





Climate change: Good vibrations





Anthropology: Not what they were





Recycling: A cracking yarn





Recycling: Technology correspondent’s job





Books and arts





China’s Cultural Revolution: In the heat of the sun





Globalisation: Bridges versus borders





Britain and Europe: Historians and Brexit





Nigerian crime and corruption: No fantasy





Fiction: Gloom with a view





French television drama: Mishap on the Med





Obituary





Obituary: Lucy Kibaki: Cherchez l’autre femme





Economic and financial indicators





Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Looking for the exit





Markets





Table of Contents

TE20160514

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



The breakdown of Arab states: The war within





An election in the Philippines: The dangers of Duterte Harry





Yellow fever: A preventable tragedy





Second homes: Stay away





Banks and state aid: The rule of flaw





Letters



On GDP, nuclear energy, Andrew Jackson, women and Islam, young voters: Letters to the editor





Briefing



The Philippines: Fist of iron





United States



Death and money: Looking up





The Republicans: Learning to love the Don





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





Scourge, rather than saviour: Scourge, not saviour





Zombie campaigns: Greenback from the dead





Campus life: Unclubbable





The Supreme Court: Slowing down





Lexington: Citizen Brandeis





The Americas



Brazil’s political crisis: An unplanned presidency





Bello: Mercosur’s missed boat





The Fort McMurray fire: The green and the black





Asia



India’s water nightmare: Unholy woes





Child poverty in Japan: Hidden blight





Taiwan readies for a new president: Sizing Tsai up





Kim Jong Un thrills North Koreans with hours of brilliance: Sport of Kims





Banyan: Despotic in Dhaka





China



The Cultural Revolution, 50 years on: It was the worst of times





Xi Jinping and the Cultural Revolution: Mao, diluted





Middle East and Africa



The Democratic Republic of Congo: The guide to the promised land?





Zimbabwe’s new currency: Who wants to be a trillionaire?





Closing the world’s largest refugee camp: Kenya says go home





Sierra Leone’s first post-war traffic light: Amber for recovery





Fighting Islamic State in Libya: The scramble for Sirte





Israeli agriculture: Desert wines





Europe



Russia and Syria: The withdrawal that wasn’t





German football: Red Bull gives you wingers





Austrian politics: Waltzing out of the door





France’s recovery: Ça va





Schools in Finland: Helsinking





Charlemagne: Europa all’italiana





Britain



Energy policy: Power hungry





Brexit brief: Security concerns





Public transport in London: Going underground





Corporate bonds: Not so sterling





Predicting election results: Fluttering in





Private higher education: Could do better





Leisure activities: Dreading water





Bagehot: Donald Trump’s nightmare





International



Infectious diseases: Yellow plague





Malaria vaccines: Buzzing





Special report: The Arab world



The Arab world: The clash within a civilisation





Sykes-Picot and its aftermath: Unintended consequences





The nature of the state: Mamluks and maliks





The economy: Black gold, white gold





Religion: The new strife





Religious subdivisions: Which Islam?





Foreign intervention: From Beirut to Baghdad





Israel and Palestine: Israel’s villa in the jungle





The future: What is the Arabic for democracy?





Business



Office communication: The Slack generation





Binod Chaudhary: Peak tycoon





French weapons-makers: Going great guns





Crocodile farming: Snappy dressers





Planemakers: The eye of the storm





Tobacco firms: Snuffed out





Schumpeter: Island story





Finance and economics



Inequality in China: Up on the farm





Buttonwood: A chronic problem





Saudi Arabia’s oil policy: Beyond OPEC





European banks: Triple whammy





Lending Club: Membership revoked





Value-added tax in Europe: Freedom fighters





Stockmarket regulation in Canada: Not seeing the wood or the trees





The appeal of the euro: SELL signals





Free exchange: A fare shake





Science and technology



Life and the Earth: The curious lightness of an early atmosphere





Plant science: Botany at bay





Climate change: Good vibrations





Anthropology: Not what they were





Recycling: A cracking yarn





Recycling: Technology correspondent’s job





Books and arts



China’s Cultural Revolution: In the heat of the sun





Globalisation: Bridges versus borders





Britain and Europe: Historians and Brexit





Nigerian crime and corruption: No fantasy





Fiction: Gloom with a view





French television drama: Mishap on the Med





Obituary



Obituary: Lucy Kibaki: Cherchez l’autre femme





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Looking for the exit





Markets





