The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




The world this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

The world this week

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

Iraq’s armed forces recaptured Ramadi, the capital of Anbar province, which fell to Islamic State in May and is just 100km from Baghdad. The country’s prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, said that IS would be driven from his country by the end of 2016. IS also suffered fresh reverses in Syria; on December 26th it lost the important power-generating Tishreen dam to a mainly Kurdish force. See article.

Saudi Arabia’s stockmarkets fell sharply after it announced swingeing spending cuts to close a gaping budget deficit. Saudi public finances have been hurt by declining oil revenues. In the middle of 2015 Brent crude was trading at $65 a barrel; now it is under $38.

An outbreak of Ebola that rampaged through three African countries officially ended when the World Health Organisation declared that Guinea was free of the disease. The outbreak, which started two years ago, killed some 11,000 people, most of them in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

Stockmarkets responded positively to the Federal Reserve’s decision on December 16th to raise interest rates for the first time since 2006. After months of dithering the central bank lifted the range for its benchmark rate by a quarter of a percentage point to between 0.25% and 0.5%.

Martin Shkreli was arrested by the FBI on December 17th and charged with securities fraud. Mr Shkreli made the headlines in 2015 when a drugs company he ran bought the rights to a medicine and raised its price by 5,000%. The (unrelated) charges against Mr Shkreli, which he denies, pertain to his time as a hedge-fund manager.

Poland’s right-wing government passed a law requiring the constitutional court to approve decisions by a two-thirds majority, and with at least 13 of the 15 judges present. The law will force the court to accept disputed new judges whom the government has appointed. It will also make it much harder to strike down new laws. The opposition staged furious demonstrations. See article.

Spain held an election before Christmas, which resulted in no stable majority. The ruling People’s Party of Mariano Rajoy came first and the Socialists second. Two smaller parties took seats, breaking the traditional two-party system.

Brazil’s finance minister, Joaquim Levy, resigned on December 18th. He came into office in January 2015 with a mandate to slash the budget deficit but was thwarted by a severe recession and political turmoil. His successor is Nelson Barbosa, who was the planning minister.

A group of Central American countries plus Mexico reached an agreement to allow some of the 7,000 migrants from Cuba who are stuck on Costa Rica’s border with Nicaragua to travel to the United States. Nicaragua had blocked their entry. The migrants will now be airlifted to El Salvador and continue by bus. The number of migrants from Cuba has increased since a diplomatic thaw with the United States began in 2014. Many fear that the rapprochement will end the United States’ policy of accepting émigrés from Cuba if they reach American soil.

Argentina lifted exchange controls and allowed the peso to float freely, days after the inauguration of its new president, Mauricio Macri. This forms part of a liberalisation programme to reverse populist policies of the outgoing government of Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. See article.

Carlos Rosales Mendoza, the founder of La Familia Michoacana, a Mexican drug gang, was found dead along with the bodies of three other people near a motorway in western Mexico. He was on the most-wanted list of the Drug Enforcement Agency in the United States.



A landslide in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen killed seven people and left dozens of others missing. Officials called it an “industrial safety accident”, caused by a collapsing heap of construction waste. An official who had once overseen the site committed suicide.

The chairman of one of China’s largest state-owned mobile operators, China Telecom, is being investigated by anti-graft officials. The businessman, Chang Xiaobing, is among several senior executives who have been targeted in an anti- corruption campaign being waged by President Xi Jinping.

Japan and South Korea agreed to settle a long-standing dispute over women forced to work in Japanese brothels during the second world war. Japan apologised and said it would pay ¥1 billion ($8.3m) to help victims.

The bodies of six American troops killed by a Taliban suicide-bomber near Bagram air base in Afghanistan were flown home. It was the deadliest attack on American personnel in the country in years. A sizeable contingent of troops is to remain in Afghanistan until at least the start of 2017.

The season of goodwill extended to America’s House of Representatives, which passed a $1.8 trillion spending measure before Christmas with little argument and thus avoided a government shutdown. Paul Ryan, the new Speaker, was commended for his adroit handling of the bill.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21684815-world-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21684817-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




Latin America: Brazil’s fall

Travel visas: Sticker shock

Republican tax plans: Be serious

Global inflation: Low and behold

Internet security: When back doors backfire





Articles Sections Next

Latin America

Brazil’s fall

Disaster looms for Latin America’s biggest economy

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



AT THE start of 2016 Brazil should be in an exuberant mood. Rio de Janeiro is to host South America’s first Olympic games in August, giving Brazilians a chance to embark on what they do best: throwing a really spectacular party. Instead, Brazil faces political and economic disaster.

On December 16th Fitch became the second of the three big credit-rating agencies to downgrade Brazil’s debt to junk status. Days later Joaquim Levy, the finance minister appointed by the president, Dilma Rousseff, to stabilise the public finances, quit in despair after less than a year in the job. Brazil’s economy is predicted to shrink by 2.5-3% in 2016, not much less than it did in 2015. Even oil-rich, sanction-racked Russia stands to do better. At the same time, Brazil’s governing coalition has been discredited by a gargantuan bribery scandal surrounding Petrobras, a state-controlled oil company. And Ms Rousseff, accused of hiding the size of the budget deficit, faces impeachment proceedings in Congress.

As the B in BRICS, Brazil is supposed to be in the vanguard of fast-growing emerging economies. Instead it faces political dysfunction and perhaps a return to rampant inflation. Only hard choices can put Brazil back on course. Just now, Ms Rousseff does not seem to have the stomach for them.

Dismal Dilma

Brazil’s suffering, like that of other emerging economies, stems partly from the fall in global commodity prices. But Ms Rousseff and her left-wing Workers’ Party (PT) have made a bad situation much worse. During her first term, in 2011-14, she spent extravagantly and unwisely on higher pensions and unproductive tax breaks for favoured industries. The fiscal deficit swelled from 2% of GDP in 2010 to 10% in 2015.

Brazil’s crisis managers do not have the luxury of waiting for better times to begin reform (see article). At 70% of GDP, public debt is worryingly large for a middle-income country and rising fast. Because of high interest rates, the cost of servicing it is a crushing 7% of GDP. The Central Bank cannot easily use monetary policy to fight inflation, currently 10.5%, as higher rates risk destabilising the public finances even more by adding to the interest bill. Brazil therefore has little choice but to raise taxes and cut spending.

Mr Levy made a game attempt to renovate the building while putting out the fire. He trimmed discretionary spending by a record 70 billion reais ($18 billion) in 2015 and tightened eligibility for unemployment insurance. But it was not enough. The recession dragged down tax revenues. Ms Rousseff gave her finance minister only lukewarm support and the PT was hostile towards him. The opposition, intent on ousting the president, was in no mood to co-operate.

Although he was a senior treasury official during Ms Rousseff’s disastrous first term, Nelson Barbosa may be able to accomplish more as finance minister. He has political support within the PT. He also has bargaining power, because Ms Rousseff cannot afford to lose another finance minister. One early test will be whether Mr Barbosa persuades a recalcitrant Congress to reinstate an unpopular financial-transactions tax.

A central target should be pensions. The minimum benefit is the same as the minimum wage, which has risen by nearly 90% in real terms over the past decade. Women typically retire when they are 50 and men stop work at 55, nearly a decade earlier than the average in the OECD (a club of mostly rich countries). Brazil’s government pays almost 12% of GDP to pensioners, a bigger share than older, richer Japan.

If Brazil is to fulfil its promise, much, much more is needed. A typical manufacturing firm spends 2,600 hours a year complying with the country’s ungainly tax code; the Latin American average is 356. Labour laws modelled on those of Mussolini make it expensive for firms to fire even incompetent employees. Brazil has shielded its firms from international competition. That is one reason why, among 41 countries whose performance was measured by the OECD, its manufacturing productivity is the fourth-lowest.

To reform work and pensions, Ms Rousseff must face up to problems that have been decades in the making. Some 90% of public spending is protected from cuts, partly by the constitution which, in 1988, celebrated the end of military rule by enshrining generous job protection and state benefits. Because it is so hard to reform, Brazil’s public sector rivals European welfare states for size but emerging ones for inefficiency. Long a drain on economic vitality, Brazil’s overbearing state is now a chief cause of the fiscal crisis.



Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts

Overcoming such deep-rooted practices would be hard for any government. In Brazil it is made all the harder by a daft political system, which favours party fragmentation and vote-buying and attracts political mercenaries who have little commitment either to party or to programme. The threshold for a party to enter the lower house of Congress is low; today 28 are represented, adding to the legislative gridlock. Congressmen represent entire states, some as populous as neighbouring Latin American countries, which makes campaigning ruinously expensive—one reason why politicians skimmed off huge amounts of money from Petrobras.

It is therefore hard, despite Mr Barbosa’s advantages, to feel optimistic about the prospects for deep reform. Voters hold politicians in contempt. The opposition is bent on impeaching Ms Rousseff, a misguided battle that could dominate the political agenda for months. The PT has no appetite for austerity. Achieving the three-fifths support in both houses of Congress needed for constitutional reforms will be a tall order.

Reckless Rousseff

And if Ms Rousseff fails to bring about change? Most of Brazil’s borrowing is in local currency, which makes default unlikely. Instead, the country may end up inflating away its debts. Brazil’s achievement has been to lift tens of millions of people out of rag-and-flip-flop poverty. Recession will halt that, or even begin to reverse it. The hope is that Brazil, which has achieved hard-won economic and democratic stability, does not lapse once again into chronic mismanagement and turmoil.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21684779-disaster-looms-latin-americas-biggest-economy-brazils-fall/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Travel visas

Sticker shock

They have their uses, but the burden visas impose on travellers and recipient countries is too high

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



VISAS are necessary evils. They offer governments a way to control their borders, whether to regulate the flow of immigrants or to pick out threats to security. But the paperwork and fees they entail also deter legitimate tourists and business travellers. Researchers at the Cato Institute, a libertarian think-tank, reckon that eliminating all travel visas to the United States would add between $90 billion and $123 billion in annual tourist spending. By one estimate, introducing visa restrictions can lower trade and foreign direct investment between a pair of countries by as much as 25%.

The job of policymakers is to strike the right balance between such costs and benefits. On short-term business and tourist visas, they have failed. Take security. Visas, proponents say, keep countries safer by controlling who is able to enter. That is true, but they are not very efficient. Terrorists can be home-grown as well as foreign, qualify for visas (as the 9/11 attackers did) or slip across borders illegally. Imposing restrictions on the basis of nationality is the bluntest of instruments, scooping up legions of ordinary tourists and travellers as well as the occasional suspect. America’s decision to tighten the rules for anyone who has recently been to Iran, Iraq, Sudan and Syria will affect aid workers and plotters alike.

It is a similar story with unauthorised migration. Identifying visitors who might overstay their welcome is a core duty of visa officers. Western countries often require several months’ bank statements, pay slips, proof of financial and property holdings, tax returns and letters from bosses promising that their employees will return (see article). These strictures also put off legitimate travellers. When Canada lifted visa requirements for Czech citizens in 2007, the number of Czech tourists jumped by a third; when restrictions were reintroduced in 2009, after a rise in asylum applications, arrivals fell by 70% over three years. Rather than gumming up all travel, it made more sense to process asylum claims faster. The rules have subsequently been relaxed again.

Governments can take three steps to ease the burden of visas without simply throwing borders open to all-comers. The first is to slash the length of their forms. Britain, a grave offender when it comes to high fees and piles of paperwork, requires visa applicants to fill in a ten-page form, provide a list of every foreign trip over the past decade and declare that they have never incited terrorism to boot. This is absurd. Schengen-area bureaucrats in continental Europe manage to screen visitors in just two pages. America’s visa-waiver programme allows citizens of 28 countries to visit by filling out a simple online form with basic personal information.

Second, government departments need to get better at sharing that information, both within borders and across them. Most big receiving countries now demand biometric data such as fingerprints and retinal scans. Many also require “advance passenger information” before a traveller is allowed to board an aeroplane. Cross-checking these data against intelligence and criminal databases will usually obviate the need for lengthy inquisitions.

La visa loca

Usually, but not always. Countries will want to investigate some applicants in greater detail. So the third step is to grant longer visas to those people who have easily cleared the necessary hurdles. America routinely grants ten-year visas; Europe routinely grants ten-day ones. That means travellers to the Schengen area must repeatedly prove their good intentions, leading to more otiose paperwork, and fewer visits. Necessary as they are, visas need not be so evil.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21684782-they-have-their-uses-burden-visas-impose-travellers-and-recipient-countries-too/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Republican tax plans

Be serious

The Republican candidates’ tax plans are welcome for their detail, but not their contents

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



A MONTH before the first primary contest in Iowa, the Republican race is more warlike than wonkish. Yet the candidates have found time to write sometimes intricate plans to reform America’s taxes (see article). Though no one blueprint will become law, if America chooses a Republican president, he may well have a Republican Congress to work with. At that point, the winner’s tax plan will seem less like a campaign gimmick and more like a promise to be kept.

Republicans are right to seek to reform America’s incoherent, tangled-up tax system. America’s corporate tax is a toxic combination of a high rate—the highest in the OECD—and a series of complex distortions, which encourage bad behaviour such as gorging on debt and stashing cash in foreign subsidiaries. Republicans rightly want to cut the rate and put an end to most of the distortions. Marco Rubio and Jeb Bush would also let businesses deduct the cost of their investments from their taxes immediately, rather than as their assets deteriorate and lose value. This would encourage investment and boost economic growth.

The candidates have interesting ideas for helping low earners, too. Mr Bush and Donald Trump want to raise the standard deduction (the amount Americans can earn before paying income tax). That would be a simple way to encourage work and to help low- and middle-income households: a similar policy has proved a success in Britain. Mr Bush would also double the earned-income tax credit, a wage top-up for low-earners, for childless workers. Mr Rubio wants to replace the standard deduction with a universal payment to those in work, which would help even those who earn too little to benefit from an increased tax allowance.

These ideas, though, are mere footnotes to the plans’ central chapters: huge tax cuts for high earners. At 39.6%, America’s top federal income-tax rate is hardly high by global standards. Yet the candidates are racing to see who can promise to cut it most. Mr Bush aims for 28%; Mr Trump 25%. Ted Cruz wants to replace income tax entirely with a 10% flat tax and a value-added tax. Mr Rubio, whose promise of a 35% top rate seems timid by comparison, serves up largesse elsewhere by promising to abolish levies on capital gains and dividends.

The first problem with these schemes is their cost. On today’s growth forecasts, even Mr Bush’s relatively moderate plan would reduce revenues by $715 billion, or 13.5%, a year by 2026—more than the projected national defence budget. Paying for Mr Trump’s plan with reduced day-to-day spending (as opposed to mandatory spending on things like pensions and health care) would require cutting budgets by a staggering 82%.

The candidates claim that tax cuts will spur the economy, filling the government’s coffers with new revenue. But the pace of any economic acceleration is uncertain. The evidence that income-tax cuts for high earners boost growth is thin at best. Predictions that tax cuts in the early 2000s would cause enough growth to pay for themselves look foolish today.

This is no time to be taking chances with America’s budget. Retiring baby-boomers are increasing the cost of providing pensions and health care for the old. There is no appetite among Republicans for defence cuts, and other day-to-day spending has already been cut by 22% in real terms since 2010. If tax cuts were paid for with more borrowing rather than lower spending, they would end up as deadweight for the economy rather than as fuel.

The plans would also greatly exacerbate inequality, which has increased in the 15 years since George W. Bush cut taxes for high earners. Under Mr Trump’s plan, for instance, the top 1% of earners would receive a windfall worth 18% of their after-tax income. Middle-earners have to settle for a 5% boost; the bottom fifth, just 1%. This belies Mr Trump’s claim to champion the cause of ordinary working people. The other plans are little better; Mr Rubio’s plan is probably more generous at the bottom than at the top, but he gives middle-income Americans little to cheer about.

The Republicans have spent much of Barack Obama’s presidency denouncing debt and deficits. Yet their proposals to introduce unaffordable tax cuts for the rich would send both ballooning. So long as such schemes are a prerequisite for winning the Republican nomination, a party that prides itself on economic management will lack a credible policy.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21684780-republican-candidates-tax-plans-are-welcome-their-detail-not-their-contents-be/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Global inflation

Low and behold

Another year of low prices will create strains in the world economy

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



ECONOMISTS don’t forecast because they know, said J.K. Galbraith; they forecast because they’re asked. A question that is increasingly put to them is whether inflation, which has been remarkably quiescent for years, will spring a surprise in 2016. After all, the debt troubles that have weighed down rich economies since 2007 are fading; labour markets in America, Britain and Germany are increasingly tight; housing markets are gathering steam; and the Federal Reserve has just raised interest rates for the first time in almost a decade.

Inflation in America and Europe should indeed pick up from its present, near-zero state as the big declines in energy prices at the turn of 2015 drop out of the headline rate. But a glut in the supply of crude means that oil prices are falling again. If debt is receding as a problem in rich countries, it looms larger in emerging markets, where overcapacity brought on by binge-borrowing exerts a downward force on prices. There is inflation in commodity-exporting countries, such as Brazil, whose currencies have been trashed. But global inflation is a tug-of-war between bottlenecks in parts of the rich world and imported deflation from emerging markets, and the enduring fall or stagnation of prices looks set to dominate for a while yet (see article). Indeed, this “lowflation” means that three aspects of the world economy are worth watching in 2016.

Start with Saudi Arabia. The falling price of crude is in part a consequence of its commitment (reiterated by OPEC ministers on December 4th) to produce at full tilt. The idea is to flush out the weaker producers in America’s shale-oil industry and elsewhere. This is proving a costly gambit. Saudi Arabia needs a barrel of oil to fetch around $85 to finance public spending and around $60 to keep its current account in balance. Yet the oil price recently fell below $36, to an 11-year low, before rebounding a little. America has sustained oil production of above 9m barrels a day, despite a sharp fall in the number of oil rigs, suggesting that shale firms are becoming more efficient.

This week Saudi Arabia said that it would cut local subsidies on petrol, electricity and water in order to chip away at a budget deficit that reached 367 billion riyals ($98 billion), or 15% of GDP, in 2015. The Saudis are burning through their (ample) foreign-exchange reserves to pay for imports while maintaining the riyal’s peg with the dollar. But the cost of this strategy has already forced two other oil exporters, Kazakhstan and, more recently, Azerbaijan, to abandon their dollar pegs. The public finances of other big oil producers, such as Russia and Nigeria, are also under pressure. No wonder a devaluation of the riyal this year is a favoured tail-risk for currency forecasters.

A second place to watch is China. A construction boom has left it with a mountain of debt and excess capacity in some industries—notably steel, whose falling global price has claimed jobs in Europe’s industry and led to growing complaints of Chinese dumping. Factory-gate prices have fallen in China for 45 consecutive months. Further fiscal and monetary stimulus should help to boost demand, but will also hinder the management of China’s exchange rate, which is already under pressure from an outflow of capital.

As with the riyal, the yuan has just about kept pace with the dollar’s ascent over the past two years, leaving it looking expensive. Beijing has signalled that it wants to benchmark the yuan against a basket of currencies, and some forecasters expect a gradual decline in its value against the dollar in 2016. But there is an understandable fear that the yuan may slip anchor, potentially touching off a round of devaluations in Asia.

A third outcome from continued lowflation will be increasingly lopsided economies in the rich world, particularly in America, where recovery is more advanced than in Europe. If productivity stays as weak as it has been recently, unemployment is likely to fall still further. At the same time, slow growth in emerging markets is likely to keep downward pressure on commodity prices and on their currencies. A strong dollar has already driven a wedge between the performance of America’s manufacturing and service industries. Further appreciation would make it harder for the Federal Reserve to push through more increases in interest rates.

Strong on jobs, weak on prices

All this would make for a strangely configured economy by the end of the year. An unemployment rate of 4%, a Fed Funds rate below 1%, an overvalued dollar, a strong housing market and inflation below the Fed’s target of 2% is a plausible, if very odd, mix, which could portend either a sudden burst of inflation or enduringly feeble demand (see article). An honest economist will admit the uncertainties in any forecast. But another year of lowflation will surely tax policymakers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21684781-another-year-low-prices-will-create-strains-world-economy-low-and-behold/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Internet security

When back doors backfire

Some spy agencies favour “back doors” in encryption software, but who will use them?

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



WITHOUT encryption, internet traffic might as well be written on postcards. So governments, bankers and retailers encipher their messages, as do terrorists and criminals.

For spy agencies, cracking methods of encryption is therefore a priority. Using computational brute force is costly and slow, because making codes is far easier than breaking them. One alternative is to force companies to help the authorities crack their customers’ encryption, the thrust of a new law just passed in China and a power that Western spy agencies also covet. Another option is to open “back doors”: flaws in software or hardware which make it possible to guess or steal the encryption keys. Such back doors can be the result of programming mistakes, built by design (with the co-operation of the encryption provider) or created through unauthorised tinkering with software—or some combination of the three.

The problem with back doors is that, though they make life easier for spooks, they also make the internet less secure for everyone else. Recent revelations involving Juniper, an American maker of networking hardware and software, vividly demonstrate how. Juniper disclosed in December that a back door, dating to 2012, let anyone with knowledge of it read traffic encrypted by its “virtual private network” software, which is used by companies and government agencies worldwide to connect different offices via the public internet. It is unclear who is responsible, but the flaw may have arisen when one intelligence agency installed a back door which was then secretly modified by another. The back door involved a faulty random-number generator in an encryption standard championed by America’s National Security Agency (NSA); other clues point to Chinese or British intelligence agencies.

Decrypting messages that involve one or more intelligence targets is clearly within a spy agency’s remit. And there are good reasons why governments should be able to snoop, in the interests of national security and within legal limits. The danger is that back doors introduced for snooping may also end up being used for nefarious ends by rogue spooks, enemy governments, or malefactors who wish to spy on the law-abiding. It is unclear who installed Juniper’s back door or used it and to what end.

Intelligence agencies argue that back doors can be kept secret and are sufficiently complex that their unauthorised use is unlikely. But an outsider may stumble across a weakness or steal details of it. America, in particular, has a lamentable record when it comes to storing secrets safely. In the summer it became known that the Office of Personnel Management, which stores the sensitive personal data of more than 20m federal employees and others, had been breached—allegedly by the Chinese. Some call that the biggest disaster in American intelligence history. It is rivalled only by the data taken by Edward Snowden, a former NSA contractor now living in Moscow. (The authorities responsible for airport security also let slip the details of master keys that can open most commercially available luggage—a form of physical back door.)

Push back against back doors

Calls for the mandatory inclusion of back doors should therefore be resisted. Their potential use by criminals weakens overall internet security, on which billions of people rely for banking and payments. Their existence also undermines confidence in technology companies and makes it hard for Western governments to criticise authoritarian regimes for interfering with the internet. And their imposition would be futile in any case: high-powered encryption software, with no back doors, is available free online to anyone who wants it.

Rather than weakening everyone’s encryption by exploiting back doors, spies should use other means. The attacks in Paris in November succeeded not because terrorists used computer wizardry, but because information about their activities was not shared. When necessary, the NSA and other agencies can usually worm their way into suspects’ computers or phones. That is harder and slower than using a universal back door—but it is safer for everyone else.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21684783-some-spy-agencies-favour-back-doors-encryption-software-who-will-use-them-when-back/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




On business, species, elections, whistleblowers, plurals, Donald Trump: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

On business, species, elections, whistleblowers, plurals, Donald Trump

Letters to the editor

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com

Changing gears



It is true that businesses need to make deliberate decisions about clock speed, and therefore strategy, according to their individual circumstances (“The creed of speed”, December 5th). Research for our recent book, “Your Strategy Needs a Strategy”, showed that competitive conditions overall have accelerated in some important respects. For example, the volatility of competitive rankings has increased several fold in many industries, and the five-year mortality rate for public corporations has increased from around 5% to over 30% in recent decades.

However, a more important finding is that there has been a marked divergence in competitive conditions, requiring companies to adopt very different approaches to strategy according to what they face. Although short-term adaptive strategies are appropriate for some fast-moving, unpredictable businesses, others will be best served by more classical plan-based approaches. Furthermore, large companies will need to master the art of running strategies with different clock speeds in different parts of their business.

One might say that businesses need not only an accelerator pedal, but a gearbox too.

MARTIN REEVES

Director

BCG Henderson Institute

New York

I am amazed that your leader (“Hyperactive, yet passive”, December 5th) cited lengthening maturities of company bonds as evidence against corporate short-termism. Rather, that is evidence of companies locking-in historically low interest rates driven down by governments’ monetary policies. The proceeds of this low-cost debt have been used to repay high-cost debt, or to fund share buy-backs, both enhancing earnings per share in the short term. This is hardly value-creating for the economy at large.

FRANK KNOWLES

Clavering, Essex

The data you presented to challenge the widely held view that the speed of business is increasing are not convincing. The measures chosen, such as years of job tenure, bond durations and length of shareholdings, merely capture the churn of business, not its speed. They capture how fast the engine of business is revving, but not its velocity.

For time-based competition, the critical measures of speed are the response time to customers and the development time for new products and services. In most industries these dropped dramatically in the 1970s and 1980s.

JOSEPH BLACKBURN

Professor of operations management, emeritus

Vanderbilt University

Nashville, Tennessee





Invasive species



Although eradicating invasive species is indeed difficult (“Day of the triffids”, December 5th), the primary goal of most management efforts is to reduce their damage. In the case of invasive brown tree snakes on Guam, the economic and ecological damage is clear. Only two of the 12 native forest-bird species remain, $4m is lost a year in productivity from the snakes electrocuting themselves on power lines and one out of 1,000 emergency-room visits is from a snake bite. If the snakes were to colonise Hawaii, the estimated damage could be as high as $2 billion a year.

It is important to note the difference between exotic and invasive species. The latter cause great harm ecologically and economically. But there are numerous exotic species, such as rainbow trout, which are not considered invasive. We agree that a knee-jerk reaction to all exotic species is not the best policy. However, when an exotic species becomes injurious and its costs high, investing in control measures is justified.

LARRY CLARK

Director

USDA National Wildlife Research Centre

Fort Collins, Colorado





Legitimacy at the polls

Venezuela’s Bolivarian revolution was “resoundingly rejected” in the recent parliamentary election, you say (“A democratic counter-revolution”, December 12th). Yet the defeated party of President Nicolás Maduro got 41%. That was a larger share of the vote than the 37% that the victorious Conservatives gained in Britain’s election last May.

JULIA BUXTON

Professor of comparative politics

Central European University

Budapest





Rewarding whistleblowers



Whistleblowing has increased because of the success of American whistleblower-reward programmes (“The age of the whistleblower”, December 5th). These programmes offer monetary awards, confidentiality and job protection. In 2015 British regulators failed to enhance their anti-fraud efforts in the financial industry when they decided against introducing such incentives. My law firm has been contacted by dozens of people in Britain hoping to participate in American whistleblower programmes.

In instances where their claims did not fall under American jurisdiction, every one of them chose to keep quiet rather than contact British regulators. Without the potential for financial rewards, not one was willing to risk his livelihood by stepping forward.

In the financial world, it’s all about risk versus benefit. For whistleblowers, it’s the same calculation.

ERIKA KELTON

Phillips & Cohen LLP

Washington, DC





Plural sex

According to Dennis Baron’s Web of Language Distinguished Usage Panel, singular “they” is the word of the year.

But I may not be the only one of your readers to be troubled by the ambiguity of a proposition in “Pot luck”:

“I have to be closely attached to someone before I am comfortable having sex with them” (December 12th).

RONALD MACAULAY

Claremont, California





Better than the primaries

The qualities associated with strong leadership are well known. Potential business leaders are often evaluated on their verbal and non-verbal IQ, communication skills, temperament, physical fitness and health, and the ability to handle stressful situations.

Rather than dwelling on the buffoonery of Republican candidates for president (“The greatest show on earth”, December 5th), why not call for formal leadership testing? Those who are likely to excel will relish in brandishing their credentials. Those who refuse testing would be branded cowards. Those who are tested and perform poorly would be exposed and humiliated, giving the voting public a picture of their true calibre.

GOUTHAM RAO

Clinical associate professor

Pritzker School of Medicine

University of Chicago



I was relieved to read of Nate Silver’s calculation that only about 6-8% of the electorate—roughly equal to the proportion who think the moon landings were faked—really support Donald Trump.

Can I assume we are talking about the same 6-8%?

JOSEPH FRAZIER

Yachats, Oregon

* Thank you, thank you, thank you. Despite repeated scrutiny, the cover of The World in 2016 does not reveal a likeness of Donald Trump. The future looks brighter already.

CLIFF FELDWICK

Columbia, Maryland

* Letter appears online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21684762-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




Brazil’s crisis: Irredeemable?





Articles Sections Next

Brazil’s crisis

Irredeemable?

A former star of the emerging world faces a lost decade

Jan 2nd 2016 | RIO DE JANEIRO | From the print edition



THE longest recession in a century; the biggest bribery scandal in history; the most unpopular leader in living memory. These are not the sort of records Brazil was hoping to set in 2016, the year in which Rio de Janeiro hosts South America’s first-ever Olympic games. When the games were awarded to Brazil in 2009 Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, then president and in his pomp, pointed proudly to the ease with which a booming Brazil had weathered the global financial crisis. Now Lula’s handpicked successor, Dilma Rousseff, who began her second term in January 2015, presides over an unprecedented roster of calamities.

By the end of 2016 Brazil’s economy may be 8% smaller than it was in the first quarter of 2014, when it last saw growth; GDP per person could be down by a fifth since its peak in 2010, which is not as bad as the situation in Greece, but not far off. Two ratings agencies have demoted Brazilian debt to junk status. Joaquim Levy, who was appointed as finance minister last January with a mandate to cut the deficit, quit in December. Any country where it is hard to tell the difference between the inflation rate—which has edged into double digits—and the president’s approval rating—currently 12%, having dipped into single figures—has serious problems.

Ms Rousseff’s political woes are as crippling as her economic ones. Thirty-two sitting members of Congress, mostly from the coalition led by her left-wing Workers’ Party (PT), are under investigation for accepting billions of dollars in bribes in exchange for padded contracts with the state-controlled oil-and-gas company, Petrobras. On December 15th the police raided several offices of the Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB), a partner in Ms Rousseff’s coalition led by the vice-president, Michel Temer.

Brazil’s electoral tribunal is investigating whether to annul Ms Rousseff’s re-election in 2014 over dodgy campaign donations. In December members of Congress began debating her impeachment. The proceedings were launched by the speaker of the lower house, Eduardo Cunha (who though part of the PMDB considers himself in opposition) on the grounds that Ms Rousseff tampered with public accounts to hide the true size of the budgetary hole. Some see the impeachment as a way to divert attention from Mr Cunha’s own problems; Brazil’s chief prosecutor wants him stripped of his privileged position so that his role in the Petrobras affair can be investigated more freely. Mr Cunha denies any wrongdoing.



Brazil is no stranger to crises. Following the end of two decades of military rule in 1985, the first directly elected president, Fernando Collor, was impeached in 1992. After a “lost decade” of stagnation and hyperinflation ended in the mid-1990s the economy was knocked sideways by the emerging-markets turmoil of 1997-98. In the mid-2000s politics was beset by the scandal of a bribes-for-votes scheme known as the mensalão (“big monthly”, for the size and schedule of the payments), which eventually saw Lula’s chief of staff jailed in 2013.

Yet rarely, if ever, have shocks both external and domestic, political and economic, conspired as they do today. During the original lost decade global conditions were relatively benign; in the crisis of the late 1990s the tough measures to quell inflation and revive growth taken after Mr Collor’s departure stood Brazil in moderately good stead; when scandal rocked the 2000s commodity markets were booming.

A sad convergence

Now prices of Brazilian commodities such as oil, iron ore and soya have slumped: a Brazilian commodities index compiled by Credit Suisse, a bank, has fallen by 41% since its peak in 2011. The commodities bust has hit economies around the world, but Brazil has fared particularly badly, with its structural weaknesses—poor productivity and unaffordable, misdirected public spending—exacerbating the damage. Regardless of what she may or may not have done with respect to the impeachment charge, Ms Rousseff’s cardinal sin is her failure to have confronted these problems in her previous term, when she had some political room for manoeuvre. Instead, that term was marked by loose fiscal and monetary policies, incessant microeconomic meddling and fickle policymaking that bloated the budget, stoked inflation and sapped confidence.

Poor though her record has been, some of these problems have deeper roots in what is in some ways a great achievement: the federal constitution of 1988, which enshrined the transition from military to democratic rule. This 70,000-word doorstop of a document crams in as many social, political and economic rights as its drafters could dream up, some of them highly specific: a 44-hour working week; a retirement age of 65 for men and 60 for women. The “purchasing power” of benefits “shall be preserved”, it proclaims, creating a powerful ratchet on public spending.



Since the constitution’s enactment, federal outlays have nearly doubled to 18% of GDP; total public spending is over 40%. Some 90% of the federal budget is ring-fenced either by the constitution or by legislation. Constitutionally protected pensions alone now swallow 11.6% of GDP, a higher proportion than in Japan, whose citizens are a great deal older. By 2014 the government was running a primary deficit (ie, before interest payments) of 32.5 billion reais ($13.9 billion) (see chart).

Mr Levy tried to live up to the nickname he had earned during an earlier stint as a treasury official—“Scissorhands”—with record-breaking cuts of 70 billion reais from discretionary spending. But Mansueto Almeida, a public-finance expert, points out that this work was more than countered by constitutionally mandated spending increases; government expenditure as a share of output rose in 2015. On top of that, a new scrupulousness in government accounting surely not unrelated to the impeachment proceedings has seen 57 billion reais in unpaid bills from years past newly recognised by the treasury.

Nor could Mr Levy easily fill the fiscal hole by raising taxes. Taxes already consume 36% of GDP, up from a quarter in 1991. And the recession has hit tax receipts hard. On December 18th, days after Fitch, a rating agency, followed the lead of Standard & Poor’s in downgrading Brazilian debt, Mr Levy threw in the towel. His job went to Nelson Barbosa, previously the planning minister, who insists he is committed to following the same policies. But before his elevation Mr Barbosa made no secret of favouring a more gradual fiscal adjustment—for example, a primary surplus of 0.5% of GDP in 2016, against Mr Levy’s preferred 0.7% (and an original promise of 2% a year ago). The real and the São Paulo stockmarket tumbled on news of his appointment.

Analysts at Barclays, a bank, expect debt to reach 93% of GDP by 2019; among big emerging markets only Ukraine and Hungary are more indebted. The figure may still seem on the safe side compared with 197% in Greece or 246% in Japan. But those are rich countries; Brazil is not. As a proportion of its wealth Brazil’s public debt is higher than that of Japan and nearly twice that of Greece.

Unable to increase taxes, Ms Rousseff’s government may prefer something even more troubling to investors and consumers alike: inflation. Faced with the inflationary pressure that has come with the devalued real, the Central Bank has held its nerve, increasing its benchmark rate by three percentage points since October 2014 and keeping it at 14.25% since July in the face of the recession. But despite this juicy rate the real continues to depreciate.

There is a worry that the bank may be unable to raise rates further for fear of making public debt unmanageable—what is known as “fiscal dominance”. This year the treasury spent around 7% of GDP servicing public debt. What is more, raising rates may have the perverse effect of stoking inflation rather than quenching it; an increasing risk of default as borrowing costs grow is likely to see investors dumping government bonds, provoking further currency depreciation.

A handful of economists, including Monica de Bolle of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, believe that Brazil is on the verge of fiscal dominance. And once interest rates no longer have a hold on inflation, she says, it can quickly spiral out of control. Forecasts by Credit Suisse warn that prices could be rising by 17% in 2017. Three-quarters of government spending remains linked to the price level, embedding past inflation in future prices. That said, the economy as a whole is much less indexed than it was in the hyperinflationary early 1990s. That leaves the government a bit more time, thinks Marcos Lisboa of Insper, a university in São Paulo. But not much more: perhaps a year or two.

Despite this pressing economic need for speed there seems to be no political capacity for it. Members of Congress are consumed by Ms Rousseff’s impeachment. By February they must decide whether to send her case to the Senate, which would require the votes of three-fifths of the 513 deputies in the lower house. To fend off such a decision Ms Rousseff is rallying her left-wing, anti-austerity base.

Gently doesn’t always do it

These efforts are meeting with some success: in December pro-government rallies drew more people than anti-government ones for the first time all year. It looks unlikely that the impeachment will indeed move to the Senate (which would trigger a further six months of turmoil). But this hardly provides a political climate conducive to belt-tightening, let alone to the amendment of the constitution which Mr Barbosa has said is needed to deal with the ratchet effect on benefits. Fiscal adjustment is anathema to the government workers and union members who are Ms Rousseff’s core supporters.

Like the country’s economic problems, its political ones, while specific to today’s particular scandals and manoeuvring, can be traced to the transition of the 1980s. History reveals a consistent tendency towards negotiated consensus at Brazil’s political watersheds; it can be seen in the war- and regicide-free independence declared in 1822, the military coup of 1964, which was mild compared with the blood-soaked affairs in Chile and Argentina, and the transition that created the new constitution. One aspect of this often admirable trait is a resistance to purging. The mid-1980s saw a lot of institutions—the federal police, the public prosecutor’s office, the judiciary, assorted regulators—overhauled or created afresh. But many of the old regime kept their jobs in the civil service and elsewhere. The transition was thus bound to be a generational affair.



So it is now proving, with a retiring old guard being replaced by fresh blood often educated abroad. In 2013 the average judge was 45 years old, meaning he entered university in a democratic Brazil. Civil servants are getting younger and better qualified, says Gleisson Rubin, who heads the National School of Public Administration. More than a quarter now boast a postgraduate degree, up from a tenth in 2002. Sérgio Moro, the crusading 43-year-old federal judge who oversees the Petrobras investigations, and Deltan Dallagnol, the case’s 35-year-old lead prosecutor, are the most famous faces of this new generation.

Unfortunately, this rejuvenation does not extend to the institution most in need of it: Congress. Its younger faces typically have family ties to the old guard. “Party politics is a market for lemons,” says Fernando Haddad, the fresh-faced PT mayor of São Paulo and a rare exception to the dynastic rule, nodding to George Akerlof’s classic analysis of adverse selection in the market for used cars: it attracts the venal and repels the honest. Consultants who have advised consecutive Congresses agree that each one is feebler than the last.

Brazilians have noticed the decline, and are transferring their hopes accordingly. “Judges and prosecutors are becoming more legitimate representatives of the Brazilian people than politicians,” says Norman Gall of the Braudel Institute, a think-tank in São Paulo. Everyone wants a selfie with Mr Moro and, disturbingly, nearly half of Brazilians think that military intervention is justified to combat corruption, according to a recent poll. Barely one in five trusts legislators; just 29% identify with a political party.

Monthly, oily, deeply

That last fact is perhaps particularly impressive given that they have so many parties to choose from. Keen to promote pluralism the constitution’s framers set no national cut-off below which a party’s votes would not count. It is possible to get into Congress with less than 1% of the vote: in principle, it could be done with 0.02%. As a result the number of parties has grown from a dozen in 1990 to 28 today. The three biggest—the PT, the PMDB and the opposition centre-right Party of Brazilian Social Democracy (PSDB)—together account for just 182 of 513 seats in the lower house and 42 out of 81 senators.

One of the causes of the mensalão scandal was corruption that provided Lula’s government with a way to get the votes it needed from the disparate small parties. The petrolão (“big oily”, as the Petrobras affair is widely known) apparently shared a similar aim. Such ruses may have helped PT governments pass some good laws, such as an extension of the successful Bolsa Família (family fund) cash-transfer programme. But the party was not able to do all that it had said it would; potentially helpful reforms in which it was less invested fell by the wayside. Raphael Di Cunto of Pinheiro Neto, a big law firm in São Paulo, points to many antiquated statutes in need of an update, such as the Mussolini-inspired labour code (from 1943) and laws governing foreign investments (1962) and capital markets (1974).



A Congress in which dysfunction feeds corruption which feeds further dysfunction is not one likely to take the hard decisions that the economy needs. But this is the Congress Brazil has: though there will be local elections in October 2016, congressional elections, like the next presidential poll, are not due until 2018. Can Brazil’s public finances hold out that long?

Many prominent economists think they just about can. They forecast a “muddling-through” in which Ms Rousseff holds on to her job, Congress passes a few modest spending cuts and tax rises, including a financial-transactions levy, the Central Bank continues to fight inflation, the cheap real boosts exports and investors don’t panic. After three years of this, the theory goes, an electorate fed up with stagnation and sleaze will give the PSDB a clear mandate for change. Ms Rousseff narrowly defeated the party’s candidate in 2014 by deriding his calls for prudence as heartless “neoliberalism”, only to propose a similar agenda (through gritted teeth) immediately after winning. If proposed by a PSDB in power that actually believed in them, such measures might receive cross-party support—though given the PSDB’s spiteful unwillingness to support Mr Levy’s measures in 2015 this would not be without irony.

Such a scenario is possible. Figures for the third quarter of 2015 show exports picking up. Price rises could slow down as steep increases in government-controlled prices for petrol and electricity put in place in 2015 run their course. Politicians and policymakers are keenly aware that Brazilians are less tolerant of inflation than in the 1980s and 1990s, when rates of 10% would have seemed mild.

Investors are staying put, at least in aggregate. Yield-hungry asset managers are taking the place of pension and mutual funds that left in anticipation of Brazil’s inevitable demotion to junk status. The real has fallen 31% since the start of 2015 and the stockmarket is down by 12.4%; but though battered they are not knocked flat. The banking system is well capitalised and, observers agree, diligently monitored by the Central Bank. The $250 billion in foreign-denominated debt racked up by Brazilian companies during the commodity-price-fuelled binge has ballooned in local-currency terms and remains a worry. But much of it is hedged through the firms’ own dollar revenues or with swaps—though settling some of those swaps has cost the government, which sold them, some 2% of GDP this year.



Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts

The sardonic Mr Lisboa observes with uncharacteristic optimism that “at last people are talking seriously about Brazil’s structural problems”. Fiscal dominance has left arcane discussions among economic theorists and burst onto newspaper columns. Mr Barbosa is openly discussing pension reform and the constitutional change that would have to go with it. In October the PMDB, which tends to lag behind public opinion more than to lead it, published a manifestothat talked about privatising state businesses and raising the retirement age. Even the famously stubborn Ms Rousseff has begun to listen rather than to hector, says a foreign economic dignitary who met her recently.

But the fact that muddling through may be possible does not mean it is assured. It hinges on the hope that politicians come to their senses more quickly than they have done in the past (witness the lost decade begun in the 1980s). It also assumes that Brazil’s penchant for consensus will hold its people back from social unrest on the sort of scale that topples regimes in other countries. The anti-government protests of 2015 were large, drawing up to a million people in a single day. But they were middle-class affairs which took place on sporadic Sundays, causing Ms Rousseff more annoyance than grief. As wages sag and unemployment rises, though, tempers could flare. If they do there will be every chance of a facile populist response that does even deeper economic damage.

Should Ms Rousseff be booted out—through impeachment, annulment of the election or coerced resignation (none of which looks likely just now)—chaos would surely ensue. Her core supporters may be less numerous than they once were, but she has many more than Mr Collor had in 1992. They would close ranks against the “coup-mongers”.

The strength of Brazil’s institutions suggests something shy of the failed populist experiments of some South American neighbours. And the fact that voters in Argentina and Venezuela rebuffed that populism in the past few months has not escaped the notice of Brazil’s politicians. But every month of dithering and every new petrolão revelation chips away at Brazil’s prospects. The 2010s are already certain to be another lost decade; GDP per person won’t rebound for years to come.

It will be a long time before a president can match the pride with which Lula showed off his Olympic trophy. But if Brazil’s politicians get their act together, the 2020s could be cheerier. Alas, if they do not, things will get a great deal worse.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21684778-former-star-emerging-world-faces-lost-decade-irredeemable/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




Republican tax plans: Indecent disclosure

Race on campus: Of slavery and swastikas

Rating police officers: Revenge of the nerds

Election forecasting: Prediction 2016

Lexington: Pitchfork politics





Articles Sections Next

Republican tax plans

Indecent disclosure

The Republican candidates’ tax proposals are exorbitant

Jan 2nd 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition



ASK Republicans how best to reform taxes, and they will inevitably mention Ronald Reagan. In 1986 the Gipper slashed levies on earnings; the highest income-tax rate tumbled from 50% to 28%. At the same time, Reagan simplified taxes by closing loopholes and killing off exemptions. Today’s Republican presidential contenders would dearly love to repeat the trick. But they have given up a key ingredient in the recipe. The 1986 reform cost nothing, mainly because taxes on businesses went up. In stark contrast, today’s Republican tax plans are jaw-droppingly expensive.

American taxes are a mess. There are seven different rates of federal income tax, up from three after Reagan’s reform (in Canada there are four; in Britain, three). Endless exemptions and deductions cost just over 7% of GDP. These distort incentives and benefit mainly richer folk, but are hard to keep track of because their cost stays off the government’s books. Filling in tax returns takes the average non-business filer eight hours and costs $110 every year. By one recent estimate, the inconvenience costs of filing add up to 1.3% of GDP.



Business taxes are no better. At 39%, the tax on corporate profits is the highest in the OECD. In reality, businesses pay less because of a whirlwind of incentive-distorting exemptions. Want to invest in America? Issue shares to finance your project, and your marginal tax rate ends up at 38%. Load up on risky debt and the rate plummets—in fact, you will benefit from a 6% subsidy. Across industries, average tax rates range from 40% for making software to 15% for building mineshafts. The World Bank and PricewaterhouseCoopers, an accounting firm, ranks America’s tax system 53rd in the world, wedged between Jordan and Vanuatu. It takes American businesses 87 hours, on average, to pay their taxes; in France it takes just 26 hours.

Tax reform, then, is essential, and Republicans have embraced the cause. Among the presidential candidates, Jeb Bush has proposed the most detailed plan, and is cheered on by a crew of right-leaning economists. One thing keeping the plan on the shelf is that Mr Bush lags behind in the polls. But thanks to its detail—and the scrutiny poured on it as a result—it is a useful benchmark.

Mr Bush rightly wants to reduce the number of income tax bands, to three. In doing so, though, he calls for a whopping reduction in the top rate of income tax to 28%, from 39.6% today. Mr Bush would slash the corporate tax rate to 20% and all but abolish the tax incentive to borrow. Today, if a firm buys a new computer or piece of machinery, it can knock the cost off its tax bill only incrementally as the new equipment loses value; but under Mr Bush’s plan it could deduct the full cost up-front. That should encourage investment.

The plan is hugely expensive. Before accounting for its economic effects, it would cost $6.8 trillion, or 2.6% of GDP, over a decade, according to the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Centre, a think-tank. About two-thirds of the bill comes from income-tax cuts. Cuts for high-earners are costly, because the highest-earning 1%—who would see a 12% increase in after-tax income under the plan—produce almost half of income-tax revenues. By 2026 the $715 billion annual cost of the plan exceeds the projected budget for national defence.

The plan would wrench on purse-strings that are already stretched. By 2025 government health-care and pensions programmes will have nearly 60% more beneficiaries than in 2007. Mr Bush, like most Republicans, wants to increase rather than cut defence spending. And non-defence day-to-day spending has already been slashed by 22% in real terms since 2010.

Mr Bush’s plan, then, looks unachievable. Incredibly, though, it is one of the most modest in the pack. Donald Trump, who tops opinion polls, wants to cut income taxes still further; under his plan, the top rate of tax falls to 25%. Whereas Mr Bush would nearly double the standard deduction, the amount that can be earned before paying income tax Mr Trump would quadruple it. The Donald would cut business taxes more aggressively, too. Though he talks about raising taxes on hedge-fund managers by removing the “carried interest” provision, Mr Trump’s cuts to income tax are so deep that the provision barely matters. In all, reckons the Tax Policy Centre, Mr Trump’s plan is almost 40% more expensive than Mr Bush’s.

Must be funny

Where to look for realism? Marco Rubio offers more modest income-tax cuts, but would eliminate most taxes on capital gains and company dividend payments. Many economists view these taxes as inefficient. Yet capital is mostly the preserve of the well-off: only a fifth of adults who earn less than $30,000 tell pollsters they have stockmarket investments, compared with nearly nine in ten who earn more than $75,000. Citizens for Tax Justice, an advocacy group, reckons Mr Rubio’s plan would make the pockets of the top 1% of earners bulge more than Mr Bush’s would.



Teflon Trump: Donald Trump’s gravity-defying poll ratings

Ted Cruz has the boldest plan. The Texan senator promises to replace all income taxes—including payroll taxes which fund Social Security and Medicare payments—with a 10% flat tax. Business taxes would be replaced with a value-added tax of 16%. This plan is roughly as expensive as the Bush plan, before accounting for its economic effects, according to the Tax Foundation, a right-leaning think tank. But it would be still more generous to the highest earners, as value-added taxes are less progressive than income tax.

The candidates all say their plans will increase economic growth, boosting tax-revenues and dramatically bringing down costs. Mr Bush’s cheerleaders say his plan will add 0.5 percentage points to growth each year, knocking two-thirds off the so-called “static” cost. Mr Trump claims—with a straight face—that his plan is revenue-neutral.

Done right, reforming and simplifying taxes would boost growth. Yet the gargantuan cost of the plans comes from tax cuts for high earners, and the evidence that these help the economy is patchy. Crucially, whether tax cuts boost growth depends on how they are paid for. If they cause deficits to gape larger, tax cuts will weigh on growth rather than support it, by gradually pushing up interest rates.

There is better evidence that tax cuts for businesses help the economy. But that does not mean they would pay for themselves—as Mr Trump suggests—or make up for expensive giveaways elsewhere. The best evidence suggests that taxes on dividends, which Mr Rubio would abolish, have no effect at all on investment. More than most proposals, Republican tax plans are articles of faith.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21684808-republican-candidates-tax-proposals-are-exorbitant-indecent-disclosure/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Race on campus

Of slavery and swastikas

The University of Missouri’s efforts to placate protesters have created a backlash

Jan 2nd 2016 | COLUMBIA, MISSOURI | From the print edition

Where intersextionality meets microaggressive adultism

WISHING for his death “in a fiery car accident” was only one of many messages directed at Chuck Henson when he became the University of Missouri’s new interim vice-chancellor for inclusion, diversity and equity. Mr Henson does not follow social media, but his wife does. Recently she agreed to stop reading the death threats and other missives intended for her husband, and instead to help him focus on his task, which is to end the racial turmoil that has made the university the centre of a nationwide campus protest movement over race for the past three months.

“We have a unique history and we have a unique problem,” says Mr Henson, a law professor. Missouri was a slave state until 1865; its first public university was founded in 1839 by James Rollins, an owner of slaves. It first admitted black students only in 1950 (Yale’s first black student graduated in 1857, Harvard’s in 1870). The relations of African-Americans both with other students, and with the overwhelmingly white faculty, have frequently been uneasy. Anger boiled over in November, leading to the resignation of Tim Wolfe, the university’s president and chancellor, after weeks of protests by students outraged by what they saw as Mr Wolfe’s failure to deal with racism on campus.

Offensive incidents last year included a swastika smeared with faeces on the wall of a dormitory bathroom and racial epithets hurled at black students, including Payton Head, the president of the student body. Cynthia Frisby, a member of faculty, recounted in a Facebook post how, when jogging along a road, a white man in a lorry flying the Confederate flag stopped, spat at her, delivered racist abuse, gave her the finger and drove off. “I have been called the N-word too many times to count”, she wrote, including, she says, by other members of faculty. The student protests gained momentum when Jonathan Butler, a graduate student, staged a hunger strike to force Mr Wolfe to resign. Yet the turning point was the announcement by members of the football team that they would not play or practise and boycott a game against Brigham Young University (BYU) unless Mr Wolfe stepped down. The footballers’ boycott of the game would have cost the university around $1m.

Mr Wolfe was replaced as president of the university, temporarily, by Michael Middleton, a long-standing member of the law faculty and graduate of the university, who founded its Legion of Black Collegians in 1968. Mr Middleton promises to meet all the demands of “Concerned Student 1950”, the group of black students leading the protests, which include the creation of a “comprehensive racial awareness and inclusion curriculum” and an increase in black members of faculty to 10% from around 3%. Mr Middleton cautions, however, that some demands will be tricky to meet by the deadline the student group proposes, adding that he will explain why.

Mr Middleton insists that racism at the University of Missouri, nicknamed Mizzou, is no worse than at other big universities. He calls the often inadvertent “micro-aggressions” against minority students a “national problem” that is embedded in American history, and adds: “We are the first in finding effective solutions.” So far that has meant a clean-out of the university’s leadership. Seven temporary officials, in addition to Mr Middleton, are now running the university, including Mr Henson and Hank Foley, Mizzou’s new interim chancellor.

Yet while the university is making changes, the student protests have also set off a different kind of reaction. Kurt Bahr, a Republican state representative, says some of his constituents have told him that they regret attending Mizzou and do not want their children to go there, because they do not trust the new leadership of the university. One of his constituents even said that he feared for the safety of his daughter on campus thanks to the “instability” there.

Mr Bahr co-sponsored a bill in December that would strip scholarships from any athlete who “calls, incites, supports or participates in any strike”, and would require colleges and universities to fine coaching staff who encourage them. The bill has been withdrawn since because its author, Rick Brattin, another Republican state lawmaker, realised that the state could not mandate the revocation of privately funded athletic scholarships such as the football scholarships at Mizzou. But Mr Bahr insists that the proposed bill “made its point”, which is that a strike is not a good way to cope with a possible systemic problem. “Are we promoting anarchy within our university system?” he asks.

The backlash against the changes at Mizzou is likely to continue, led by self-styled defenders of the First Amendment (which protects free speech). Yet the First Amendment does not give people a free pass to go round saying hateful things, points out Mr Henson. To help students and faculty realise this, Mizzou has developed a new guide to “inclusive terminology” which ensures a healthy level of respect for all minority groups. It includes terms such as “adultism” (prejudice against the young), “minoritised” (when under-represented groups are made to feel inferior) and intersextionality (obscure). Some will see this stuff as movement in the right direction. But it is also likely to increase the ire of those who watched the protests and thought they saw a group of privileged college students complaining about how terrible their lot is.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21684819-university-missouris-efforts-placate-protesters-have-created-backlash/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Rating police officers

Revenge of the nerds

How one family of high-school students is policing the cops

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

Steve McGarrett, awaiting feedback

THE Christian siblings were doing their homework when the police arrived. Two officers entered the house, guns drawn, pursuing what was evidently a prank tip-off about a captive being held at their address. The guns stayed out even when the mistake became apparent. The officers ran the details of the children’s father—who, like them, is black—through the police system on the off-chance of turning something up.

The family was traumatised. The incident, in 2013, brought home to Ima Christian, now 18, that Americans could be vulnerable to rough policing “no matter where you live, or who you are”; her sister Asha, who is 16, says it is “not until you are face to face with an officer that you realise what the deal is.” The sisters—from Stone Mountain, just outside Atlanta—didn’t get even, exactly. Instead, with their brother Caleb (now 15), they developed an app, called Five-O, intended to help improve police behaviour and community relations. It lets citizens rate their experiences with officers, record both parties’ race and sex and the purpose of the interaction, and find aggregate scores for county forces.

Five-O (a slang term for cops) was launched in 2014, but will get a boost this spring from the €20,000 ($22,000) prize it won at an international contest for justice-related initiatives, organised by a think-tank in the Netherlands. The money will go towards marketing the tool in Baltimore and Chicago. Attracting input from broad cross-sections of such communities is one of the ways the Christians believe they can neutralise an obvious potential bias—ie, that the ratings will be skewed by the aggrieved, legitimate as those grievances may sometimes be. That composite picture, combining good and bad feedback, is, they reckon, one of the ways their product differs from other police-related apps, which concentrate on uploading video. They also want to extend its availability from Android to iPhones. The long-term plan is to include Britain, Brazil, Canada and Russia, making Five-O, as Asha puts it, “a global repository of unbiased police data”.

That is an ambitious goal for teenagers who mostly taught themselves to code. (Their parents used to work for an internet start-up and, Caleb recalls, noticed youngsters “getting paid insane amounts of money” for programming.) In 2016 they aim to launch another app through their firm, Pinetart Inc: this one, Coily, lets women rate hair-care products, and so avoid shower-stall accumulations of half-empty bottles. Studies permitting, that is. Ima is a freshman at Stanford University; Asha—who is finishing high school online, to free up time for enterprise—hopes to join her or go to Columbia. “I’m very proud of them,” says their mother Karen.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21684818-how-one-family-high-school-students-policing-cops-revenge-nerds/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Election forecasting

Prediction 2016

How Jesse Jackson inadvertently revived political betting

Jan 2nd 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



IF YOU believed the pollsters, America’s 2012 presidential election looked like a nail-biter. Most national surveys had Mitt Romney and Barack Obama tied; Gallup, the country’s oldest scientific polling outfit, had the challenger ahead, 49% to 48%. When the votes were counted, however, Mr Obama won by four percentage points. To many political pundits, as to Mr Romney, Mr Obama’s margin of victory came as a shock. Among bettors, however, it barely elicited a shrug: prediction markets, in which punters wager on the outcomes of elections, had always considered the incumbent a heavy favourite. An Irish bookmaker, Paddy Power, was so confident of his chances that it paid out £400,000 ($640,000) two days before the election to people who had bet on Mr Obama. Will this trick be repeated in 2016?

Though now a fringe asset class, prediction markets are in fact among the oldest exchanges in America. In the 1820s prominent supporters of candidates frequently offered public wagers on them as a demonstration of their conviction. Punters who could not afford to pony up cash would compensate with offers of public humiliation: one common wager made losers trundle winners around in a wheelbarrow; another required them to roll peanuts up and down streets with toothpicks. Some losers had to eat real crow.

Half a century later, these expressions of bravado had evolved into semi-formal financial markets. Trading volume began to approach that of actual shares: in 1916 $10m ($218m in today's prices) was wagered on the photo-finish race between Woodrow Wilson and Charles Hughes. The markets were wrong that year, predicting a win for Hughes. But in 11 of 12 elections between 1884 and 1940 when bettors had identified a clear favourite by mid-October they were vindicated, despite operating in an era without any reliable polling. Newspapers diligently reported presidential betting odds: according to Paul Rhode and Koleman Strumpf, the economists who unearthed the records of these markets, the press published prices five days a week in the month before an election.

The death knell for the electoral markets of yesteryear sounded in 1936, when George Gallup of the American Institute of Public Opinion stationed pollsters on street corners and asked passers-by whom they would vote for, thus obtaining a random sample. The well-known Literary Digest survey, which relied on readers mailing in postcards, had over-sampled the well-off and called the election for the Republican Alf Landon, while Gallup accurately predicted an easy victory for the incumbent, Franklin Roosevelt. Punters were not fooled by the Digest’s “poll”, and also forecast that Roosevelt would win. But the dawn of scientific polling made gambling odds look amateurish, and allowed newspapers to publish campaign updates without having to cite markets of dubious legality and (in their view) morality.

Nonetheless, the markets might have soldiered on had history not conspired against them. The industry was centred in New York, and during the second world war Fiorello La Guardia, the city’s mayor, launched a crackdown on unauthorised gambling. His raids drove political bookmakers deep underground or out of town. At the same time, competing forms of wagering began to offer alluring substitutes. In 1939 the state legalised betting on horse races, allowing punters to slake their thirst for action dozens of times a day rather than once every four years, without any risk that a bookie would fail to pay out.

By the late 1940s, what was once an eight-figure marketplace had all but vanished. Electoral betting would not make a comeback until 1988, when Jesse Jackson defied expectations to win Michigan’s Democratic presidential primary. His victory highlighted how unreliable polls could be, and led a group of professors at the University of Iowa to hunt for an alternative. Though unaware of prediction markets’ pre-war history, they reinvented the idea by setting up an “Iowa Political Stock Market”, in which students and faculty could wager modest sums on the upcoming general election. Four years later, America’s Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) authorised the Iowa Electronic Markets to take money from the public because they were at heart an academic enterprise, though the regulators capped bets at $500 to prevent speculation with meaningful sums.

For the next 20 years the IEM consistently out-performed polls in various executive, legislative, national and local elections in a dozen different countries. But the logistical difficulty of placing bets on the exchange (particularly before internet access became widespread), along with the low wagering ceiling, limited it to trivial volumes of a few hundred thousand dollars a year. It was not until 2008, after the internet had globalised both information and financial flows, that pre-war prediction markets found a worthy heir.

During the 2004 presidential campaign an Irish sports-betting site called Intrade started taking bets without the low limits of the IEM. Even though credit-card companies in America would not process deposits to the site, punters flocked to it. A whopping $230m was wagered on the 2012 election—an even greater sum in constant dollars than on the Hughes-Wilson contest of 1916. And like its predecessors, Intrade was deadly accurate. Its markets correctly predicted the results of 47 of the 50 states in the election of 2008, and 49 of 50 in 2012.

But just like the street-corner action of the 1930s, Intrade soon came under legal scrutiny. In November 2012 the CFTC ordered the site to stop offering contracts on the price of goods under the agency’s oversight, such as oil and gold. Four months later, the risks of investing in Intrade’s unregulated marketplace were laid bare when the site abruptly shut down after it dipped into its clients’ funds to transfer money to its late founder. It took months for account-holders to be made whole. The site’s untimely demise provided fresh ammunition for those who regard prediction markets as unsavoury speculation.

The collapse of Intrade did not annihilate prediction markets, though. The IEM is alive and well, and in late 2014 PredictIt, an online exchange sponsored by Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand, entered the fray with an $850 wager cap and official authorisation from the CFTC. But these operations still fall far short of realising prediction markets’ full potential. Their low betting limits prevent investors with extremely valuable information—say, a looming scandal—from cashing in on the value of their knowledge and incorporating it into the market price.

At the time of writing, PredictIt reckons that the fight for the Republican nomination is between Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, and that Hillary Clinton has a 54% chance of becoming the next president.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21684798-how-jesse-jackson-inadvertently-revived-political-betting-prediction-2016/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

Pitchfork politics

A pioneer of Trump-style populism wonders if it can succeed in today’s America

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



BEFORE Donald Trump, there was Patrick Buchanan. More than two decades before Mr Trump kicked over the Republican tea table, Mr Buchanan, a former speechwriter and White House aide to Presidents Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan, launched his own revolt against Republican grandees. He made bids for the Republican presidential nomination in 1992 and 1996, the first of which challenged a sitting president, George H.W. Bush. Like his billionaire successor, Mr Buchanan ran against free trade and called for restrictions on immigration. As early as 1991 he called for a fence on the border with Mexico (talk of a “great, great” wall would have to wait for Mr Trump).

On foreign policy, the end of the cold war turned him into a non-interventionist. Mr Buchanan—who in 1972 accompanied Nixon on his trip to Maoist China—now concluded that America should shun foreign entanglements and defend only vital national interests. In January 1991 Mr Buchanan found himself speaking in New Hampshire during the American-led operation to expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait, which he opposed. Stepping from the podium, he was given a message: America had just started bombing Baghdad. There goes my non-interventionist line, he recalls telling the watching governor of New Hampshire, Judd Gregg: it is “all over once the bombs begin to drop”. Mr Bush’s approval ratings rose to 90%. Yet by the time of the 1992 election the president was not saved by victory in the Gulf.

Timing matters—a political lesson that Mr Buchanan learned early. He was one of the first aides to describe a new voter coalition that Nixon might assemble. This would unite business bosses with doctrinaire conservatives, southern whites, socially conservative Roman Catholics and middle Americans who liked such government safety nets as pensions for the old, but despised Democrats for seeming to condone social unrest—whether race riots, campus radicals or flag-burning protesters opposed to the war in Vietnam. In a memo of 1968 Mr Buchanan spoke of a “silent majority” to be won. Nixon made the phrase his own.

Today Mr Trump calls his own supporters a “silent majority”, though his borrowing comes with a twist. In the late 1960s Nixon asked the “great silent majority” for their support. In 2015 the businessman assumes he has already sealed the deal. Printed signs handed out at his rallies declare: “The silent majority stands with Trump”. Asked about the slogan’s Nixonian overtones by the Washington Post, Mr Trump denied the connection, scoffing: “Nah. Nobody remembers that.”

Speaking in his home in northern Virginia, Mr Buchanan does not grumble about Mr Trump’s swiping of his phrase. He is too interested in a new question of political timing. As a candidate, he was less successful than as an adviser. His high point was his win in the 1996 New Hampshire primary, after a populist surge that saw him declare: “The peasants are coming with pitchforks.” A full-size silver pitchfork (a gift from campaign aides) hangs in his wood-panelled study, alongside a souvenir mug that asks: “What would Nixon Do?”

Back in the 1990s moderate Republicans agreed that Candidate Buchanan was doomed by his ferocious opposition to abortion, homosexuality and feminism: in 1992 he told his party’s national convention that America faced a “cultural war”. He also caused alarm with intemperate talk about Israel’s clout in Washington. Today, though, he argues that his timing was off when it came to three big issues: immigration, globalisation and non-interventionism. “Those issues are mature now,” says Mr Buchanan, rattling off statistics on undocumented immigrants in America (their numbers have more than tripled since 1991) and factory closures since such pacts as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was signed. At 77, Mr Buchanan writes newspaper columns and is a frequent public speaker. He reports that people “constantly” voice the same complaint to him: “This isn’t the country I grew up in.” He lists reasons why he thinks they are right: immigrants have reached even small communities, factory jobs have vanished and interventionist wars launched by George W. Bush left Americans “with ashes in our mouths”.

Mr Buchanan was called a fringe candidate, a protectionist and an isolationist in the style of the America First Committee, which argued against declaring war on Nazi Germany. Now today’s frontrunner, Mr Trump, echoes his scorn for free-trade pacts and nation-building overseas, and praises Vladimir Putin (Mr Buchanan has long admired the Russian president’s ethno-nationalism). Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, Mr Trump’s big rival on the hard right, recently said: “I believe in an “America first” foreign policy.”

The silent majority, outnumbered

Yet Mr Buchanan cannot conceal a thought that grieves him. Evidence to support his beliefs is, to him, now irrefutable. But if he was early in the 1990s, demographic and cultural shifts now make it too late to rally the conservative majorities that elected Nixon or Reagan. If given $100 to bet on the Republican nomination, Mr Buchanan would put at least $40 on Mr Trump and at least $30 on Mr Cruz, whom he compares to an earlier “down-the-line” conservative, Barry Goldwater (who lost the 1964 presidential election by a landslide). If he were Mr Trump, he would attack Hillary Clinton over free trade in rustbelt states such as Ohio, Pennsylvania and Michigan that are key to winning the White House. He would tell voters that “she and her husband” backed NAFTA and deals that “sent your jobs overseas”. No other Republican has Mr Trump’s potential to win some blue-collar Democrats, he says: “It is hard to see how Cruz, for example, takes Ohio.” For all that, he thinks the odds probably favour Mrs Clinton to win the election. Either way he sees a country “at war with itself ideologically and politically, culturally”, triggering a measure of foreign policy “paralysis”. If even half-right, it is a bleak prediction: America first nationalism, in a divided America.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21684799-pioneer-trump-style-populism-wonders-if-it-can-succeed-todays-america-pitchfork/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Human rights in El Salvador: Digging for justice

Argentina’s new president: A fast start





Articles Sections Next

Human rights in El Salvador

Digging for justice

Survivors of wartime atrocities are questioning the country’s amnesty

Jan 2nd 2016 | EL MOZOTE | From the print edition



ONE afternoon eight months ago in the mountains of eastern El Salvador, Rosario Sánchez peered into a pit where forensic experts were at work. They were unearthing human remains—two skinny leg bones, several ribs and two halves of a skull. One held up a thin chain hardened with blood and soil. Ms Sánchez gasped. “My sister loved that necklace,” she said.

Over three days in December 1981 soldiers from the Salvadorean army, who had been trained by the United States, machinegunned hundreds of unarmed men, women and children in the village of El Mozote and surrounding hamlets. It was the worst atrocity committed during the 12-year-long war between leftist guerrillas and El Salvador’s right-wing government, in which some 75,000 Salvadoreans died. No one has been punished for the massacre, and almost no one has been held to account for any other human-rights crime committed during the conflict. An amnesty law in 1993 shielded perpetrators on both sides from prosecution, and helped make a political settlement possible.

As the exhumations in La Joya, near El Mozote, show, the amnesty is being called into question. El Salvador’s Supreme Court is considering a constitutional challenge to it. The court ruled in 2000 that the amnesty does not apply to violations of “fundamental” rights, but left it to judges and prosecutors to decide which crimes are grave enough to qualify.

Some human-rights advocates argue that impunity for war crimes is one reason why El Salvador has the world’s highest murder rate, although other factors, such as the lack of economic opportunity, undoubtedly also play a role. “The same system that was incapable of investigating human-rights violations has found itself incapable of confronting post-war violence and crime,” says David Morales, El Salvador’s Human Rights Ombudsman.

The country’s post-war reconciliation was in many ways exemplary. Both sides disarmed, the army shrank and the security forces were transformed into a civilian police. After the war’s end in 1992, a UN Truth Commission spent six months investigating “serious acts of violence”. It registered 22,000 complaints, 85% of them against the armed forces, paramilitary groups and right-wing death squads. Their left-wing foe, the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN), was accused in 5% of the cases. The commission’s report blamed the army’s elite Atlacatl battalion for the murder of six Jesuit priests in 1989 and for the El Mozote massacre, among other findings.

For the leaders of post-war El Salvador, the commission’s revelations were justice enough. Five days after its report was published the government enacted the amnesty law. It is one of the few things on which both leftist and conservative politicians agree. “We chose peace over justice,” says Mauricio Vargas, a retired general who represented the army in the peace process. Without the amnesty, “the whole building comes crashing down.” Salvador Samayoa, who represented the guerrillas, warns that if the left demands trials of former military officers the right will go after ex-guerrillas, including the president, Salvador Sánchez Céren. He was a commander of the FMLN, which became a political party after the war.

Other countries in Latin America, perhaps surer that their democracies are stable, are testing whether justice in the courts will jeopardise peace. In Guatemala, a UN–backed commission to investigate corruption has strengthened the justice system. That helped make it possible for prosecutors to bring several human-rights cases, including against the former dictator, Efraín Rios Montt. Colombia, which is close to a peace agreement with leftist FARC guerrillas, whom it has been fighting for more than 50 years, will not offer a general amnesty, although just how criminals will be punished has yet to be decided.

Not even past

The United States, once a haven for criminals from Latin America’s wars, has changed its stance. It is seeking to deport José Guillermo García, a former Salvadorean defence minister, on charges that he bears responsibility for the El Mozote massacre and the murder in 1980 of three American nuns and a lay worker. A proposed $750m aid package for three Central American countries sets as one condition that governments must prosecute soldiers and police officers suspected of human-rights violations, including past war crimes.

In El Mozote daily reminders of the atrocity keep alive the demand for an accounting. One farmer, digging the foundation for a new house, recently uncovered skeletons of 15 of his relatives. He recognised his mother’s skull from the crown on a tooth. Still isolated and poor, the village trades on its tragedy: locals sell mementos of the massacre at stalls near the site and jostle to relate the story to tourists in exchange for small tips.

The demand for justice is chipping away at El Salvador’s amnesty. In 1990 relatives of the victims, helped by Tutela Legal, a human-rights group, filed a suit at the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Twenty-two years later the court ordered El Salvador’s government to investigate the massacre, punish the culprits and compensate victims’ relatives. El Salvador’s then-president, Mauricio Funes, admitted the state’s responsibility and, weeping publicly, begged forgiveness. A trickle of aid to El Mozote followed: a clinic, computers for the school and road repairs.

But the messy conduct of the exhumation shows how little official enthusiasm there is for investigation and punishment. The human-rights unit of the attorney-general’s office, which promised in 2013 to investigate El Mozote and seven other massacres, put in charge of the dig a systems engineer with no formal training in excavation. Work started in the rainy season, when floods threatened to damage DNA evidence. The villagers received no advance notice, and at first no counselling from psychologists. Instead of healing wounds, the investigation reopened them, their lawyers said.

The intervention of the government’s forensics agency, the Legal Medicine Institute, improved matters, and showed that the government’s apparent hostility to the investigation is not uniform. The agency assigned three Canadians—two anthropologists and an archaeologist—to help with the excavation. The attorney-general’s office sought to undermine the three women, claiming that they were unqualified. The director of the human-rights unit, Mario Jacobo, declined to comment on the conduct of the excavation. He recently lost responsibility for it. A judge suspended it after two weeks of digging, and said it should resume under the direction of the Legal Medicine Institute. Work is likely to restart in early 2016.

Although opinion may be shifting, many Salvadoreans are loth to unpick an amnesty that has served the country well in many ways. There is speculation that the Supreme Court will strike a compromise: uphold the amnesty law, but compel prosecutors and judges to pursue violations of fundamental rights, rather than leaving the decision to them, as its earlier ruling did. On November 23rd six members of the United States House of Representatives sent a letter to legislators in El Salvador urging them to choose a “new attorney-general focused on defeating corruption and organised crime”. This was widely interpreted as a slap at the incumbent, Luis Martínez, who hopes to be re-elected by El Salvador’s Congress.

The families of El Mozote hope that pressure to investigate and punish today’s crimes will lead to prosecutions for past atrocities. In December laboratory tables in the San Salvador headquarters of the Legal Medicine Institute were covered with the bones of Ms Sánchez’s murdered relatives. Brittle and brown, they lay among bundles of tattered clothing and stacks of rusted coins. Other tables displayed larger, lighter-coloured bones. They belonged to unidentified victims of recent gang violence. The government—and probably still most Salvadoreans—think going after today’s murderous gangs should be the priority: 95% of murders are unsolved. To the survivors of El Mozote, both groups of victims are entitled to the same justice.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21684820-survivors-wartime-atrocities-are-questioning-countrys-amnesty-digging-justice/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Argentina’s new president

A fast start

Mauricio Macri’s early decisions are bringing benefits and making waves

Jan 2nd 2016 | BUENOS AIRES | From the print edition

Nice sash, horrible inheritance

MAURICIO MACRI, who took office as Argentina’s president in December, has wasted little time in undoing the populist policies of his predecessor. On December 14th he scrapped export taxes on agricultural products such as wheat, beef and corn and reduced them on soyabeans, the biggest export. Two days later Alfonso Prat-Gay, the new finance minister, lifted currency controls, allowing the peso to float freely. A team from the new government then met the mediator in a dispute with foreign bondholders in an attempt to end Argentina’s isolation from the international credit markets.

This flurry of decisions is the first step towards normalising an economy that had been skewed by the interventionist policies of ex-president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and her late husband, Néstor Kirchner, who governed before her. They carry an immediate cost, which Mr Macri will seek to pin on the Kirchners. Some of the new president’s other early initiatives are proving more controversial.

The economic reforms seem to be working. Farmers who had hoarded grain in the hope that the tariffs would be lifted are now selling, replenishing foreign-exchange reserves that had been drained to defend the artificially strong peso. The newly freed currency fell by more than 30%, a further boost to exporters. It has stabilised at around 13 pesos to the dollar. “Substantive” talks with holdout bondholders starting in early January could lead to a return to credit markets in 2016.

But the devaluation has pushed up the inflation rate, already more than 25% when Mr Macri took office. To rein it back, on December 15th the central bank raised interest rates on short-term fixed deposits by eight percentage points to 38%. The government hopes to persuade business and trade-union leaders to keep tight control of prices and wages. But that may prove difficult: the unions are fragmented and little disposed to help Mr Macri, a centre-right politician; businesses may balk at holding down prices. Barclays, a bank, expects the economy to contract by 1.1% in 2016. But increased foreign investment should lead to renewed growth of 3.5% in 2017.

Mr Macri’s attempts to bring fresh talent into institutions dominated by Ms Fernández’s kirchneristas have run into resistance, from both foes and allies. On December 14th, with the Senate in recess, Mr Macri temporarily appointed by decree two Supreme Court judges. He then booted out the chief of the media regulator, Martín Sabbatella.

In both cases his motives were worthy. He wants independent jurists in the courts. Mr Sabbatella had clashed with Grupo Clarín, a big media group. Mr Macri thinks his removal will strengthen press freedom. But critics say he misused his authority. On the judges, at least, he has relented. He will now wait for the Senate’s approval.

Touring northern Argentina, where 20,000 people have been displaced from their homes by floods, Mr Macri blamed the former president, saying she had failed to invest in flood defences (see article). For now, Argentines are likely to believe their new president. However, if the economic slowdown is prolonged, the honeymoon will not be.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21684823-mauricio-macris-early-decisions-are-bringing-benefits-and-making-waves-fast-start/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Japan, South Korea and their history wars: Saying sorry for sex slavery

Family planning in Vietnam: Running deer

Thailand’s southern insurgency: No end in sight

Simplifying Indian taxes: One country, but no single market





Articles Sections Next

Japan, South Korea and their history wars

Saying sorry for sex slavery

A surprise deal over forced prostitution during the war may soothe troubled relations between two democratic neighbours

Jan 2nd 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



THE bronze statue of a teenage “comfort woman” in Seoul, South Korea’s capital, is intended as a daily rebuke to the Japanese embassy opposite. The figure represents one of many thousands of Korean women who were forced to serve as prostitutes in wartime military brothels catering to imperial Japanese soldiers. Citizens’ groups paid for the figure to be erected in 2011 when relations between Japan and South Korea were at a nadir. Well-wishers bring her flowers, shoes and, in stormy weather, even a hat and raincoat. Yet now the statue is meant to move elsewhere as part of a landmark agreement struck between the two countries on December 28th to try to settle their dispute over comfort women once and for all—and transform dangerously strained relations.

Of former sex slaves who have come forward in South Korea, only 46 survive. Under the deal, South Korea will set up a fund for them into which the Japanese government will pay $8.3m for their medical and nursing care. The Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has expressed “sincere apologies and remorse” for their suffering, which was appalling. In all, there were tens of thousands of comfort women. Many were raped dozens of times a day, beaten and infected with venereal diseases.

It is a big change for Mr Abe, who has in the past questioned whether the comfort women were coerced at all. But he hopes to have found what the two countries’ foreign ministers called a “final and irrevocable” resolution to an issue that has poisoned the relationship for years. South Korea’s president, Park Geun-hye, hailed the deal—hastened by the two leaders’ first bilateral meeting in November—as a key to improved relations.

The administration of Barack Obama is cock-a-hoop that its two closest Asian allies are making up. It had long pressed South Korea to do so. Better relations between the two should help America’s strategy to balance China’s rise.

But some South Korean policymakers had also grown uneasy that relations with Japan were at a dead end and—though they would not say it out loud—that Ms Park sometimes seemed to hew too closely to China. Meanwhile, a stronger trilateral relationship with Japan and America would help in dealing with dangerous North Korea. It has taken time for Ms Park to see all this, and her family history helps explain why. Her late father, Park Chung-hee, was a star officer in the Japanese imperial army, and later the South Korean dictator who normalised relations with Japan. These were liabilities for the cautious Ms Park as anti-Japanese hysteria grew.

A question now is whether a deal will hold. Some of Japan’s loony ultranationalists will feel betrayed by Mr Abe. But he is too politically dominant at home to be worried by that. Besides, the government can argue that saying sorry does not imply legal responsibility, which was settled in Japan’s normalisation treaty with South Korea in 1965. “We didn’t give an inch,” says a government adviser. Indeed, one observer critical of Japan’s attitudes towards history, Tessa Morris-Suzuki of the Australian National University, says that the agreement rows back from the landmark Kono statement of 1993, Japan’s first official acknowledgment of wartime coercion. For it refers only to the imperial army’s “involvement” in the recruitment of comfort women, while excluding references to the use of deception or force.

The agreement is more likely to face problems in South Korea. Groups representing the survivors say that the women were not consulted, and at least one of them has already railed against it as a betrayal. South Korean activists will oppose moving the statue, something Japan cares deeply about. Calls may grow for Mr Abe to come and make a personal apology to survivors, rather than through Ms Park. Whether he would swallow his pride to do so is unclear. Chung-in Moon of Yonsei University in Seoul says it is a fragile deal born of diplomatic necessity.

Make it work

Yet both sides have good reason to try to make it stick, for the bilateral relationship could quickly improve, on military matters as well as others. For instance, an agreement to share military intelligence that was scuppered in 2012 could be revived. The benefits could also show in trade diplomacy, with Japan and America working together to bring South Korea into the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a free-trade grouping recently agreed among a dozen countries. With luck, the idea of two democracies in a dangerous corner of the world not talking to each other will soon look too absurd to go back to.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21684758-surprise-deal-over-forced-prostitution-during-war-may-soothe-troubled-relations-between-two/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Family planning in Vietnam

Running deer

A draft population law looks ill-considered and discriminatory

Jan 2nd 2016 | HANOI | From the print edition

Voiding the topic ain’t gonna stop it

BRIGHTLY coloured plastic flowers greet patients at the reception desk of Nguyen To Hao’s abortion clinic. Yet the mood in her waiting room is grim. Ms Hao, an obstetrician and gynaecologist, says that many of her patients are teenagers who know shockingly little about sex or its consequences. Some young women with late-term pregnancies are sent to a nearby hospital for abortions; others carry their pregnancies to term and leave their newborn babies in the care of Buddhist monks.

Unwanted pregnancies could be avoided if only Vietnam had better sex education in secondary schools. A Vietnamese adage claims that avoiding discussions of sex is the surest way to “prevent the deer from running”. Yet the deer are “already running”, Dr Hao insists, and the government is failing to guide them.

Vietnam’s abortion rate is not known for certain, but is thought to be among the world’s highest. According to researchers at the Central Obstetrics Hospital in Hanoi, the capital, two-fifths of all pregnancies in Vietnam end in abortion—double the government’s tally.

Ignorance about sex and contraception is one glaring factor. Some women who have abortions never meant to get pregnant. Others desperately wanted a boy, since male children keep the family bloodline going and are traditionally expected to look after their elderly parents. Sex-selective abortions have been illegal since 2003, but the ban is hard to enforce. Ultrasounds are widely available. Nguyen Thi Hien, a mother of two in Hanoi, says that for $75 doctors at the capital’s private clinics are happy to tell couples the sex of their fetus.

So for every 100 girls, 111 boys are born in Vietnam, according to the UN Population Fund—a sex ratio at birth nearly as lopsided as neighbouring China’s. Vietnam’s Communist Party worries that this sex imbalance will leave a generation of men struggling to find a mate. As in other societies with lots of frustrated single men, that may mean more trafficking and prostitution, more rape and a greater risk of political instability.

Vietnam’s reproductive and demographic policies are in flux. China’s recent decision to relax its one-child policy may prompt Vietnam to reconsider its own (more loosely enforced) two-child policy, says a former official from Vietnam’s health ministry. The ministry is now soliciting public comments for a revision of that law, and the National Assembly may take it up this spring.

It is not a moment too soon. A whopping two-thirds of the country’s 90m people are of working age. That gives Vietnam a chance to boom economically over the next three decades. But the “demographic dividend” may then stop abruptly. Fertility rates in some Vietnamese cities have fallen to below the population replacement rate, a trend that could eventually lead to a shortage of workers, as Japan and other rich countries have learnt to their cost. The difference is that Vietnam risks growing old before it grows rich.

The new population law, in its current wording, would not help. It proposes to leave the two-child policy in place and ban abortion after 12 weeks, down from the current limit of 22 weeks, except in cases of rape. That may send even more pregnant Vietnamese into shadowy abortion clinics. In September some 17 public-health professionals complained about the proposed law in a letter to the health minister. Such pressure may prompt the government to extend the proposed 12-week limit.

However, the population-control measures being mulled by the ministry contain another troubling feature: a pre-natal focus on “population quality”. That sounds harmless enough, but the underlying idea, according to a foreign health-policy expert in Hanoi, is that health officials could encourage mothers to abort fetuses showing signs of disability.

Some in the ministry have also proposed lifting the two-child policy in cities while continuing to enforce it in the countryside—ie, encouraging the better-educated and better-off to have more children while denying the same right to poor folk, including ethnic minorities, who view their children and grandchildren as their only social safety net. That would allow the bureaucrats in charge of the two-child policy to keep their jobs. But the idea is regressive, unfair and needs to be junked.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21684813-draft-population-law-looks-ill-considered-and-discriminatory-running-deer/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Thailand’s southern insurgency

No end in sight

A southern village tries to remain united as divisions elsewhere grow

Jan 2nd 2016 | TOH CHUD | From the print edition

He’s backed by a fat budget

SITTING on the floor with neighbours, Sakariya uses a mobile phone to flick through photos of his son. In one, Kholid stands dressed in his school uniform. In another he sits hunched over his university work. In a third he is dead—lying cold on a mortuary slab. The picture was taken in March, only hours after soldiers surrounded a group of men at a construction site in Toh Chud, their home in Thailand’s restive south. Seven bullet holes perforate his chest.

Kholid was one of four to die that day—victims of a botched operation seeking to collar murderous separatists who for years have dreamed of resurrecting an independent sultanate in Thailand’s southern borderlands. Nearly two dozen villagers were detained and interrogated but later released. The men who were shot may have tried to run, perhaps for fear of being found with soft drugs on them. A fact-finding panel says the killings were an error. Compensation is promised. But what the families want is justice, says Mohammad, another parent whose son is among the dead.

Toh Chud up in the hills had mostly managed to escape the nightmares suffered by so many communities in Thailand’s southernmost provinces. Of 2m-odd people in the region, over four-fifths are ethnic-Malay Muslims. Hotheads among them have long agitated against the Thai government in Bangkok and its policies of assimilation—denying the region autonomy, for instance, and even recognition of the local Malay language. In 2004 secretive insurgent groups began a campaign of exceptionally violent attacks on security forces as well as on their own Buddhist neighbours.



Since then about 6,500 people have died in this lush coastal strip, most of them civilians. Terrorists have bombed shops and restaurants and murdered scores of schoolteachers, who are seen as agents of the state; victims’ bodies are sometimes beheaded or set alight. Moderate ethnic-Malays considered to be collaborators are also targets. On December 13th an ethnic-Malay Thai soldier and his father were blown up in a graveyard, where they had gone to bury his mother.

State violence has done much to boost the body count. The apparent legal immunity enjoyed by trigger-happy soldiers and pro-government vigilantes continues to radicalise new generations of combatants. Kholid’s family say his killers placed an assault rifle next to his body to make him look like an insurgent.

Over the past decade seven Thai governments, swept in and out of power by broader political problems, have grasped for a resolution. Officials say that regional autonomy of the type that has soothed Islamist insurgencies in Indonesia and the Philippines is off the table. But so are smaller concessions, such as formal recognition of the region’s odd Malay language. Some argue that the fat budget the security forces get to prosecute the conflict gives them little incentive to end it. Three checkpoints clog the road out of Pattani, a seaside town, each manned by a different force.

Some energy has gone into boosting the deep south’s economy, which depends greatly on its rubber trees. Though it remains far poorer than Bangkok, the region is not as hard-up as some other far-flung parts of Thailand. But locals tend to compare their fortunes with those of ethnic kin across the border in Malaysia, where laws grant the Malay majority a host of advantages over ethnic-Chinese and Indian minorities. Christopher Joll, an academic, says the region is like “meat in a sandwich”, squeezed by inflexible nationalisms from either side.

Thailand’s ruling junta, which had said it would try to fix the conflict by the end of 2015, trumpets progress. Lured by the promise of fresh peace talks, a gaggle of once-shadowy separatist groups has formed a common political wing. The violence has ebbed markedly in recent months. But Don Pathan, a local security analyst, speculates that militants may be swapping frequent small assaults for better planned and more lethal ones. As for dialogue, hardliners within BRN, the most powerful rebel group, say they will play no part in the junta’s proposed talks.

Peace-builders on the ground complain that it is getting harder to discuss unpopular solutions. The army has long refused to countenance international mediation, one of the separatists’ principal demands, for fear of legitimising separatist claims. And it is hardly likely to consider devolving powers when it is busily recentralising the state, in part to neuter the government’s opponents in other provinces and in part to keep a lid on the dissent which may follow a looming royal succession.

Matt Wheeler of the International Crisis Group, a research outfit, thinks the generals are simply “kicking the can down the road”. Yet that carries two risks. Although the insurgents have largely rejected international jihadism, some people fret that Islamic State’s flashy propaganda may yet find an audience among the region’s unhappy young. Lately someone in cyberspace has been adding Thai subtitles to the jihadists’ video-nasties.



In graphics: Explaining Thailand’s volatile politics

A deeper worry is that the bubbling southern war may fuel Buddhist chauvinism. Perhaps a tenth of Thais are Muslim, most of them living well-integrated lives far from the conflict zone. On a recent public holiday girls in black headscarves cycled cheerfully around the Haroon mosque, one of Bangkok’s oldest, which was festooned with royal flags. Yet Thailand’s Muslims are gradually growing more conservative under the influence of Middle Eastern doctrines, which unnerves their Buddhist compatriots. And some people think that Buddhist authorities are growing more strident as the influence of Thailand’s royal establishment, which has traditionally checked them, begins to wane. In October a senior Buddhist monk said that Thais should set fire to a mosque every time southern “bandits” kill a monk.

The locals gathered at the house in Toh Chud worry that outsiders are seeking to sow division. Unlike nearby ghettos, their village of 300 households includes 30 Buddhist families, and the tragedy in March has tightened their village bonds. On the day of the raid local Buddhists helped to conceal one young man who had escaped the soldiers’ cordon.

As lunch approaches, Somkhuan, a Buddhist who once served as village headman, joins the group for a smoke. When his daughter got married he threw two parties, his neighbours recall enthusiastically, one of them halal. Such good relations are not a big deal, Somkhuan says: it has always been this way. But what if Toh Chud started to become the exception?



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21684829-southern-village-tries-remain-united-divisions-elsewhere-grow-no-end-sight/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Simplifying Indian taxes

One country, but no single market

India’s excitable politics is blocking the best chance of promoting growth

Jan 2nd 2016 | DELHI | From the print edition



NARENDRA MODI likes to make a splash abroad. On December 25th he turned up in Pakistan, the first visit by an Indian prime minister in more than a decade, for an impromptu summit with his counterpart, Nawaz Sharif. At home, though, Mr Modi appears less impressive. Despite his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)’s thumping general-election victory in 2014, his promises of business-friendly reforms are stuck.

The passage of an all-embracing value-added tax, known as the goods and services tax (GST), has become the litmus test of his liberalising credentials. It is the one reform that both the BJP and the opposition Congress party ostensibly agree on. Raising funds for both the federal government at the centre and the states, it is meant to replace a monstrous excrescence of taxes, duties, surcharges and cesses levied by the centre, the states and local authorities—a system that fragments the economy and gives huge scope for corruption by officials and politicians. Replacing most taxes with a GST would, for the first time, create a single market in India—of 1.3 billion people.

The latest and perhaps most promising attempt to pass the necessary constitutional amendment failed with the closing of the winter session of parliament in December. Mr Modi will try again in the budget session, which opens in February. But if he is to succeed, he will have to overcome India’s cynical politics.

The economy grew at a pleasing annualised rate of 7.4% from July to September—faster than China’s. Yet many economists cast doubt on the official figures, and Mr Modi’s attempt to boost manufacturing is not making much progress. Indeed, the best chance of turning his slogan of “Make in India” into reality is through a single market—“Make in India by Making One India”, as a recent government report put it.

The existing system, senior officials say, taxes production more than consumption and, in effect, subsidises importers at the expense of domestic producers. Perversely, trade between states is taxed, through a central sales tax of 2%. Some states also impose duties on products entering from elsewhere in India. Lorries are held up at internal checkpoints (see picture).

An executive from a prominent Indian firm explains that, because trade between one state and another is subject to the central sales tax while the transfers of inventory are not, his company has set up warehouses in every state to avoid the tax. And because duties paid on inputs often cannot be claimed back, there is a “cascade” of taxes levied upon previous ones. Among other things, it discourages investment in machinery. “The entire ecosystem”, he says, “works to optimise tax, not productivity.”

One study suggests that a “flawless” GST—with a single rate for all goods and services, and minimal exemptions—could boost Indian growth by anything between 0.9 and 1.7 percentage points a year. Another benefit would be to create a paper trail and an incentive for firms to declare transactions in order to claim tax credits, so reducing overall tax evasion.

Attempts to streamline indirect taxes date back to liberalisations in the 1990s, yet moves towards forms of value-added taxes have been partial at best. A version of a more encompassing GST bill was passed by the lower house in May. Unwisely, it postponed imposing the tax on oil products (a vital input) till an unspecified future date. It exempted alcohol entirely. That these two categories currently account for a large share of states’ revenues (and of illicit party funding) is no coincidence. The bill also still stipulates a temporary central sales tax, of 1%, on interstate trade.

Even this watered-down law has been stuck in Parliament’s upper house, where the BJP lacks a majority. When Congress was in office, its own attempt to introduce a GST was blocked by the BJP. Now it acts as the spoiler. Congress rightly objects to the central sales tax. But its demand that the constitution should enshrine a maximum rate for the GST of 18% makes little sense. (A third demand is for a different mechanism to resolve disputes over the working of the tax.)

For more than a year Mr Modi haughtily ignored the opposition. He no doubt hoped that the momentum from his general-election victory would carry him to wins in subsequent state elections, automatically sending delegates to the upper house and giving him a majority there, too. But lately the BJP has been defeated in key places, most recently in Bihar, the third-most-populous state.

So Mr Modi has become a bit humbler. He belatedly invited Sonia Gandhi, president of Congress, and Manmohan Singh, his predecessor as prime minister, to tea in the hope of finding a deal on a GST. A committee led by the finance ministry’s chief economic adviser, Arvind Subramanian, offered some concessions: scrapping the central sales tax and setting two bands for the GST (a standard rate of 17-18% and a lower 12% rate for certain sensitive goods) which are within Congress’s declared ceiling. The committee also proposed that alcohol as well as property transactions should be subject to the GST; in return, states could levy “sin taxes” on things like alcohol and tobacco of up to 40%.

Taxing times

The committee’s report appeared to bring a much-improved GST bill within reach. But Congress took to disrupting the upper house. The cause of its rowdy outrage at first was the government’s “intolerance” of minorities (especially Muslims); then a minister’s allegedly derogatory remarks about low-caste dalits; then the BJP’s supposed “vendetta” in a court wrangle involving Mrs Gandhi, her son Rahul, and the allegedly corrupt disposal of a failed party newspaper; and lastly the party’s demand that the finance minister, Arun Jaitley, should step down over claims of corruption in cricket.

Congress might have claimed victory in forcing Mr Modi to see sense over the GST, even as it challenged his excesses. Instead it chose obstructionism. If he is to secure any economic legacy, Mr Modi may now have to spend more time on the art of buttering up opponents at home rather than fellow leaders abroad.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21684824-indias-excitable-politics-blocking-best-chance-promoting-growth-one-country-no-single/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




Social media: Weibo warriors

Economic ideology: Reagan’s Chinese echo





Articles Sections Next

Social media

Weibo warriors

The Communist Party’s battle with social media is a closely fought one

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



ON DECEMBER 25th, some three years after taking over as China’s leader, Xi Jinping posted his first tweet. For a man clearly rattled by the rapid spread of social media, and grimly determined to tame them, the venue was fitting. Uniformed military officials stood around as he typed his message into a computer in the office of an army-run newspaper (see picture). His new-year greeting was not to China’s more than 660m internet users, but to the armed forces—most of whose members are banned from tweeting.

It was clearly in part to intimidate feistier members of the country’s online community that the authorities arrested one of the country’s most prominent civil-rights activists, Pu Zhiqiang, in 2014 and eventually put him on trial on December 14th. On the basis of seven messages posted on Weibo, China’s heavily censored version of Twitter, Mr Pu was charged with “picking quarrels and stirring up trouble” as well as “inciting ethnic hatred”. The court handed down a three-year suspended prison sentence, which means that Mr Pu will not be allowed to continue his widely acclaimed work as a lawyer (less than three years ago, he was the subject of a laudatory cover story in a state-controlled magazine). “It was not the worst outcome, but it set the most odious of precedents,” said a Weibo user in Beijing in a message to his nearly 57,000 online followers.

Mr Xi is the first Chinese leader to come to power amid the rapid growth of a middle class whose members are equipped with a powerful means of airing dissent and linking up with like-minded malcontents. He inherited an army of internet censors, but despite his efforts to give them more legal muscle (the country’s first counter-terrorism law, passed on December 27th, includes restrictions on the reporting of terrorist incidents), Mr Xi is still struggling. Support for Mr Pu both online and off has shown the scale of the challenge he faces. Some had feared that Mr Pu would be jailed for years. It is possible, in the face of huge support for the activist and a lack of strong evidence, that officials blinked.

Napping net nannies

Social-media messages relating to Mr Pu were quickly purged from the internet. Yet it is likely that some were seen by many people before disappearing. Some sensitive postings were retweeted by users with large followings before they were eventually deleted, suggesting that censors occasionally failed to keep up. “If you can be found guilty on the basis of a few Weibo postings, then every Weibo user is guilty, everyone should be rounded up,” wrote a Beijing-based journalist to his more than 220,000 followers. “I don’t understand the law, but I do know that [handling Mr Pu this way] was absolutely against the spirit of rule by law,” said Zhang Ming, a politics professor in Beijing, to his following of nearly 790,000 people.

Mr Pu’s prosecutors also provided evidence of the censors’ weaknesses. They said one of his allegedly criminal messages, which suggested that a terrorist attack in 2014 may have reflected failings in the government’s policies in the western region of Xinjiang, had garnered 1,930 retweets—remarkable given Mr Pu’s well-known propensity to criticise officialdom.

Outside the court, dozens of Mr Pu’s supporters defied a heavy police presence, which included the deployment of thuggish men in plain clothes (oddly wearing smiley badges during the trial). Several protesters were dragged away, some after chanting “Pu Zhiqiang is innocent”.

Internet users showed similar disdain for the censors on the anniversary on December 26th of the birth of Mao Zedong (“He wreaked greater destruction on human civilisation than any other villain,” one businessman told his more than 106,000 followers). They piped up, too, after an avalanche of construction waste on December 20th in the southern city of Shenzhen that killed at least seven people and left more than 70 others missing. One Weibo user with nearly 75,000 followers lamented how effective a modern city like Shenzhen was at downplaying such news. “What’s frightening is that this is the way China as a whole will be,” he said.

Mr Xi need not worry about his own social-media pulling power. By the time The Economist went to press, his first post on Weibo—sent through the account of an unnamed journalist at the newspaper he visited—had been retweeted more than 380,000 times and had garnered more than 50,000 comments. Most of these are fawning—of those still visible, at least.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21684793-communist-partys-battle-social-media-closely-fought-one-weibo-warriors/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Economic ideology

Reagan’s Chinese echo

The mystery of Xi Jinping’s supply-side strategy

Jan 2nd 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition



RONALD REAGAN, a sworn enemy of communism, and Xi Jinping, a doughty defender of Communist rule in China, ought to have little in common. Lately, though, Mr Xi has seemed to channel the late American president. He has been speaking openly for the first time of a need for “supply-side reforms”—a term echoing one made popular during Reagan’s presidency in the 1980s. It is now China’s hottest economic catchphrase (even featuring in a state-approved rap song, released on December 26th: “Reform the supply side and upgrade the economy,” goes one catchy line).

Reagan’s supply-side strategy was notable, at least at the outset, for its controversial focus on cutting taxes as a way of encouraging companies to produce and invest more. In Xiconomics, the thrust of supply-side policy is less clear, despite the term’s prominence at recent economic-planning meetings and its dissection in numerous articles published by state media. Investors, hoping the phrase might herald a renewed effort by the leadership to boost the economy, are eager for detail.

Mr Xi’s first mentions of the supply side, or gongjice, in two separate speeches in November, were not entirely a surprise. For a couple of years think-tanks affiliated with government ministries had been promoting the concept (helped by a new institute called the China Academy of New Supply-Side Economics). Their hope is that such reforms will involve deep structural changes aimed at putting the economy on a sounder footing, rather than yet more stimulus. Since Mr Xi gave the term his public blessing, officials have been scrambling to fall in line with supply-side doctrine, designing policies that seem to fit it or, just as energetically, working to squeeze existing ones into its rubric.

Mr Xi’s aim may be to reinvigorate reforms that were endorsed by the Communist Party’s 370-member Central Committee in 2013, a year after he took over as China’s leader. They called for a “decisive” role to be given to market forces, with the state and private sectors placed on an equal footing. But Mr Xi lacked a catchy phrase to sum up his economic vision. The one he most commonly used was simply that the economy had entered a “new normal” of slower, more mature, growth. That phrase had its detractors, for it seemed to imply passive acceptance of a more sluggish future. “Supply-side reform” is being made to sound like a call to action. Xinhua, a state news agency, neatly tied the two phrases together: “supply-side structural reform is the new growth driver under the new normal.”

But what does it mean? Those who first pushed supply-side reform onto China’s political agenda want a clean break with the credit-driven past. Jia Kang, an outspoken researcher in the finance ministry who co-founded the new supply-side academy, defines the term in opposition to the short-term demand management that has often characterised China’s economic policy—the boosting of consumption and investment with the help of cheap money and dollops of government spending.

The result of the old approach has been a steep rise in debt (about 250% of GDP and counting) and declining returns on investment. Supply-siders worry that it is creating a growing risk of stagnation, or even a full-blown economic crisis. Mr Jia says the government should focus instead on simplifying regulations to make labour, land and capital more productive. Making it easier for private companies to invest in sectors currently reserved for bloated state-run corporations would be a good place to start, some of his colleagues argue.

There are plenty of differences between China’s supply-siders and those who shaped Mr Reagan’s programme, not least in their diagnosis of their respective economies’ ills. The Americans thought that production bottlenecks were fuelling inflation and stifling growth. Their Chinese counterparts worry about the opposite: excessive production causing deflation and unsustainably rapid growth. Still, the language used in China can sound just as radical. “We can no longer delay the clean-up of zombie corporations,” Chen Changsheng of the Development Research Centre, a government think-tank, wrote recently. “Taking painkillers and performing blood transfusions is not enough. We need the determination to carry out surgery.”

There may be another similarity as well: a revolution that falls short of its hype. Reagan had to work with a Congress controlled by his political opponents, and the policies he enacted were more moderate and muddled than supply-side purists had hoped. Mr Xi faces no such democratic checks, but China’s ruling party is split between rival interest groups, and economic policy is often implemented in fits and starts as party leaders try to reconcile their competing demands.

Supply us with a slogan

Mr Xi’s adoption of the supply-side mantra marks the start of protracted tiptoeing. Over the past two months, party propagandists have asked economists at top universities and research institutions to expound on their views of what supply-side reforms should entail, according to insiders. It is a slogan in search of content.

In the recent proliferation of articles and speeches about supply-side reforms, there are clearly differences over what the emphasis should be. The National Development and Reform Commission, a powerful planning agency, argues that China needs to become more innovative and efficient in making the kinds of things its consumers want to buy. But its version of “supply-side reform” would look more like stimulus than surgery. Tax cuts since 2014 on purchases of electric cars offer a taste of what may lie ahead; sales of these vehicles have surged nearly fourfold this year.

Some fret that the supply-side talk is a dangerous distraction. As Yao Yang of Peking University puts it, the economy’s main ailment now is a lack of demand, not a problem with supply. The cure for that, he believes, is a short-term burst of monetary easing, the very thing that ardent supply-siders have been hoping to banish.

For all the recent debate, early signs are that the supply-side shift may not amount to a serious change of course. Measures proposed by the government in late December include lower corporate borrowing costs, an easing of entry barriers in underdeveloped sectors such as health care and a reduction of excess capacity in sectors such as property. It just so happens that all these policies have already been in place for months or even years. If nothing else, Mr Xi’s supply-side reforms will prove that China is among the world’s most accomplished suppliers of slogans.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21684804-mystery-xi-jinpings-supply-side-strategy-reagans-chinese-echo/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Iraq: Reclaiming the ruins from Islamic State

Christians in the Middle East: And then there were none

Enforcing morality: No sex please, we’re Middle Eastern

Ethiopia: What if they were really set free?





Articles Sections Next

Iraq

Reclaiming the ruins from Islamic State

By retaking Ramadi, Iraq’s security forces have won a morale-boosting victory

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



IT HAS been a long time in coming. But on December 27th Iraq’s security forces announced they had recaptured the city of Ramadi from Islamic State (IS), with only pockets of resistance remaining. This followed a week of heavy fighting by the Iraqi army, local police and Sunni tribal fighters, all backed by American air strikes.

The expulsion of jihadists from the capital of Anbar, a mainly Sunni province, is a morale-boosting victory for the beleaguered government of Haider al-Abadi in Baghdad. It will go some way towards expunging the memory of the humiliating flight of the army from the city seven months ago, when a numerically inferior IS force launched a stunning assault, spearheaded by at least 30 vehicular suicide-bombs, some of them armoured bulldozers packing enough explosive to demolish entire streets. Outflanked and outgunned, even the army’s Golden Division, a highly regarded American-trained special-forces unit, succumbed to panic.

The carefully orchestrated campaign to recover Ramadi, which saw much closer co-ordination between troops on the ground and coalition air power than in the past, is an indication of how other battles to expel IS from Iraqi cities may be conducted. Air strikes are claimed to have killed at least 350 IS fighters in the days before the ground offensive began in earnest.

While it is true that Iraqi forces some 10,000 strong were needed to defeat no more than 1,000 IS fighters, the difficulties should not be underestimated. IS had time to construct a multilayered defence based on booby traps and a network of tunnels that allowed shooters and suicide-bombers to move around the town unseen by surveillance drones. The Iraqi army had to spend months encircling the city and slowly cutting IS off from outside help. This allowed Iraqi units to move cautiously into the ruined city, street by street.

Significantly, Iranian-backed Shia militias, who have often been in the vanguard of the fight against IS during the past 18 months, were largely excluded from the battle. This was at the insistence of the Americans, who want to encourage a Sunni uprising against IS, like the one they fomented against its predecessor, al-Qaeda in Iraq, in 2006. But the results have been patchy, because the promised supply of American weapons to Anbari Sunni tribes has been blocked by the predominantly Shia government in Baghdad.

Next stop, Fallujah

Given the deep sectarian divisions, limiting the role of the Shia “Popular Mobilisation Forces” in Anbar remains a priority for the Americans. Most are backed and financed by Iran—and Mr Abadi has little influence over such groups.

If the government is to build on its success in Ramadi, it must show displaced Sunni inhabitants that it can both hold the city and start rebuilding it. That means providing material support for the Sunni tribes and local police to garrison Ramadi, while freeing up the overstretched Iraqi army to take on IS elsewhere in Anbar. The jihadists still control not only Fallujah, but also Ana, Rawa, Hit and al-Qaim, towns which between them have (or had) a population of over 700,000.

The Iraqi army will have little choice but to work with the Shia militias in the continuing attempt to recapture Fallujah, which has seen only intermittent progress in the past year. The tactics used in Ramadi—encirclement and air strikes—are being applied to the city, which is now more or less completely cut off. But Fallujah, which was al-Qaeda in Iraq’s first stronghold and the scene of bitter fighting with American troops in 2004, will be much harder to crack.

Mr Abadi promised on December 28th that IS will be driven from his country by the end of 2016. “We are coming to liberate Mosul, which will be the fatal blow to [IS],” he said. A concerted attempt to retake Iraq’s second city (seized by IS 18 months ago) does now appear more likely, although it will have to wait until Fallujah is restored to government control and the Iraqi army can field more effective units to join with Kurdish Peshmerga fighters.

Estimates differ as to how many IS combatants there are in Mosul. IS says it has 30,000. Iraqi government sources put the number at a more modest 1,500. But IS has had a long time to dig itself in to the northern city, and at least some of the people there are said to prefer the so-called caliphate, for its all brutality, to rule from Baghdad. Mosul is a huge source of funding for IS, because it has so many people for the jihadists to tax. If it should fall, IS’s pretensions to being a state will fall with it. But there is still quite a way to go.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21684689-retaking-ramadi-iraqs-security-forces-have-won-morale-boosting/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Christians in the Middle East

And then there were none

Fed up and fearful, Christians are leaving the Middle East

Jan 2nd 2016 | BEIRUT, BETHLEHEM AND CAIRO | From the print edition

Cryin’ Christmas tears

FAR from spreading cheer this holiday season, Pope Francis has been in a Grinch-like mood. “There will be lights, parties, Christmas trees and Nativity scenes,” he said in late November. “It’s all a charade.” As the Vatican unveiled its own giant spruce, he sounded downright depressed: “We should ask for the grace to weep for this world, which does not recognise the path to peace.”

It is easy to see why the pope is so downhearted. Look no further than Bethlehem, where young Palestinians throw stones at Israeli soldiers manning the wall separating the West Bank from Israel. From afar, the Israeli tear gas looks like the smoke from frankincense, of the sort that pilgrims burn when visiting the Church of the Nativity. But there were few pilgrims this Christmas—they were too scared.



Most victims of war and terrorism in the Middle East are Muslims, since they are by far the majority of the population. But the tiny Christian minority often feels singled out. Their numbers are declining where the fighting is worst (see chart). Overall, the proportion of Middle Easterners who are Christian has dropped from 14% in 1910 to 4% today. Church leaders and pundits have begun to ask whether Christianity will vanish from the Middle East, its cradle, after 2,000 years.

An exodus is under way. Many Christians feel more at home in the West and have the means to get there. Some are leaving because of the general atmosphere of violence and economic malaise. Others worry about persecution. A recent video of three Assyrian Christians in orange jumpsuits being made to kneel before being shot in the head by Islamic State (IS) jihadists fuelled this fear—though IS treats many other groups equally badly.

Fewer births, virgin or otherwise

The Christians who remain tend to have fewer babies than their Muslim neighbours, according to the Pew Research Centre. Regional data are unreliable, but in Egypt the fertility rate for Muslims is 2.7; for Christians it is 1.9.

Mosul, in northern Iraq, was once home to tens of thousands of Christians. Perceived as supporting the Americans, they were targeted by insurgents after the invasion. A wave of killings in 2008, including that of the local Chaldean archbishop, seemed to mark the low point for the community. Then came IS. When the jihadists entered the city in 2014, they reportedly tagged Christian houses with an “N” for “Nazarene”, and gave their occupants a choice: convert, pay the jizya, a tax on non-Muslims, or face possible death. Most fled. In July 2014 IS announced that the city was free of Christians.

Many who left Mosul went to Erbil, the Kurdish capital of northern Iraq, where they have trouble finding work or obtaining public services. Even there, some refugees chafe at the enforcement of Muslim customs. “You wouldn’t want to live there,” says Samir, a Christian refugee now in Lebanon. In general, Christians complain that their Muslim neighbours are growing increasingly intolerant.

Some retort that Westerners exaggerate tales of Christian persecution to justify interventionist policies. “There is talk as if the West is genuinely interested in Christians, but most of the time they only use them for their own political ends,” says Mitri Raheb, pastor of a church in Bethlehem. He says that the Israeli occupation hurts Palestinian Christians far more than persecution by Muslims, but provokes less outrage in the West.

Christian leaders are in a tough spot. “I cannot preach to people: ‘Do not leave,’” says Father Raheb. But other priests have. In an open letter published in September one of Syria’s most senior Catholic leaders, Melkite Patriarch Gregory III, wrote: “Despite all your suffering, stay! Be patient! Don’t emigrate! Stay for the church, your homeland, for Syria and its future!” Rankling many, he then urged Europe not to “encourage Syrian Christians to emigrate”. Haitham, a refugee from Mosul, says the pleas go “in one ear, out the other”.

In the decades before the Arab spring, many Christian leaders lent their support to authoritarian rulers in return for the protection of Christians—and their own lofty status. But the deals broke down when the dictators fell or wobbled, leaving Christians in a predicament. “In Iraq, when Saddam Hussein was removed, we lost a million Christians,” said Bechara Boutros al-Rahi, Lebanon’s Maronite Christian Patriarch, to AFP in 2012. “Why? Not because the regime fell, but because there was no more authority, there was a vacuum. In Syria, it’s the same thing, Christians do not back the regime [of Bashar al-Assad], but they are afraid of what may come next.”

Christian leaders have often supported whichever strongman is in power. The late Pope Shenouda III, head of the Coptic church, the largest in the Middle East, backed Hosni Mubarak, Egypt’s former dictator, and discouraged Copts from joining the protests that would eventually topple him. In 2012 Shenouda was succeeded by Tawadros II, who supports the current strongman, Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi. He has described the Arab spring as being more like a “winter, plotted by malicious hands” in order to break up the region into smaller states.

Yet the Copts have gained little from their leaders’ loyalty. Mr Mubarak stood by as relations between Christians and Muslims deteriorated and sectarian violence increased. Mr Sisi is seen as better than the Islamist government that he toppled. A draft law would make it easier to build churches. But Copts are still expelled from villages for such crimes as falling in love with a Muslim.

Even in Lebanon, where Christians were once a majority and still hold considerable power, their political leaders have disappointed. Under the country’s unique system, government posts are shared out based on sect. The presidency goes to a Maronite, the largest group of Christians. But in recent decades many Christians have left. Muslims are now a majority, and want power to match their numbers. Christian political leaders complain of persecution, but many seem more concerned with enhancing their own power. Bickering between politicians has left the presidency vacant for 18 months.

Oddly enough it is the Gulf, home to the most conservative brand of Islam, which has welcomed the largest number of Christians recently, though not from Iraq or Syria. A wave of migrant labourers from the Asia-Pacific has dramatically increased the share of Christians in countries such as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), which had few before. Tolerance varies between countries. Saudi Arabia, for example, bans the practice of Christianity (though many Christians worship in private). The UAE restricts proselytisation, but has otherwise supported its Christians. The number of churches in the country has grown from 24 in 2005 to 40 today. The emirate’s rulers often provide churches with free land, water and electricity. But these new Christian enclaves may not last. Migrant workers in the Gulf cannot easily become citizens or put down roots.

In any case it is the loss of ancient communities that most concerns church leaders. “Christians are not guests in the Middle East,” says Father Paul Karam, the president of Caritas, a Catholic charity, in Lebanon. “We are the original owners of the land.” But none of the Christian refugees who spoke with your correspondent plans to return home. “We don’t belong there,” says Samir, who expects Iraq soon to be empty of Christians altogether.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21684795-fed-up-and-fearful-christians-are-leaving-middle-east-and-then-there-were/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Enforcing morality

No sex please, we’re Middle Eastern

The bossiness of the vice police

Jan 2nd 2016 | BEIRUT | From the print edition

Endangered pleasures

IT WAS a disquieting announcement. On November 25th Egypt’s President Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi approved a committee tasked with “improving the morals and values” in his country. Efforts to reduce littering or sexual harassment, both plagues in Egypt, might be welcome. But experience in the Middle East suggests that the boot will be put into more harmless activities.

In September, for example, Egypt locked up two belly-dancers for “inciting debauchery” after they showed a little skin in online videos; one of the dancers, known as “Egypt’s Shakira”, is most famous for a video which features much suggestive use of a pestle and mortar, but no more flesh than is revealed by a low-cut blouse and an above-the-knee skirt. A young Egyptian couple tells of police accusing them of being together without being married, something that is not banned in the country. Across the region gay people, atheists and dissidents are punished for their supposed moral transgressions.

Saudi Arabia and Iran, regional and religious rivals, are the bossiest. Both regimes claim to be Islamic. Both have vice squads. In Iran they berate women for showing too much fringe; in Saudi Arabia, for wearing too flirty an abaya, the big, usually black, cloak that is mandatory for females there, or being in the company of unrelated males. They enforce bans on alcohol, parties and other things that normal people, even the most morally upright, enjoy. Saudi media recently reported that female bureaucrats wearing too much make-up would be fined 1000 riyals ($266).

Police in Algeria, Morocco and Sudan, too, have powers to stamp out immorality. Sudan’s criminal code, which outlaws adultery and women wearing trousers, is particularly harsh. Vague laws across the region such as causing offence and encouraging indecency are broad and open to abuse. Violators can be flogged.

In November Saudi Arabia sentenced Ashraf Fayadh, a poet, to death. He was accused of apostasy and of having illicit relations with women, whose images he stored in his phone. He denies the charges. He had previously posted a video showing the religious police whipping a man; his supporters think the police are taking revenge. Saudi Arabia beheads people for moral transgressions. Iran hangs them.

Since the 1970s Arab populations have grown more devout. This makes it easier for rulers to use “morality” to keep them in line. Women, especially, are told how to dress and under what circumstances they may have sex. In Morocco and Algeria, women who are raped are sometimes made to marry their rapist.

Social censure is pervasive, and can be deadly. Even in moderate countries such as Jordan, men sometimes kill women to uphold family “honour”. The murderers—usually a father or brother—often escape with light sentences. “If I go out with a boyfriend in Beirut it’s fine,” says a Lebanese Christian woman. “But in the villages, people will say, ‘Look, she’s seeing him and they’re not married’.”

Some among the region’s ever more globalised young are pushing back. Grindr and Tinder, two hook-up apps for gays and straights respectively, have a fair number of users in the Middle East. Men and women mix and, more and more, choose their own partners. When parts of films are cut, such as an explicit scene in “The Wolf of Wall Street”, people go online to watch the full version. In Jeddah, if not Riyadh, colourful abayas swing open as unrelated men and women mingle in cafés.

A few leaders say they want to give people a break. Hassan Rohani, Iran’s relatively moderate president, has talked about stopping the religious police from fining women for failing to conceal their hair, wrists and bottoms. Such small freedoms, so far only very partially implemented, would be popular.

Some of the region’s moral arbiters do not practise what they preach, as bartenders and madams in posh parts of Europe can attest. Imagine if the vice police cracked down on hypocrisy.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21684801-bossiness-vice-police-no-sex-please-were-middle-eastern/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Ethiopia

What if they were really set free?

If the government let people breathe, they might fly

Jan 2nd 2016 | ADDIS ABABA AND LALIBELA | From the print edition



THE Ben Abeba restaurant is a spiral-shaped concrete confection perched on a mountain ridge near Lalibela, an Ethiopian town known for its labyrinth of 12th-century churches hewn out of solid rock. The view is breathtaking: as the sun goes down, a spur of the Great Rift Valley stretches out seemingly miles below in subtly changing hues of green and brown, rolling away, fold after fold, as far as the eye can see. An immense lammergeyer, or bearded vulture, floats past, showing off its russet trousers.

The staff, chivvied jovially along by an intrepid retired Scottish schoolmarm who created the restaurant a few years ago with an Ethiopian business partner, wrap yellow and white shawls around the guests against the sudden evening chill. The most popular dish is a spicy Ethiopian version of that old British staple, shepherd’s pie, with minced goat’s meat sometimes replacing lamb. Ben Abeba, whose name is a fusion of Scots and Amharic, Ethiopia’s main language, is widely considered the best eatery in the highlands surrounding Lalibela, nearly 700km (435 miles) north of Addis Ababa, the capital, by bumpy road.

Yet the obstacles faced by its owners illustrate what go-ahead locals and foreign investors must overcome if Ethiopia is to take off. Electricity is sporadic. Refrigeration is ropey, so fish is off the menu. So are butter and cheese; Susan Aitchison, the restaurant’s resilient co-owner, won’t use the local milk, as it is unpasteurised. Honey, mangoes, guava, papaya and avocados, grown on farmland leased to the enterprising pair, who have planted 30,000 trees, are delicious. All land belongs to the state, so it cannot be used as collateral for borrowing, which is one reason why commercial farming has yet to reach Lalibela. Consequently supplies of culinary basics are spotty. Local chickens are too scrawny. The government will not yet allow retailers such as South Africa’s Shoprite or Kenya’s Nakumatt to set up in Ethiopia, let alone in Lalibela, a UNESCO World Heritage site.

Bookings at Ben Abeba are tricky to take, since the internet and mobile-phone service are patchy. Credit cards work “about half the time”, says Ms Aitchison. Imports for such essentials as kitchen spares are often held up at the airport, where tariffs are sky-high: a recent batch of T-shirts with logos for the staff ended up costing three times its original price. Wine, even the excellent local stuff, is sometimes unavailable, because transport from Addis, two days’ drive away, is irregular and private haulage minimal. The postal service barely works. Fuel at Lalibela’s sole (state-owned) petrol station runs out. Visitors can fly up from Addis on Ethiopian Airways every morning, but private airlines are pretty well kept out.



Many of these annoyances could be removed—if only the government were brave enough to set the economy free. “The service sector here is one of the most restrictive in the world,” says a frustrated foreign banker. The government’s refusal to liberalise mobile-telephone services and banks is patently self-harming. Ethiopians have one of the lowest rates of mobile-phone ownership in Africa (see chart); the World Bank reckons that fewer than 4% of households have a fixed-line telephone and barely 3% have access to broadband.

The official reason for keeping Ethio Telecom a monopoly is that the government can pour its claimed annual $820m profit straight into the country’s grand road-building programme. In fact, if the government opened the airwaves to competition, as Kenya’s has, it could probably sell franchises for at least $10 billion, and reap taxes and royalties as well; Safaricom in Kenya is the country’s biggest taxpayer.

Moreover, Kenya’s mobile-banking service has vastly improved the livelihood of its rural poor, whereas at least 80% of Ethiopians are reckoned to be unbanked. For entrepreneurs like Ms Aitchison and her partner, Habtamu Baye, local banks may suffice. But bigger outfits desperately need the chunkier loans that only foreign banks, still generally prevented from operating in the country, can provide. A recent survey of African banks listed 15 Kenyan ones in the top 200, measured by size of assets, whereas Ethiopia had only three.



Land reform is another big blockage, though farmers can now have their plots “certified” as a step towards greater security of tenure. Given Ethiopia’s not-so-distant feudal past and the dreadful abuses that immiserated millions of peasants in days of yore, especially in time of drought, the land issue is sensitive; the late Meles Zenawi, who for 21 years until his death in 2012 ran the country with an iron fist and a fervent desire to reduce poverty, was determined to prevent a rush of landless or destitute peasants into slums edging the big towns, as has happened in Kenya. But the increasing fragmentation of land amid the rocketing increase in population is plainly unsustainable, even though productivity has risen fast through government-provided inputs such as fertiliser and better seed. (Ethiopia is Africa’s second-most-populous country after Nigeria; by some estimates it has nearly 100m people.) Most women still have four or five children. The standard family plot has shrunk to less than a hectare.

Yet, despite these self-imposed brakes, Ethiopia’s economic progress has been spectacular. Its growth rate, if the latest official figure of 11% is true, is the fastest in Africa; and even the lower figure of around 8%, which the IMF and many Western analysts prefer, is still very perky. Social and economic indices are reckoned to have improved faster than anywhere else in Africa, albeit from a low base. Extreme poverty, defined as a daily income of under $1.25, afflicted 56% of the population in 2000, according to the World Bank, but had fallen to 31% by 2011 and is thought to be dipping still. The average Ethiopian lifespan has risen in the same period by a year each year, and now stands at 64. Child and infant mortality have dived. Protection for the rural poor in time of drought, which presently afflicts swathes of the north and east, is more effective than before. The government has “the most impressive record in the world” in reducing poverty, says a British aid official. (Britain gives its fattest dollop of largesse to Ethiopia.)

Nonetheless, at least 25m Ethiopians are still deemed to be “extremely poor”. A waitress at Ben Abeba, a university graduate in biology, seems happy to get a monthly wage of $26. A labourer earns a lot less.

How they made a miracle

The core of the government’s economic policy is to improve agriculture, nurture industry and build lots of infrastructure. This includes a series of huge dams on the Blue Nile (which provides most of the water that flows into Egypt via Sudan) and on the Omo river, which flows south into Kenya’s Lake Turkana. The mass electrification that is expected to ensue should eventually help Ms Aitchison’s kitchen and communications in Lalibela.

Roads and railways are also being built apace. Driving east from the town on a dirt track to join a paved road 80km or so away, your correspondent saw not a single other vehicle in two hours. The government puts its hope in industrialisation and light manufacturing, spurred on by investment and also by mass education (more than 32 universities have been created since 2000). It promotes industrial parks, which are supposed to boost their share of GDP from 5% today to 20% within a decade—and create millions of jobs for a population whose median age is only 19.

Though the government invokes no precise model, it has various Asian ones in mind, most obviously China’s system of state capitalism under the strict control of a dominant political party. Meles rose to power at the head of the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front, a revolutionary regional party that originally drew its inspiration from Enver Hoxha’s Albanian brand of communism and which, after years of guerrilla warfare in the mountains, overthrew a vicious Soviet-backed Marxist regime, known as the Derg, in 1991.

Meles gradually began to open the country’s economy, but he also felt obliged to close down an experiment in multiparty democracy after an assorted opposition made big advances in a general election (which it claimed to have won) in 2005. The two main opposition parties, which both want to liberalise the economy and privatise the land, were eventually allowed to keep 161 seats in the 547-strong parliament. In the post-election fracas, about 200 people were killed and at least 20,000 are reckoned subsequently to have done stints in prison. In the next two rounds of elections, in 2010 and again in May 2015, the tally of opposition MPs, after a government campaign of outright repression, slumped to one and now none.

The opposition is crushed, fragmented and feeble. Prominent dissenters have fled or are behind bars. Human Rights Watch, a monitoring group based in New York, reckons there are “thousands” of political prisoners. Torture is routine. “Ethiopians are cowed,” says a longtime analyst. It was notable, at a recent Economist conference in Addis, that virtually no businessman, Ethiopian or foreign, had the nerve to disparage any of the government’s policies. In public Ethiopians tend dutifully to echo the government line; in private, though, they can be franker.

After Meles’s death, Hailemariam Desalegn emerged as prime minister. In September of 2015 he was confirmed as head of the ruling Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front, itself a coalition whose key component is still Meles’s Tigrayan front. But Mr Hailemariam, a southern Pentecostalist from a small ethnic group outside Meles’s circle of revolutionaries from the north, has yet to achieve his predecessor’s authority.

Just take the plunge

He says he favours a loosening of economics and politics. But so far he has been tentative. “He’s a compromise guy encircled by old-guard Leninist ideologues, the Tigray boys,” says Beyene Petros, a veteran leader of the opposition. One of Mr Hailemariam’s close advisers, Arkebe Oqubay, a reformist who promotes industrial policy (especially the creation of industrial parks) and craves foreign investment, cagily suggests that banking will open up “in five years”. Yet the ruling front still reflects a deep wariness of foreigners who, in the words of a long-standing expatriate, remain widely suspected of plotting to “get rich at the expense of Ethiopians”.



Most independent observers feel that, overall, Ethiopia is on the rise, and may even emerge as an African powerhouse alongside South Africa and Nigeria—and ahead of Kenya, its regional rival. It is proud of having the African Union’s headquarters and of providing more UN peacekeepers than any other African country. It is a leading mediator in the region, especially in war-torn South Sudan, and has won plaudits from the West for its fierce stand against jihadism. It also caters for more refugees than any other African country—some 820,000 at last count.

On the home front, Ethiopia’s infrastructure plans have attracted the interest of potential investors from across the globe. Yet unless the government gets a move on frustration will grow, at home and abroad. If the ruling party had the courage to open up the economic and political system, the pace of Ethiopia’s progress towards prosperity and stability would quicken. Even lovely, remote Lalibela would gain.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21684816-if-government-let-people-breathe-they-might-fly-what-if-they-were-really-set/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




Russia’s Far East: Snow job

Vladivostok’s new casino: Russian roulette

Spanish politics: The chore of the Spanish succession

Poland’s religious politics: Courting disaster

Educating refugees: Learning the hard way





Articles Sections Next

Russia’s Far East

Snow job

Russia’s much-ballyhooed turn towards China is less than it seems

Jan 2nd 2016 | VLADIVOSTOK AND KHABAROVSK | From the print edition



DOWN a bumpy two-lane road through the hills north-west of Vladivostok, the Pogranichny border crossing is where Russia meets China. Bilateral relations are blossoming, and trade should be booming. Yet lorries loaded with timber idle on the roadside, as obstructive bureaucrats keep them waiting for days. On a recent visit, the electricity was out; candles flickered in the truck stop’s lavatories. “Nothing new here,” said a shopkeeper.

Over the past two years, as its relations with the West have soured, Russia has proclaimed a “pivot to the East”. Officials envisioned China replacing Western capital markets and hoovering up Russian exports of oil, minerals and food. Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping, the countries’ presidents, visited each other’s capitals for ceremonies commemorating the end of the second world war; Western leaders stayed away. Big deals in energy, transport and arms seemed to augur a new friendship. In September Mr Putin declared that Sino-Russian relations had “probably reached a peak in their entire history”.

That was the official story, at least. “The turn to the east is happening, but in a characteristically Russian way: slowly, foolishly and with unrealistically high expectations,” says Alexander Gabuev, the chairman of the Russia in the Asia-Pacific programme at the Moscow Carnegie Centre, a think-tank. The Russian recession and China’s slowdown have put a damper on grand plans. With oil prices low and the rouble weak, bilateral trade shrank by around 30% in the first half of 2015. Corruption, bureaucracy and the rickety infrastructure of Russia’s Far East cloud the business climate.



Mr Putin is not the first Russian leader to turn towards Asia. Chinese and Soviet communists feuded during the cold war, but by the time of perestroika Mikhail Gorbachev was calling Vladivostok a “window to the East” and declaring the Soviet Union “an Asian and Pacific country”. Nor is Mr Putin’s interest in the Pacific Rim new: when Vladivostok hosted the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) conference in 2012, he poured resources into the city, building two bridges and a sprawling campus for the talks. “In the 21st century, the vector of Russia’s development will be the development of the East,” Mr Putin said, in a rare echo of Mr Gorbachev.

But after the conference, Moscow’s attention shifted and funds dried up. Development projects fell by the wayside. Two five-star Hyatt hotels went unfinished. The government says funds allocated to rebuild the Pogranichny border area were stolen (by contrast, a shopping mall and a Holiday Inn await on the Chinese side).

The clash with the West over Ukraine turned Russia’s focus eastward again. In May 2014, two months after the annexation of Crimea, Mr Putin met Mr Xi and announced a 30-year, $400 billion gas deal, ending a decade of talks. Russia’s rail monopoly awarded a tender to the state-controlled China Railway Group to design a high-speed train between Moscow and Kazan. Moscow agreed to sell Beijing sophisticated S-400 anti-aircraft missiles and Su-35 fighter jets. China extended a yuan currency-swap agreement.



In the autumn of 2015 Russia declared several Far Eastern regions priority development zones. Investors will enjoy a five-year break on most taxes and streamlined bureaucracy. Foreigners arriving through Vladivostok will be allowed in without visas. Some firms have moved in: En+ Group, an energy holding company controlled by Oleg Deripaska, a Russian oligarch, has signed a deal with China’s Huawei to build data centres in Siberia.

But it has not exactly been a gold rush. Western sanctions have made Chinese lenders cautious about Russian firms. Chinese foreign direct investment in Russia more than doubled in 2014, but collapsed during the first half of 2015. Gas export volumes are up, making Russia China’s largest supplier, but falling oil prices have slashed revenues. And although China is now Russia’s largest trading partner, Russia does not crack China’s top five—a fact not lost on Chinese businessmen. “They believe, and not without good reason, that they can dictate the conditions,” says the boss of a Vladivostok-based shipping firm.

Russia, meanwhile, frets about being exploited. The desire to get closer to China is offset by a fear of becoming dependent, says Victor Larin of the Russian Academy of Sciences in Vladivostok. Russia imposes tough restrictions on businesses because of unfounded fears that the Chinese will take over its sparsely-populated Far East. Chinese businessmen complain about restrictions on hiring foreign labourers. Deals to lease farmland draw the ire of Russian nationalists.

Even innocuous projects can incur the wrath of Russian apparatchiks. In November Cai Shangjun, an internationally acclaimed Chinese film director, brought more than 50 cast and crew to Khabarovsk to shoot a new movie, but customs officials held his camera equipment at the border. The frustrated cinéaste was left cooling his heels in his hotel for over a week. “It’s a tragedy,” said Mr Cai, as his crew lingered aimlessly in the lobby. His film “Under the Ice”, about two Chinese lovers who meet in Russia, has since resumed production. But like most things under ice, and Russia’s eastern pivot itself, it is moving slower than hoped.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21684809-russias-much-ballyhooed-turn-towards-china-less-it-seems-snow-job/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Vladivostok’s new casino

Russian roulette

How to lure rich Chinese to take a chance on Russia

Jan 2nd 2016 | VLADIVOSTOK | From the print edition

A billion on Siberia, please

THE shiny new Tigre de Cristal casino looks like a black glass and steel spacecraft that has landed in the Siberian forest. A neon sign advertises “Seafood delicacies from the Sea of Japan”. Inside, Russian ladies deal out baccarat cards to Chinese gamblers. The casino itself represents a bit of a bet: that Russia can tap some of the cash from rising Asian economies to help develop its own Far East, a territory larger than the European Union that is home to just 6m people.

Though the Far East is staunchly Russian, it has grown dependent on its Asian neighbours. Some regions do 85% of their foreign trade with China. Europe feels a world away. When Russia’s economy was booming, locals took their holidays at Chinese resorts and popped over the border for cheap massages and shopping.

Since the collapse of the rouble the flow has reversed. Chinese shoppers come to buy Russian food, which they think safer than their own chemical-ridden produce. Others come for a bit of Europe. Li Tsang, a hairdresser from Fuyuan, raves about Khabarovsk, just across the Amur river: “It’s so clean!”

At Tigre de Cristal, the brainchild of Lawrence Ho, son of the Macao mogul Stanley Ho, investors are banking on an influx of gamblers from north-east China, South Korea and Japan. “Within a two- or three-hour radius, you have 200m-300m people under-served from a gambling perspective,” says Craig Ballantyne, the casino’s upbeat Scottish manager.

The fate of such foreign-backed projects depends on Russia providing the conditions for success. For Tigre de Cristal, little went smoothly. A bizarre legislative oversight means that it is illegal to advertise the casino: with the exception of a handful of special gaming zones, gambling is banned in Russia. The launch was postponed because of bureaucratic hassles. Even with the delay, the local government failed to revamp the main road from the airport in time for the grand opening, much to the chagrin of casino staff. “When Disneyland opened,” Mr Ballantyne notes pointedly, “the Santa Ana highway was finished.”

Correction: In “The gauge of history” in our Christmas issue, a portrait was wrongly described as showing Fyodor Shekhtel, a Russian architect. The subject was in fact Savva Mamontov, a Russian industrialist and patron of the arts.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21684806-how-lure-rich-chinese-take-chance-russia-russian-roulette/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Spanish politics

The chore of the Spanish succession

A fissiparous electorate makes for difficult coalition negotiations

Jan 2nd 2016 | MADRID | From the print edition



IN MOST places, when 3,030 people take an up-or-down vote, some sort of decision will probably emerge. But one should never underestimate the contentiousness of the Catalans. On December 27th an assembly of the far-left Popular Unity Candidacies (CUP) party deciding whether to back Catalonia’s acting president, Artur Mas, split the vote evenly—1,515 on each side. The deadlock means that, three months after elections, Mr Mas still cannot form a government to carry out his programme of moving steadily towards secession from Spain.

The Catalan impasse is part of a wider Spanish gridlock. Elections on December 20th splintered the political landscape. The duopoly of the conservative People’s Party (PP) of the prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, and the opposition Socialists (PSOE), who have traded turns in power for the past 33 years, has been upended. The insurgent left-wing Podemos and liberal Ciudadanos parties grabbed a third of the parliamentary seats between them, making a coalition or minority government a necessity. But Spain has little culture of coalition-building, and forming a government is a tall order. Fresh elections are also possible.

After losing over a third of the PP’s seats, Mr Rajoy’s attempts to form a new government seem destined to fail. Meanwhile Pedro Sánchez, the Socialist leader, led his party to a historic low with barely one in five votes. A “grand coalition” between them, possibly backed by Ciudadanos, would be the most stable option. But decades of enmity make that unlikely.

Instead Mr Sánchez fancies himself as the next prime minister. He would need to include the far-leftists of Podemos, which would be a triumph for southern Europe’s anti-austerity rebellion. But Podemos demands that Catalonia be granted a referendum on independence, which the Socialists refuse to accept. Mr Sánchez himself may soon face a leadership challenge, especially if party heavyweights, led by Susana Diez, the president of Andalusia, think he is selling them out. And even if Mr Sánchez and Podemos reach agreement, they do not have enough deputies; they would need the backing of either Ciudadanos or Catalan separatist parties.

Podemos and Ciudadanos would make strange bedfellows. One party rails against neoliberalism; the other backs liberal reforms. The leaders of Podemos, Pablo Iglesias, and of Ciudadanos, Albert Rivera, have good personal chemistry, and both see themselves as crusaders ridding Spanish politics of corruption. They agree on the need to depoliticise the judiciary and some regulatory agencies. Yet a government of the Socialists, Podemos and Ciudadanos would lack the votes to change the constitution, making it hard to resolve Spain’s biggest looming problem: Catalonia’s threat to secede.



Spanish election results

Mr Mas and his Catalan Democratic Convergence party have been plodding towards secession for years. To secure the CUP’s backing, the once business-friendly leader is now dabbling in anti-austerity populism, promising to scrap a privatisation programme and commit his indebted region to an extra €270m ($296m) of social spending. His next steps towards independence are likely to clash with Spain’s constitution and may prod the new government to employ legal force against him. After four years without dialogue between Madrid and Barcelona, however, the two new governments may both be too weak to sort the problem out.

Spain’s economy grew by an estimated 3% in 2015, but the recovery remains fragile and inadequate. Unemployment is 21% and GDP is still lower than in 2007. The most recent report by Fitch, a ratings agency, stated the obvious: a long period of political uncertainty and reversals of reforms will damage business confidence. Spain could use a strong government. It looks likely to get a weak one.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21684827-fissiparous-electorate-makes-difficult-coalition-negotiations-chore-spanish/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Poland’s religious politics

Courting disaster

An attack on judicial independence reveals the government’s ideology

Jan 2nd 2016 | TORUN | From the print edition

Communists, communists everywhere

WHEN the far-right Law and Justice (PiS) party won Poland’s parliamentary elections on October 25th, it was clear that the country was headed for change. But few expected anything like what has followed: purges of senior security officials, threats against public broadcasters, a police raid on a NATO–affiliated office and a deepening crisis over the constitutional court. On December 28th President Andrzej Duda (nominated by PiS, though technically non-partisan) signed a law that would, among other things, require Poland’s constitutional tribunal to approve all verdicts by a two-thirds margin, crippling its ability to review legislation. PiS has appointed five additional judges to the tribunal, in a move the standing judges ruled unconstitutional. PiS politicians refer to the court as a bastion of the previous Civic Platform government that must be subdued. Liberals and centrists have taken to the streets in protest.

Observers wondering why a stable EU member with a growing economy has suddenly plunged into such turmoil might do well to visit Torun, a small city in northern Poland. Torun is home to Radio Maryja, an ultra-conservative radio station run by Father Tadeusz Rydzyk, a Roman Catholic priest. From its gated headquarters, guarded by silver-haired devotees, it broadcasts warnings against “gender ideology” (an umbrella term for feminism and gay rights) and the “Islamisation” of Europe. The station’s audience is small, under 2% of all listeners. Yet its political ideology is close to that of the new government. PiS would not have won without Radio Maryja, said Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the party’s leader, at the broadcaster’s 24th anniversary celebration in December.

The 70-year-old Father Rydzyk does not think much of the way Poland has evolved since the end of communism. The country needs a spiritual renaissance, or it will become a “republic of bandits, thieves and perverts”, he said in an October interview with Nasz Dziennik, the daily newspaper he publishes. Like PiS, Radio Maryja propounds social conservatism, suspicion of Brussels and hostility towards refugees from the Middle East. The station’s listeners are sympathetic to conspiracy theories positing that the parties that have ruled Poland since the 1990s (apart from PiS) are secretly controlled by communist apparatchiks. Right-wing demonstrators (see picture) often demand that the constitutional court be “decommunised”, a request that leaves its moderate justices bemused.

Radio Maryja’s listeners are not so much religious fanatics as the socially vulnerable. It speaks to Poles alienated by economic and cultural change. Religious symbols are their means of showing discontent, says Tomasz Szlendak, a sociologist at the University of Torun; Radio Maryja is the only media outlet that “speaks their language”. PiS, too, blends religious and nationalist symbolism with a focus on social injustice; a new monthly child benefit crowns the government’s list of election promises. Some term PiS the “pious left”. The party castigates its critics as heathen liberals. “Every hand raised against the Church is a hand raised against Poland,” said Mr Kaczynski in December.

Like Father Rydzyk, Mr Kaczynski speaks of PiS’s election as the first step in a spiritual renaissance that will remake the Polish state. But his party’s interference with the constitutional tribunal has raised hackles in Brussels. The European Commission had asked the Polish government to put the process on hold; Mr Duda ignored the request. On January 13th the commission will meet to discuss the statute and whether it infringes EU treaty commitments to the rule of law.

Meanwhile, Father Rydzyk, too, is disappointed in the new government. After a spat over access to the president, he threatened to break off co-operation, saying he expected his media outlets to be “treated differently”. It remains to be seen whom Mr Kaczynski and his party fear more: the EU, or Radio Maryja.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21684826-attack-judicial-independence-reveals-governments-ideology-courting-disaster/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Educating refugees

Learning the hard way

Integrating migrants into schools will not be easy

Jan 2nd 2016 | STOCKHOLM | From the print edition

That’s an ä not an å

AFTER Aida Hadzialic’s parents fled war-torn Bosnia for Sweden in the early 1990s, they put their five-year-old daughter in a school full of native Swedes and made sure she studied hard to get ahead. It worked. Today Ms Hadzialic, 27, is Sweden’s minister for upper secondary education. Like her counterparts across Europe, she faces a new challenge: ensuring that a fresh wave of refugee children can integrate as successfully as she did.

Even before this year’s surge, western Europe had lots of immigrant students. According to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the proportion of 15-year-old schoolchildren in Spain who are foreign-born rose from 3% to 8% from 2003 to 2012 (though in Germany it fell by about the same amount). The new wave of migrants from Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq and elsewhere has redoubled the strains on school systems.

In the countries accepting the most refugees—Sweden and Germany—lack of space is not a problem. Before the migrant surge, both countries faced declining numbers of pupils because of low birth rates. In Sweden the number of children in ninth grade fell from 120,000 in 2005 to 96,000 in 2015. “We have places for a hundred more pupils,” says Henrik Ljungqvist, the headmaster of Ronna School in Sodertalje, a city near Stockholm. (His school admits two to four new refugee pupils a week.) In Germany, without the new migrants, the number of students was projected to decline by 10% over the next decade, says Ludger Woessmann of the University of Munich.

The biggest problem for education systems is that refugee children tend to be concentrated together. Many attend schools near refugee centres or in immigrant neighbourhoods. In Norway, Denmark and Sweden about 70% go to schools where at least half of the pupils are immigrants. This means they are partially segregated and less likely to learn the local language.



Moreover, immigrants tend to find housing in poor areas with lower education standards. Schools where more than a quarter of students are immigrants usually perform worse than those with no immigrants (see chart), although the gap shrinks when economic status is accounted for. At Mr Ljungqvist’s school, where about 350 of the 750 students were born abroad, many of the brightest pupils have left.

Swedish schools faced problems well before the latest migrants began arriving. From 2002 to 2012 Sweden’s rank in the OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) fell more than any other country’s, to 28th out of 34 countries in mathematics and 27th in reading and science. Pupils in Sweden are more likely to arrive late to school than in any other rich-world country. The government has responded to declining scores by increasing teachers’ pay, but it still does little or no inspecting of schools. The OECD’s Andreas Schleicher says the system lacks a culture of accountability.

Germany’s PISA rankings remain high, but its school system is “almost the worst you could pick” for migrants, says Maurice Crul, an expert on immigrant youth at Erasmus University in Rotterdam. Unlike France or Sweden, where most children start preschool before age three, German children tend to start school at four or five. Many schools have only half-day classes.

Moreover, the German system streams pupils at 10 into either vocational or academic systems—and immigrant children are 44 percentage points more likely than natives to be sent to vocational courses. Unlike other vocational systems such as that in the Netherlands, Germany’s makes it hard to move from a vocational track to an academic one. Lack of native language skills can steer bright immigrant children away from a university education. The system’s inflexibility also makes it harder to integrate older immigrant children. Germany has one of the world’s biggest gaps in reading proficiency between those who arrive aged between six and 11 and those who arrive aged 12 or over.

The German system has its strengths. In less than a decade, Germany has improved the mathematics grades of second-generation migrant children by the equivalent of over a year of schooling. In some German states school days are being extended, and the government has made a big investment in preschool education. In Sweden, meanwhile, older refugees are being trained as teaching assistants to speed integration. Ronna School and others scrapped separate “introductory lessons” for refugees after realising they led to immigrants being segregated and bullied.

But far more could be done. Pupils could be distributed throughout the school system more effectively. In Aarhus, a city in Denmark, the proportion of pupils from migrant backgrounds cannot exceed 20% in each school; a similar distribution in Germany and Sweden could help fight ghettoisation. And refugee children should be getting more preschool. According to the OECD, 15-year-old immigrant children are 20% less likely to have attended pre-primary education than the native-born, but those who have score 49 points higher in reading than those who have not.

Most important, European governments need to treat refugee children as an opportunity rather than a problem. Driven by a desperate desire for a better life, they and their parents tend to be hard-working and ambitious. Europeans worried about migrants studying beside their children should take comfort: the most important predictor of pupils’ school results is their parents’ level of education, and about half of the refugees reaching Europe from Syria have university degrees, according to UNHCR, the UN refugee agency. “Sometimes I joke that Syrian children may help reverse [our decline in] PISA results in maths,” quips Ms Hadzialic. If they are integrated properly, she may be right.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21684830-integrating-migrants-schools-will-not-be-easy-learning-hard-way/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




Funding the police: Counting up the coppers

Floods: Northern waterhouse

Bagehot: Bring on the tempest





Articles Sections Next

Funding the police

Counting up the coppers

As the police get more control over their budgets, different forces are taking very different approaches to fundraising

Jan 2nd 2016 | BEDFORD | From the print edition



ON A recent Sunday night in Bedfordshire, north of London, a damp-looking officer enters police headquarters. He has been fishing a possible murder victim out of the river, he says, but “had nothing to fish him out with”. Under the gaze of throngs of Christmas shoppers, he found he also had no tent with which to cover the body, and “embarrassingly” had to borrow one from an ambulance.

Following big increases in spending on the police in 2000-10, the past five years have been austere. Police spending per person has been remorselessly trimmed back to roughly where it was in 2003, accounting for inflation. Further cuts were expected to be imposed in 2015, but after intensive lobbying by officers, and the jolt of the Paris terrorist attacks, on November 25th the government announced that the police would be protected from cuts for the next five years.



Amid rises and falls in police funding there has been one constant trend. The police in England and Wales long received almost all their money in the form of a grant from the central government. But over the past two decades they have been raising more and more of their money locally. Whereas in 1995 only 12% of police funding was local, by 2014 30% of it was earned in this way (see chart). Tweaks announced in November mean that in five years’ time the proportion will be higher still. Britain’s police forces are slowly gaining real control of their finances—and they are using this power in very different ways.

The shift began in 1995, when forces gained the ability to raise money by adding a supplementary “precept” to council tax, a local property levy. Police precepts were small at first: about £70 ($100) per household in today’s terms. They crept up in the 1990s, before soaring in the 2000s: in the decade to 2010, forces increased local charges by an average of 98%.

There was wide variation. Whereas some forces increased their precepts by just a few percent each year, others went for broke: in North Yorkshire the police more than trebled the amount raised from local taxation in 2000-10. In the main, according to an analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, a think-tank, those forces that increased their local funding most were those that had done least well under the old system of direct grants, which favoured populous places with high crime rates. Forces covering England’s largest cities—Greater Manchester, Merseyside, West Midlands and London’s Metropolitan Police—all raised their local taxes less than average. The most enthusiastic taxers were small or rural forces: after North Yorkshire, the biggest increases were in Durham, Cambridgeshire and Cleveland.

After entering office in 2010, the Conservative-led coalition put a brake on local fundraising, forbidding police bosses from raising taxes by more than 2% without holding a referendum, a feat none has yet managed. (Only one force, Bedfordshire, has tried it; Surrey considered it, but backed down in 2015 after a Conservative minister branded it a “lazy option”.) Yet the government has increased reliance on local funding in another way, by reducing the central grant. Central funding for the police was cut by one-fifth across the board in 2010-14. The forces that suffered least were those that had plenty of local income. The differences are stark: overall, North Yorkshire’s total budget is now 30% higher in real terms than in 2000, whereas in Northumberland, which increased its local precept the least, it is 8% lower.

The devolution of funding allows locals to decide for themselves how much to spend on security. But it may lead to more being spent in wealthy areas—an odd way to approach crime, which is strongly correlated with poverty, points out Tom Kirchmaier, a policing expert at the London School of Economics. The reliance on raising money from households also punishes districts that combine sparsely populated rural areas with troublesome urban patches. Bedfordshire falls into this category: of the 43 forces in England and Wales, it ranks 32nd in the number of police officers per person, yet the presence of Luton, a rundown town with an international airport, gives it the fourth-highest rate of gun crime per head, as well as what local officials believe to be a high terror threat. There are sometimes so few officers on duty, says Kate Rowley, a local copper, that she knows that if she pressed her emergency panic-button no one would come.

Police forces are finding new ways to supplement their incomes. In April the Home Office raised the modest fee charged by police for licensing firearms for the first time in 14 years. More controversially, the police make money by sending dangerous drivers on remedial “speed awareness” courses costing £85. Between 2010 and 2014, as forces’ central funding was squeezed, twice as many motorists were sent on such courses. Some police bosses have threatened to raise money by fining motorists who stray only fractionally above speed limits.

Like doctors, police officers report that they are increasingly “dumped on” by social services, whose budgets have been drastically cut. In November the government announced that social services, too, would be supplemented in future by an optional local levy, to be determined by councils. Increasingly, it will be for local people to decide what sort of services they are willing to pay for. With a round of elections of police commissioners due in May, voters will get a chance to say just how thin a blue line they want.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21684822-police-get-more-control-over-their-budgets-different-forces-are-taking-very-different/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Floods

Northern waterhouse

Anger rises as fast as the water across inundated northern cities

Jan 2nd 2016 | YORK | From the print edition



EARLY on December 27th, residents of Huntington Road in York were woken by cries warning them of torrents of water gushing down the street; the River Foss had burst its banks. The flooding was the worst in the neighbourhood since the last great inundation in 1982, says one local, John. With his house situated on a slight rise, the waters lapped at his front steps but rose no further. Most of his neighbours were less fortunate: by the afternoon most of the houses had to be evacuated. Here and there a few car tops were still just visible poking above the muddy waters.

York was one of several northern cities to be swamped by the latest round of floods in Britain’s wet winter. By December 29th at least 6,700 properties had been inundated in northern England. At the time of writing (with more storms forecast), no one had died; the floods pale in comparison with recent disasters in other parts of the world (see article). But the rampaging waters, and the limp official response to them, are a problem for David Cameron, who has put the project of creating an economic “Northern Powerhouse” at the centre of his second term. “A Northern Powerhouse is nothing when it is under several feet of mucky water,” thundered the Yorkshire Evening Post. Splashing around York on December 28th, the welly-shod prime minister was heckled.

He deserved it. After entering office in 2010, he reduced flood-protection spending by one-fifth, and in spite of a splurge in 2014, after severe floods in Somerset, it has dropped back to below its level when he entered Downing Street. The cuts have resulted in hundreds of relatively cheap flood-defence schemes being cancelled, including one that could have prevented Leeds city centre flooding this week.



The Environment Agency, which administers most flood-defence spending in England, funds only defences against sea and river flooding, not surface or groundwater, which cause more than 60% of the damage done by water to houses. A “complete rethink” is needed, the agency’s acting head said this week (his unfortunate boss was found on holiday in Barbados). Climate change has increased the frequency of the intense rains that cause severe flooding; some parts of Cumbria with a one-in-100-years chance of it have been inundated three times in the past decade.

Yet if central government was found wanting, the local response was little better. “It was a poor show,” complains Ken Heald, a York hairdresser, with obvious understatement. He phoned a council helpline to request sandbags for his salon, Mamselle, as soon as he saw water seeping under the front door. Nobody got back to him, nor replied to two more pleas. Overall, the council was “no help at all”, he says. And for all the talk of e-government, the online response was glitchy, too: requests for sandbags on Leeds council’s website were met with error messages.

Hard-up local authorities have struggled to do much beyond leading search-and-rescue efforts. In Leeds and York, the council response mainly consisted of organising evacuations. The stripped-down service is part of a wider trend of councils “becoming more like emergency services”, says Simon Parker of the New Local Government Network, a think-tank. Forced to make deep cuts to their budgets in the past five years, they have sacrificed long-term investment: in 2010-15 councils’ capital spending fell by 25% in real terms, and their outlay on planning and development by 50%. Saving so much money without seriously denting voter satisfaction has been a marvel, but the apparently thin preparation on display this week suggests how the trick has been pulled off.

In the absence of much help from government, people have helped each other. “The spirit round here has been very good,” says Mr Heald, whose neighbours have rallied to help him out; one spent hours scooping water out of his salon. Groups such as Bingley Flood Support, near Bradford, have been organising clean-up operations, using Facebook to co-ordinate efforts: in Bingley members of a local mosque have brought food, a local newspaper has donated old newsprint to soak up water, and a bouncy-castle firm has lent its van to run errands.

Social media have also eclipsed the conventional sort. Twitter and Instagram have provided updates and advice quicker than the local press, whose skeleton staff were caught on the hop over Christmas. Mr Cameron has long wanted to encourage a “Big Society” of volunteers. The floods have provided it—though perhaps not in quite the way he wanted.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21684825-anger-rises-fast-water-across-inundated-northern-cities-northern-waterhouse/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

Bring on the tempest

Britain’s interlocking political dramas may be just what the country needs

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



BRITONS have much to look forward to in 2016. Street parties will take place on the queen’s 90th birthday. The English, Welsh and Northern Irish football teams will all contest the European Championship. The Royal Shakespeare Company is promising the biggest-ever celebration of the Bard’s work to mark the 400th anniversary of his death, and the Globe theatre will stage a new production of “The Tempest”.

Yet in politics, as in the skies, storms loom. Jeremy Corbyn, the far-left leader of the Labour Party, is consolidating his grip on the opposition. In an imminent shadow-cabinet reshuffle he will show moderates the business end of his proverbial ice-axe. North of the border, the pro-independence Scottish National Party will consolidate its political hegemony at elections in May. Another vote on separation is now only a matter of time. London’s mayoral election, also in May, will accentuate the growing divide between the rich, worldly capital and the rest of Britain. And with its EU referendum expected to take place as early as June, the country’s status as a leading European power hangs by a thread.

Small wonder, then, that its allies are perturbed. Barack Obama privately talks of Britain’s “mid-life crisis”. As a commentary in the New York Times in 2014 put it: “Britain is having a kind of nervous breakdown, and its friends aren’t sure whether to say something or just look away.” Such observers are right to imply that the traumas were long in the making; more than freak intrusions on a country that has been calm and stable for decades.

Why? Each polity has its pathology and Britain’s, as Walter Bagehot noted, is muddling through. Just as its people pride themselves on their—only partly imagined—“mustn’t grumble” stoicism, its leaders possess the institutional equivalent of the stiff upper lip: a preference for patching and fudging over abolishing and remaking. It has no written constitution; its union is the messy product of years of tweaks; its political bodies, from local councils to the Lords, are great mounds of sticking plasters.

This predilection has its pros and cons. On the one hand, Britons’ mistrust of wide-eyed ideas (“Don’t you know it’s gonna be all right”, the Beatles sang in their sceptical hit, “Revolution”) explains their historical aversion to political extremism. It steers the country away from risky ventures like, some would argue, the euro. Thomas Kielinger, a veteran German correspondent in London, claims Britain’s seafaring history has made it flexible but cautious; more comfortable tacking with the winds than its uncompromising continental neighbours.

On the other hand, a penchant for the zigzag and the gentle curve over the straight line comes at a cost. Consider the Palace of Westminster. Bombed during the war, it was quickly repaired and is now crumbling. A rolling programme of restoration struggles to keep up with its decay. Muddling through, in other words, can leave big problems unresolved. It stores up contradictions that occasionally unleash thoroughly un-British political earthquakes: the Labour landslide of 1945 would have been unthinkable without the hemming and hawing of pre-war governments, just as Margaret Thatcher’s economic revolution would have been without her predecessors’ procrastinations.

The same pattern is in evidence now. Thatcherism created doubts about Britain’s place in Europe, divided England from other parts of the union, propelled London towards vast wealth and presented socialists with an existential challenge. Labour inherited these tensions when it came to power in 1997, but a combination of political skill and benign economic circumstances allowed it to fudge them. It sought European integration without convincing voters of the need for it; devolved powers to Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast without reforming the architecture of the union; encouraged the capital to boom without building up a counterweight and made its peace with markets without finally defeating anti-capitalists on the left. Today’s crises are, in other words, Tony Blair’s unfinished business.

O brave new world

Thus Britain’s current period of upheaval is not just overdue. It is necessary. The EU referendum forces pro-Europeans to make the gutsy case for continental co-operation. If they succeed, the vote should give British leaders a fresh mandate to build and wield influence in Brussels. Scotland’s swerve towards independence, and the accompanying grievances in England, should push politicians to transform Britain into a federation, at last putting the union on a stable footing. This should also precipitate the long-overdue decentralisation of England (a process that has already begun; Manchester will run its own health service from April). Lastly, Mr Corbyn’s leadership should force his moderate MPs to take on a reality that even Mr Blair ducked: Labour has always been two parties, one social democratic and the other anti-capitalist. Over the years it has muddled through, as concessions, feints and tactical battles have postponed a decisive confrontation. No longer: as Mr Corbyn bears down on the moderates, they will have to decide whether to push back, concede the party to him or quit—en masse, not in a dribble, as did their predecessors in 1981 when Labour last swung left—and form a new party.

Britain’s crises may yet go to waste. But today’s flux gives the country a rare chance: to forge happier relations with continental Europe, to federalise the union and to update creaky institutions (asked to vote on a painfully expensive renovation of the Palace of Westminster in the spring, MPs should demand that Parliament move to a new, modern building). It is a test not just of Britain’s ability to evolve, but also of the very practice of muddling through. A political entity can only be sceptical and incremental most of the time if, when events demand it, it can bring about a sea-change. So let Britain’s leaders take in “The Tempest” and heed its wisdom: storms may be destructive, but they can also bring redemption.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21684803-britains-interlocking-political-dramas-may-be-just-what-country-needs-bring-tempest/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




The unexplored world: A new age of discovery





Articles Sections Next

The unexplored world

A new age of discovery

The glory-seeking adventurer of old is giving way to explorers who want to understand the planet rather than dominate it

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



TWENTY years ago this newspaper published an essay that hailed a coming “golden age of discovery”. Great expanses of the Earth were beckoning the intrepid to put their footprints on untrodden ground, scale unclimbed mountains, peer into unscrutinised forest canopies, plumb unvisited caves and dive into unfathomed seas.

Many such challenges remain. But exploration for the sake of being the first, and testing willpower, nerve and endurance, has been giving way to a higher-minded thirst to preserve the planet for future generations. As technology advances, especially in photography and telecoms, it is getting easier for ordinary citizens to play a part. Exploration is becoming both more scientific and more democratic.

All the same, vast unknown chunks of the world still tempt the purely adventurous. The most obvious are mountains: thousands remain unconquered. Then there are caves: speleologists, as cavers are more grandly known, reckon that a good half of them have never even been poked into. Antarctica, larger than the United States and Mexico combined, and Greenland still offer vast, untouched icebound stretches for the ultra-hardy. (The picture above shows a crevasse on Ross Island, Antarctica.) Millions of hectares of forest canopy in the Amazon Basin and in Africa and East Asia, especially Borneo and New Guinea, are yet to be inspected. Least charted of all is the seabed. Oliver Steeds, a leading British ocean explorer and film-maker, reckons that barely 1% of it has been explored. Lastly, there are still isolated peoples who have never been in contact with the outside world, and whose languages remain untranslated and unclassified.

Start with mountains. All 14 higher than 8,000 metres have been scaled; the tallest of all, Mount Everest, has been climbed more than 7,000 times. But many thousands of peaks across the world are still unconquered, including hundreds in the Himalayas rising to 6,000-7,000 metres. Only 200-odd of the 2,800 Nepalese mountains that are higher than 6,000 metres may have been climbed, guesses Glyn Hughes, the archivist of the London-based Alpine Club. The highest unscaled mountain is Gangkhar Puensum, in Bhutan, near the border with China: the authorities have closed it to climbers to respect local beliefs. Muchu Chhish, in Pakistani Kashmir, is thought to be the highest unscaled mountain that it is still possible to get a permit to climb. It defeated a British team in 2014.

Shifting geopolitics have opened some new ranges to Westerners wanting to display their derring-do, especially in the former Soviet republics but also in Chinese-run Tibet. Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan offer many challenging virgin peaks. And of course mountaineers are for ever seeking new “lines”, as they call routes, up mountains whose tops have already been reached. The sheer faces of the range of table-top mountains known as tepuis, near where Venezuela, Brazil and Guyana meet, offer a host of staggeringly hard tests. Even in Europe’s Alps new lines still beckon.

Mountains apart, Antarctica is the continent we know least about, says Julian Dowdeswell, director of the Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge, England. It is the coldest, driest and windiest, and probably offers the greatest opportunity for old-style glory-seekers wanting to secure a “first”—if they can find a sponsor rich enough. In the past 20 years numerous new feats (crossings and climbs by new routes, “unsupported” by mechanical devices, for instance) have been achieved, but many more are still to be tackled.

The most impressive endurance champion is probably Rune Gjeldnes, a Norwegian. Already the first person to cross the Arctic Ocean bringing all his provisions with him, in 2006 he became the first person to cross the Antarctic continent on skis without being resupplied. He is reckoned to be the only person to have traversed the North Pole, the South Pole and Greenland without resupplies.

Caving offers explorers opportunities to test themselves that until recently were not even known to exist. Speleology “has changed massively” in the past two decades, says Andy Eavis, widely considered the world’s foremost caver. The Krubera cave in Georgia, near the Black Sea, down which a Ukrainian team descended in 2004, is twice as deep, at more than 2,000 metres, as the Pierre St Martin cave in the French Pyrenees, which had been reckoned the deepest when Mr Eavis plumbed it in 1971. A new technique of laser scanning can measure such “chambers” far more accurately than before. Mr Eavis still marvels at the great chambers still being found in the Malaysian state of Sarawak, on the island of Borneo. In 1981 he was the first to explore a cave there that is still the largest by area in the world—it could enclose the Hollywood Bowl. Now South China, among other places, is offering new opportunities for cavers. Its Miao Room, penetrated in 1989, is 852 metres long, and the largest by volume.

Access to forest canopies is also being transformed by technology. Towers, balloons, inflatable rafts, light aerial walkways, drones and even giant cranes that have been helicoptered into place allow scientists to see what is going on under once-inaccessible foliage. A new remote-sensing technology known as lidar can illuminate objects high up under the canopy and analyse them through reflected light.

The world’s most extensive unexplored place is undoubtedly the seabed. At first the aim was to get to the ocean’s very bottom. In 1960 Jacques Piccard, a Swiss oceanographer, and Don Walsh, an American, touched the floor of the Mariana Trench, the ocean’s deepest point, off the Pacific island of Guam. It is nearly 11,000 metres down; for comparison, Mount Everest rises 8,848 metres. Since then only one other person, a film-maker, James Cameron, has achieved the feat, in 2012.

Lastly, there is one of the old-school Western explorers’ oldest quests: to find people who have never made contact with other human beings. The richest area in this respect is the Amazon Basin, mainly in Brazil but also extending into Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela. (Paraguay, though not Amazonian, may also host an uncontacted people.) Estimates of the number of uncontacted groups are rising, says Fiona Watson of Survival International, an organisation that seeks to protect tribal peoples and their lands, and to help them determine their own future. Ten years ago the Brazilian government department that deals with the country’s indigenous people reckoned there were between 20 and 30 such groups. Ms Wilson now thinks there are between 70 and 80.

The other last bastion of uncontacted people (or isolated people, as some anthropologists prefer to call them) is New Guinea, an immense island whose western chunk, West Papua, is part of Indonesia and whose eastern side comprises a country of its own, Papua New Guinea (PNG). Half a century ago, many of its people lived in complete isolation from the rest of the world: even, often, from nearby groups. In the 1990s, says Sophie Grig of Survival International, missionaries made contact for the first time with at least 40 distinct groups in West Papua. But recent experiences in Amazonia lead the group to believe that there are still isolated people in various areas of West Papua. It would generally be best for them if they stayed that way, Ms Grig thinks.

“All of the tribes in PNG have had contact with the modern world to one degree or another,” says Jonathan Claussen, an American linguist-cum-explorer who roams PNG. But many have seen only one or two visitors in the past 40 years, he adds; many outlying regions have yet to be visited. “The last uncontacted people are usually clans and families of a tribe that live on the fringes in isolated valleys, sub-ranges and forests,” he says. A tribe may be labelled as contacted, but “perhaps only 20% of the villages have actually been visited…Whole sections of mountain ranges and valleys have had no recorded visits by researchers or travellers.”



Finding and saving endangered languages is yet another challenge. Early this century Tom Headland, an expert on tribal languages in the Philippines at SIL International, a non-profit organisation formerly known as the Summer Institute of Linguistics, reckoned there were 6,809 known languages, but half had fewer than 6,000 speakers each; a quarter, fewer than 1,000. Five hundred, he wrote, had no more than 100 speakers, 200 had fewer than ten. Two languages every month were reckoned to be dying out. Yet previously unknown and not properly deciphered languages are still, he reckons, occasionally found. The Ethnologue, a scholarly compendium published by SIL, has recently put the tally of “living languages” at 7,102, but says that 2,447 are “in trouble” or “dying”.

Don’t just show off

While the prospect of reaching new places and even people still tantalises the adventurous, explorers have become far more conscious of a duty to preserve the environment and less keen to be seen as no more than frostbitten action heroes. Even mountaineers, still often obsessive individualists seeking to pit themselves against the forces of nature, now tend to stress their role in advancing science and protecting the environment and local people. Mr Gjeldnes took regular samples of his blood as he crossed the Antarctic to help research into the functioning of the immune system under extreme conditions. Community Action Nepal, a charity founded by a British mountaineer, Doug Scott, who in 1975 was the first Briton to scale Mount Everest, is supported by thousands of climbers across the globe. It works to improve education, health care and living conditions in the Middle Hill Regions of Nepal, the home of most of the porters who assist Himalayan climbing expeditions.

Krubera, the world’s deepest known cave

Today’s ocean explorers, too, think at least as much about scientific progress as about being the first to reach the bottom of another seabed. Considering its vast expanse, remarkably little is known about it. “Only 0.05% of the ocean floor has been mapped in detail,” says Mr Steeds, who has switched from desert and jungle to the ocean. The “blue economy”, he reckons, could provide a wealth of minerals such as cobalt and manganese, and new plant and fish life. He talks poetically about the five watery zones: “sunlit” means down to 200 metres; “twilit”, descending to 1,000; “midnight” to 4,000; “abyssal” to 6,000; and finally “hadal”, meaning the deepest trenches, where (not being immune to the lure of being first) he has filmed a fish at a deeper level than anyone else.

Virtually all today’s leading explorers stress climate change. “We’ve learnt a totally new way of presenting rainforests to the world,” says Andrew Mitchell, a British zoologist who runs the Global Canopy Programme. “It’s like understanding the lining of your lungs.” Forest coverage, he reckons, hosts 40% of the world’s terrestrial biodiversity. Mr Eavis says that caving offers climatologists “an incredibly detailed history of the planet” in terms of the composition of water and the atmosphere. Bertrand Piccard, son of the late Jacques, is trying, with a British balloonist, Brian Jones, to achieve the first around-the-world trip in a solar-powered aircraft—“to promote clean technologies”.

“The key word nowadays is discovery rather than exploration,” says John Hemming, a former director of Britain’s Royal Geographical Society and an expert on the Amazon. “The term ‘explorer’ has been diminished and debased by headline-grabbing stuntmen and adventurers.” The RGS now gives grants almost solely for research. Mr Hemming quotes Robert Ballard, an American oceanographer famous for discovering the wrecks of the Titanic and the German battleship Bismarck—but who is far prouder of his work on hydrothermal vents. “Science gives legitimacy and worth to exploration,” wrote Mr Ballard. “You see lots of stunts today, but if you’re not doing worthwhile science, you’re not an explorer.”

Most good research, Mr Hemming continues, involves patient observation, often in the same spot, under concealment and for a long time. “It is near-impossible to do that if you’re doing it solo or travelling by some awkward method.” He notes hopefully that many countries that once took less interest in the environment, including China and Brazil, along with smaller countries, such as Oman and various African ones, are becoming keener on conservation. Brazil has improved its once-dismal treatment of indigenous peoples. Mr Mitchell says the world should be grateful to them for helping to preserve the rainforest, which in turn provides the Earth with so much of its potable water.

Exploring an underwater cave off Fiji

Nigel Winser, another British explorer-scientist and long-time RGS luminary who more recently worked for the Earthwatch Institute, a charity founded in the United States to study and protect the environment, praises what he calls “citizen’s science”. Advances in technology, particularly in photography and the internet, make it possible for far more people to carry out valuable research. What he calls “the revolution of the camera trap” means images of animals can be captured seemingly with no interference by humans. Drastic improvements in nocturnal and underwater photography have opened whole new vistas of knowledge. Apps nowadays make it possible to identify the species of a bird by its chirp, often on the spot. Shane Winser, another RGS stalwart (and wife of Nigel), points also to the benefits of television, since it brings the best aspects of exploration into the public domain, not least thanks to sponsorship; witness David Attenborough and Alastair Fothergill, creators of “Planet Earth” and more recently “The Hunt”, two BBC television series.

Nigel Winser, another British explorer-scientist and long-time RGS luminary who more recently worked for the Earthwatch Institute, a charity founded in the United States to study and protect the environment, praises what he calls “citizen’s science”. Advances in technology, particularly in photography and the internet, make it possible for far more people to carry out valuable research. What he calls “the revolution of the camera trap” means images of animals can be captured seemingly with no interference by humans. Drastic improvements in nocturnal and underwater photography have opened whole new vistas of knowledge. Apps nowadays make it possible to identify the species of a bird by its chirp, often on the spot. Shane Winser, another RGS stalwart (and wife of Nigel), points also to the benefits of television, since it brings the best aspects of exploration into the public domain, not least thanks to sponsorship; witness David Attenborough and Alastair Fothergill, creators of “Planet Earth” and more recently “The Hunt”, two BBC television series.

Not that the new zest for scientific discovery has quenched the desire to see what is over the horizon, behind the tree, up the mountain or under the sea. What Robin Hanbury-Tenison, another British explorer, who is president of Survival International, calls “the gosh factor”—that rush of amazement and catharsis when a pinnacle is reached or a mad exploit in some jungle or desert achieved—still motivates many an explorer.

There is still no limit to the feats of endurance that people seek to achieve without a tangible scientific purpose—though often for a charitable one. Just after Christmas a 53-year-old Briton, John Beeden, became the first man to row solo non-stop across the Pacific Ocean (from San Francisco to Cairns in Australia). As Ranulf Fiennes, a British explorer, once said, people are still trying to cross the oceans “in ever tinier gin-bottles”, claiming firsts that have no bearing on science. Mountaineering still offers the same thrills it always has done. Even Everest has an almost endless list of feats yet to have been achieved. In 2006 Mark Inglis, a New Zealander, became the first double amputee to scale it.

But, however admirable, this is not exploration or discovery. The gosh factor has been overtaken by the “do-good factor”.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21684786-glory-seeking-adventurer-old-giving-way-explorers-who-want-understand/print





Articles Sections Next





Business




Travel visas: A strange sort of welcome

Companies’ investment plans: From diggers to data centres

Activists and resources companies: Icahn, you can’t

Cruise lines: Eastward ho!

Schumpeter: Social saints, fiscal fiends





Articles Sections Next

Travel visas

A strange sort of welcome

Governments are deterring business travellers and tourists with cumbersome visa requirements that do little to make their countries more secure

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



THE rise of big emerging economies like China and India, and the steady march of globalisation, have led to a surge in the numbers of people wanting to travel abroad for business or tourism. As a result, demand for visas is at unprecedented levels. In the fiscal year to the end of September 2014 the United States granted just under 10m visas—up from around 6m in 1997, despite blips in the wake of the terrorist attacks of September 11th 2001 and the global financial crisis of 2007-08 (see chart 1).



Citizens of America, Britain and some other rich countries can travel to most places without a visa. Chinese and Indian travellers are far more likely to have to apply for them. And citizens of a few benighted places, such as Iraq and Afghanistan, have to submit to the cost and bureaucracy—and often the humiliation—of the visa-application process to get to most places (see chart 2).



The most sensible response to this surge in demand for short-term visas would be for governments to streamline the application process and scrap the most onerous requirements. But governments are often not sensible about such things. The 26 European countries with a common visa policy—the “Schengen group”—require tourists from India and other developing countries to provide several months’ worth of bank statements and pay slips. Visitors to Britain often have to fill in a ten-page application form, including details of every trip abroad for the past ten years. Business travellers to India must provide two references. Mexico has scrapped a rule requiring visa applicants (including women) to submit a description of their moustaches. But in 2016 America will start requiring visas for some travellers who currently do not need them—if, for example, they have visited Iran, Iraq, Syria or Sudan in the previous five years.

In many cases, instead of simplifying the visa process, governments have offloaded it to private contractors. Travellers may now have to pay a service fee to the company handling their application on top of the standard visa fee. The biggest firm in this growing business is VFS Global, which is part of Kuoni, a Swiss tourism company. Starting from a single premises in Mumbai in 2001, handling applications for American visas, VFS now has more than 1,900 visa centres in 124 countries, processing paperwork for 48 governments.

Of the 113m visa applications made worldwide in 2013, one in three went through a contractor, reckons VFS, which has about half the market. Its main rivals are CSC, with around 10% of the market, and TLScontact, with around 7%. Dozens of smaller firms make up the remainder of the market. The private contractors collect and verify the applicant’s paperwork, ensure that forms are filled in properly, take fingerprints and other biometric information and collect the fees. The consular staff of the destination country simply decide whether to grant the visa, and slap a sticker in the passport of successful applicants.

For the contractors, it is a nice little earner. VFS probably enjoys operating margins of 20%, reckons Kathleen Gailliot, an analyst at Natixis, a French bank. The companies are given a free hand to pad their earnings with pricey “premium” services. In Mumbai, for example, VFS offers Indians applying for British visas a text on their mobile phones to notify them that their passports are ready for collection, at 128 rupees ($2) a shot. For an extra 2,548 rupees, applicants can use a special “lounge” area while submitting their documents, and have their passports posted back to them.

VFS accounts for just 5% of Kuoni’s revenues but more than 60% of its operating profits. So bright are the division’s prospects that its parent company is getting out of the tour-operator business, which it has been in since 1906, to concentrate on visa-processing and a few other specialist travel services.

Until VFS opened its Mumbai office, applicants had to queue for an average of five hours in the sweltering heat outside the American consulate. After the job was handed to the contractor, the typical waiting time fell to one hour. However, applicants still have no choice but to submit to whatever petty demands contractors make—such as, say, banning them from using mobile phones while they sit waiting for their appointments. If the staff are rude, the queues are badly managed or the “extras” extravagantly priced, travellers can hardly take their business elsewhere.

The application-processing firms are profiting both from travellers’ lack of choice and from governments’ failure to consider the economic damage caused by their visa requirements. There is scant evidence that making all travellers submit the same documents every time they want to travel, or provide extensive financial details, protects countries from terrorists or illegal immigrants. In contrast, there is evidence of how liberal visa regimes bring in the bucks. A report in 2014 from the European Parliament, “A Smarter Visa Policy for Economic Growth”, estimated that over-strict visa rules probably cost the EU economy 250,000 jobs and €12.6 billion ($13.8 billion) a year in lost output. It recommended requiring fewer documents from applicants, handing out longer visas and simplifying the whole process.

Since Britain is not part of the Schengen group, Chinese people taking a tour of Europe have to apply for a second visa to cross the Channel. Only 6% of them do so, says Euromonitor, a research firm. The British Tourist Authority has complained that the country’s visa policies cost it £2.8 billion ($4.1 billion) a year in lost revenue.

However, amid worries about the wave of asylum-seekers from Syria and elsewhere, governments in Europe and beyond will face pressure to keep making life hard for tourists and business travellers—even as other departments of those same governments spend heavily on promoting tourism and foreign investment.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21684791-governments-are-deterring-business-travellers-and-tourists-cumbersome-visa-requirements/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Companies’ investment plans

From diggers to data centres

Computers, research and software will be the big-ticket items in 2016

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

THERE have been three great waves of corporate investment in the past two decades. First came the dotcom splurge of 1997-2001, when cash was poured into building mobile-phone networks and the internet’s backbone. Then there was the emerging-market frenzy of 2003-10. Western firms threw about $2 trillion into factories and other facilities in places like China and India. In 2005-13 there was a craze for commodities, partly driven by insatiable Chinese demand. Global energy and metals firms spent $6 trillion digging in the Australian outback and drilling for oil in North Dakota and deep beneath Brazil’s coastal waters.



The dotcom boom turned to bust, emerging markets are now in poor shape and commodity prices have slumped in the past year (costing some firms’ bosses their jobs—see article). So where are companies looking to invest now? A new study by Hugo Scott-Gall, of Goldman Sachs, a bank, crunches the numbers for capital investment at more than 2,500 firms worldwide, forecasting how things will look in 2017 compared with 2014. It finds a startling divergence across industries (see chart).

Energy, mining and chemicals firms are expected to slash their capital-investment budgets by 20-50%. Property firms are cutting back too, in part reflecting the end of China’s building boom. This has a knock-on effect on those capital-goods firms that supply equipment to these industries. For example, Caterpillar, which makes diggers used by mining and construction firms, expects its capital investment in 2016 to be half the level of 2012.

In contrast, internet, software and other tech firms are on a high, with their budgets expected to expand by a quarter or more. Though some tech firms have gone asset-light, renting their processing power and data storage in the online “cloud”, others—including cloud-providers themselves—are splurging on hardware. In 2016 the combined capital spending of Google and Apple will be $24 billion, almost equal to Exxon’s $28 billion budget.



Measured in dollars, the overall picture is of a 15% fall in corporate capital spending by 2017. Allowing for the greenback’s big rise since 2014, the fall will be just 5% or so in local-currency terms. And the figures exclude research-and-development (R&D) spending. That is rising quickly. America’s national accounts, for example, show an economy-wide decline in investment in physical plant being offset by a rise in R&D and software spending.

However you slice the numbers, growth in capital investment is unusually concentrated. Of the industries that Goldman studied, 22 are forecast to have shrinking budgets in dollar terms and 12 are expected to grow. The top 20 spenders on R&D—firms such as Samsung, Roche, Novartis and Microsoft—account for 25% of worldwide R&D spending by listed firms, according to Bloomberg, an information provider. The corporate world seems mostly destined to stagnation, with only a few hotspots of investment and growth.



So investors might hope that an elite of investment-intensive, technology-based firms will conquer new markets and increase profits faster than all others. That is certainly what Silicon Valley’s boosters think will happen. They cheer each time tech firms unveil some new area of expansion—smart watches, driverless cars, virtual-reality goggles, delivery drones.

Yet history suggests that whenever there is a near-unanimous view on what to invest in, disaster follows as firms in those industries lose their spending discipline. The shares of Western firms exposed to energy and emerging markets have lagged the S&P 500 index by over 50% in the past two years. In 2016 it should become clearer whether the present funnelling of investment into tech-based industries reflects a step change in the way the economy works, or is just a symptom of a stagnant climate in which pockets of opportunity are hyped beyond their true potential.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21684796-computers-research-and-software-will-be-big-ticket-items-2016-diggers-data/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Activists and resources companies

Icahn, you can’t

Swashbucklers of the commodities boom meet their match

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



“PEOPLE call us pioneers. Well...some people say pioneers end up with arrows in their back.” So James “Jim Bob” Moffett, one of the great wildcatters of the past half-century, presaged his fate in 2012. On December 28th Freeport-McMoRan, the firm he founded and built into a global mining and oil giant, said he was stepping aside as executive chairman.

He seems to be the latest casualty of the “Icahn effect”, the toppling of larger-than-life entrepreneurs of the commodities boom after Carl Icahn, a veteran activist investor, buys stakes in their firms and seeks to shift their focus to cost-cutting. Though Mr Moffett, a geologist, found one of the world’s largest copper and gold mines, Grasberg, in the mountains of Indonesia, in 1988, his costly pursuit of the appropriately named Davy Jones gasfield in the Gulf of Mexico, as well as controversial takeovers, upset many shareholders. So did a 70% drop in Freeport’s share price during 2015.

Since it invested in Freeport in August, Mr Icahn’s firm has acquired two seats on the board, and the miner has halted the dividend and shrunk operations to stabilise its debt. Mr Icahn has not commented on Mr Moffett’s removal, but the defenestration fits a pattern.

In mid-December Mr Icahn increased his stake in Cheniere Energy, which is preparing to export the first-ever shipment of liquefied natural gas (LNG) from America’s lower-48 states. After he did so, Cheniere’s board pushed out Charif Souki, its co-founder and chief executive, because it opposed his strategy of betting even bigger on LNG, despite a global glut. Acknowledging the changing times, Mr Souki displayed no hard feelings: “Am I the best person to manage a quasi-utility? I’m a builder, not a cost-cutter,” he told Forbes magazine.

Two years earlier one of the biggest mavericks of the shale boom, Aubrey McClendon, also came a cropper after Mr Icahn invested in his firm, Chesapeake Energy. Other commodities chiefs with an overdeveloped risk appetite, such as Ivan Glasenberg of Glencore, a debt-ridden mining and trading firm, should keep looking over their shoulders.

Mr Icahn’s victories can be pyrrhic, though. Almost all his energy investments were deep in the red in 2015. And Mr Moffett’s arrow in the back comes with a painkiller. He will become “chairman emeritus”, on $1.5m a year.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21684792-swashbucklers-commodities-boom-meet-their-match-icahn-you-cant/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Cruise lines

Eastward ho!

The biggest cruise operators are sailing full steam ahead to China

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

Sailing and shopping, the perfect mix

EVERY New Year, cruise lines brace themselves for “wave season”—the first three months of the year, in which nearly a third of all holidays at sea are booked. They will do well to improve on their 2015 results. On December 18th Carnival, the world’s largest operator, with more than 40% of a global market worth nearly $40 billion a year, announced a record $2.1 billion in full-year earnings, 40% up on 2014, thanks to buoyant demand and cheap fuel oil. Along with Royal Caribbean Cruises (RCL) and Norwegian Cruise Line (NCL), the trio now control around 80% of the industry.

Amid worries that demand for cruises may be peaking in some rich countries, the big three are now piling into the biggest potential market of all, China. Although Carnival based its first ship—the Costa Allegra—at a mainland Chinese port back in 2006, only in the past year have the big three got serious about moving capacity there from America and Europe.

In 2016 Carnival plans to increase the number of its ships in China from four to six. In October it announced the launch of a joint venture with a Chinese shipbuilder and China Investment Corporation, a sovereign-wealth fund, to establish the first new cruise brand aimed at the domestic Chinese market. RCL, which had three ships based in China in 2014, now has four and will add a fifth in the next few months. NCL, which has hitherto stayed away, plans to enter the Chinese market in 2017.

Carnival and RCL no longer send elderly cast-off hulks from America and Europe to China. Now they send their newest and best, such as RCL’s Quantum of the Seas, a megaship that can carry 4,180 holidaymakers, which has been based in Shanghai since June 2015.

Such are Carnival’s hopes for the Chinese market that it recently moved its chief operations officer, Alan Buckelew, to Shanghai to oversee the firm’s expansion there. The number of Chinese households earning over $35,000 a year—the figure the industry sees as the point at which foreign travel takes off—has increased from 6m to more than 27m over the past decade, according to Oxford Economics, a consulting firm. The number of mainland holidaymakers going on cruises—a comparatively fuss-free way of travelling abroad for the first time—has been growing by around 80% a year, and is expected to keep doing so despite China’s slowing growth rate. The government wants to promote the cruise-lines business together with the building of the ships it uses, as part of a rebalancing of the economy towards consumption in its latest five-year plan.

The Chinese market is also very profitable. This is partly because higher daily rates can be charged for the short, four-to-six-night cruises that are more popular in China, but also because the Chinese spend far more onboard. They are less interested than Americans or Britons in boozing and spa treatments, but keener on gambling, and really go to town in the onboard shops, buying such things as foreign-made appliances. One recent shopping craze on Carnival’s Chinese ships was for Japanese rice cookers, Mr Buckelew says.

If China’s economic slowdown intensifies, or if consumer interest in cruises turns out to be a fad, the operators risk being left with excess capacity and having their margins squeezed. Even so, betting on the rise of the Chinese holidaymaker looks more attractive than sticking to the main Western markets.

In Europe bookings have been hit by recent terrorist attacks in France and north Africa, according to Greg Badishkanian, a cruise-line analyst at Citigroup, a bank. And in Britain cruise-passenger numbers have been falling since 2013 because newly retired people, staple customers, have less disposable income than the previous generation of pensioners, who are now too old to travel. The future plans of the big three operators suggest they have concluded that the American market is saturated and has poor growth prospects. In 2017 there could be the first fall on record in North American cruise-ship capacity, according to Robin Farley, an analyst at UBS, another bank. For the moment, the decision by the big three to sail for China is a choice. But it could become a necessity.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21684800-biggest-cruise-operators-are-sailing-full-steam-ahead-china-eastward-ho/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

Social saints, fiscal fiends

Opinions vary on whether firms can be “socially responsible” while avoiding taxes

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



PFIZER has always prided itself on its commitment to corporate social responsibility (CSR). The drugs giant talks loftily about “embracing our responsibility to society”. It insists that it does as much as it can to make sure that the world’s poor can gain access to its products. It is particularly proud of the work that it does with NGOs and “other global health stakeholders” to strengthen and improve health-care systems. But this has not deterred it from seeking a gargantuan “tax inversion”. The company intends, as part of a $160 billion takeover of Allergan, to shift its tax domicile from America to Ireland, where Allergan is domiciled, and where corporate-income taxes are considerably lower. Pfizer’s shareholders no doubt rejoiced: in 2014 the company would have saved $1 billion of the $3.1 billion it paid to the US Treasury. But many Americans were outraged: Hillary Clinton, the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination, promised to impose an “exit tax” on companies that engage in such tactics.

A paper in the January issue of the Accounting Review suggests that Pfizer is far from unusual in trying to perform this pro-CSR, anti-tax straddle. David Guenther of the University of Oregon’s Lundquist College of Business and his co-authors compared the effective tax rates paid by a sample of American firms between 2002 and 2011 with a measure of those companies’ CSR programmes compiled by MSCI, an index provider. It found that the companies which do the most CSR also make the most strenuous efforts to avoid paying tax—and that those with a high CSR score also spend more lobbying on tax.

The most obvious explanation for this inverse relationship is hypocrisy. Surely CSR depends on the idea that firms have an obligation to society, not just to shareholders? And surely the most basic obligation to society is to pay the taxes that support the poor and vulnerable? Another explanation is that firms are not monoliths but collections of rival fiefs with different priorities. The department that oversees the CSR programmes, and thus has an interest in boosting their budgets, may never talk to those in the finance department who are paid to minimise the tax bill.

Mr Guenther and his colleagues suggest two more intriguing explanations. The first is that companies intentionally embrace CSR for exactly the same reason they try to reduce their taxes—to maximise their profits. There is some evidence that companies with large CSR programmes find it easier to attract talented workers (particularly among the millennial generation) and to generate a buzz around their products. Baruch Lev of New York University has found that companies with higher CSR scores have higher revenue growth. Yet the more vigorous companies are in reducing their taxes, the more they destroy any social capital that they have accumulated through CSR. Starbucks recognised how much damage its British operation had done to its reputation when the extent of its tax planning was exposed in 2012, and promised to pay around £10m (then $16m) a year in each of the following two years, whether or not it was profitable.

The second possible explanation is that companies regard CSR and taxes as substitutes for each other: the less you pay in taxes, the more you have left over for good works. Firms might even convince themselves that they have a moral obligation to reduce their tax bills: they have no control over what governments do with their taxes, whereas they can select their CSR projects and ensure they are run efficiently.

These rival theories reflect conflicting ideas on what counts as a socially responsible company. The view put forward by various international bodies that seek to set standards for corporate behaviour, and accepted by many big European firms, is that responsible firms should pay a fair share of taxes while privately sponsoring some do-gooding on top of this. The Global Reporting Initiative, which issues guidelines on how companies should report their “sustainability” efforts, recommends that they provide detailed information on their tax payments, since the public wants to know what they are contributing to the sustainability of “a larger economic system”. The UN Global Compact, a body that presses firms to align themselves with universal social goals, encourages them to collaborate with governments and other organisations to “generate more taxes”.

The business of business: discuss

However, many CEOs, particularly in America, take a different view: that the best way for companies to contribute to the common good is to succeed as businesses. Furthermore, they argue, the more money they can keep from the government’s clutches, the more they can invest in new plants (which create jobs in the short term) or research (which creates jobs in the longer term). And the more money they will have left over for good causes as well: thus Intel’s 2011 CSR report stated that the company “believes in promoting tax policies that encourage innovation and competition around the world”, while 3M’s sustainability report for the same year stated that its top public-policy objective was “To make the case for tax reform and lower US corporate-tax rates for a more level global playing field”.

The CEO school of corporate responsibility has something going for it. Such bosses are right to argue that a business’s main contribution to society is to provide jobs and income. They are also right to argue for tax harmonisation: America has only itself to blame if firms revolt against its high corporate-tax rate. But they should recognise that there is a big difference between moving to a place like Ireland because it has made a more sensible trade-off between collecting taxes and promoting business, and indulging in contortions such as the “Double Irish with a Dutch Sandwich”, whose only aim is to avoid paying taxes anywhere. They also need to recognise that there is a big difference between worrying that government is inefficient and pretending that it is irrelevant, and thus that contributing to its upkeep is unnecessary.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21684770-social-saints-fiscal-fiends-opinions-vary-whether-firms-can-be-socially-responsible/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Global inflation: Low for longer

The first venture capitalists: Fin-tech

Buttonwood: Tales of the unexpected

European insurance firms: One rule to bind them all

South-East Asian integration: More hat than cattle

Free exchange: Exit, pursued by bear





Articles Sections Next

Global inflation

Low for longer

Inklings of inflation in the rich world are outweighed by downward pressure on prices elsewhere

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



EVER since the financial crisis of 2008, forecasters have scanned the horizon for the next big disruption. There are plenty of candidates for 2016. China’s economy, whose might acted as a counterweight to the slump in the rich world in the years after the crisis, is now itself a worry. Other emerging markets, notably Brazil, remain in a deep funk. The sell-off in the high-yield-debt market in December has prompted fears of a broader re-pricing of corporate credit this year.

Yet one worry is absent: financial markets are priced for continued low inflation or “lowflation”. A synthetic measure, derived from bond prices, puts expected consumer-price inflation in America in five years’ time at around 1.8%. That translates into an inflation rate of around 1.3% on the price index for personal-consumption expenditure (PCE), the measure on which the Federal Reserve bases its 2% inflation target. Ten-year bond yields are just 2.3% in America, and are below 2% in Britain and below 1% in much of the rest of Europe. The price of an ounce of gold, a common hedge against inflation, has fallen to $1,070, far below its peak in 2011 of $1,900. Yet market expectations are often confounded. Economic recoveries are maturing. Labour markets are tightening. Could inflation be less subdued than expected in 2016?



Rich-world inflation is currently depressed because of temporary influences. In America the PCE index rose by just 0.4% year on year in November—but that is in large part because of a sharp fall in consumers’ energy prices in early 2015, which will soon drop out of the annual comparison. The core measure, which excludes food and energy prices, has been stable at 1.3% for months. It might also be somewhat suppressed by the sharp fall in oil prices, which has held down the cost of producing other sorts of goods and services. An analysis by Joseph Lupton of J.P. Morgan finds that core inflation worldwide has crept up to 2.3%, a rate that has rarely been exceeded in the past 15 years. In biggish emerging markets, including Brazil, Russia and Turkey, core inflation is above the central bank’s target (see chart).

A low blow

In the view of some, lowflation is a relic of the past. Even the euro zone is recovering from its prolonged recession; the business cycle in other rich economies is more advanced. The debt hangover that has troubled them for almost a decade has faded. Job markets are also a lot tighter than a few years ago, when deflation was a serious concern. Unemployment in America has fallen to 5%, a rate which is close to many estimates of full employment. The jobless rate in Britain is 5.2%. In Germany it is 6.3%. If the recent trend of low productivity growth in these economies continues, bottlenecks in the jobs market will emerge and higher inflation may not be far behind. For instance, if America’s GDP grows by 2.3% in 2016, its recent average, and growth in output per worker also matches its recent sluggish trend, the unemployment rate would decline further, to around 4%, reckons Mr Lupton. The lower the jobless rate goes, the more likely it is that wages—and eventually inflation—will pick up.

As rich countries were wrestling to reduce their debts, emerging markets went on a credit binge for which the reckoning is just beginning. Debt in China in particular has risen sharply relative to GDP since 2008. Some of the resulting stimulus went into factories, leading to overcapacity and falling global prices for various goods, from steel to solar panels. But a lot of China’s debt went on financing housing and infrastructure, rather than its export capacity. Moreover, the Chinese authorities’ desire to avoid big lurches downwards in the yuan ought to minimise the risk that it exports lowflation to the rest of the world.

Nonetheless, the expectations projected by bond markets—that lowflation will persist—have sound underpinnings. For a start, the price of oil and other commodities does not yet seem to have reached bottom. The price of a barrel of oil fell to an 11-year low of under $36 before Christmas, before rallying a little on hopes of renewed stimulus in China. Saudi Arabia is pumping at close to capacity, in an effort to force out high-cost producers such as America’s shale-oil firms and thus grab a bigger slice of the global market. The strategy has had some success. For instance, the number of oil-rigs operating in America has fallen from around 1,500 a year ago to just 538, according to Baker Hughes, an oil-services firm. But oil production in America remains above 9m barrels a day, and Iran’s exports are likely to increase in 2016, thanks to the lifting of Western sanctions. For the time being, the oil market heavily favours buyers over sellers.

Where inflation can be found in the world, it is not obviously a function of capacity constraints. The biggish economies in which core inflation is above the central bank’s target tend to be commodity exporters that have suffered big falls in their currencies. That, in turn, has stoked domestic inflation. Core inflation is typically well below target in countries that are importers of raw materials. And despite tighter labour markets in rich countries, wages are not rising very fast. That might in part be because of low expectations of inflation.

It seems likely, also, that the debt burden in emerging markets, and the slower growth that usually comes after a credit binge, will bear down on global prices for a while. Even if China’s spare capacity is not fully exportable, plenty of other emerging markets have built mines and factories in expectation of higher Chinese growth that will now prove redundant. As nervous investors creep back to the comparative safety of developed markets, the upward pressure on big currencies, notably the dollar, will increase—adding to downward pressure on local prices.

As was the case in the late 1990s, rich-world policymakers will find that they have to keep their domestic economies primed with low interest rates to offset disinflation from abroad. The strong dollar has already caused a split in American industry between strong services and weaker manufacturing. Lopsided economies may prove as hard for policymakers to steer as deleveraging ones.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21684802-inklings-inflation-rich-world-are-outweighed-downward-pressure/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The first venture capitalists

Fin-tech

Before there were tech startups, there was whaling

Jan 2nd 2016 | NEW BEDFORD | From the print edition



FEW industries involve as much drama and risk as whaling did. The last voyage of the Essex, which inspired Herman Melville’s classic, “Moby Dick”, and is the subject of a new film, “In the Heart of The Sea”, gives a sense of the horrors involved. The ship left Nantucket in 1819 and sailed for over a year before being destroyed by a whale it was hunting. The 20 crew members survived the sinking, but found themselves adrift in the Pacific in three longboats, with little food and no water. Three opted to stay on a desert island, from which they were rescued three months later, on the verge of starvation. The others sailed on, hoping to reach South America but dying one by one. At first the survivors buried the dead at sea; then they resorted to eating the corpses of their crewmates. When they ran out of bodies, they drew lots to decide whom to shoot and eat. Only five of the 17 were eventually rescued. By then, they were so delirious that they did not understand what was happening.

The only reason that anyone could be induced to take part in such a dangerous business was the fabulous profit that could be made. Gideon Allen & Sons, a whaling syndicate based in New Bedford, Massachusetts, made returns of 60% a year during much of the 19th century by financing whaling voyages—perhaps the best performance of any firm in American history. It was the most successful of a very successful bunch. Overall returns in the whaling business in New Bedford between 1817 and 1892 averaged 14% a year—an impressive record by any standard.

New Bedford was not the only whaling port in America; nor was America the only whaling nation. Yet according to a study published in 1859, of the 900-odd active whaling ships around the world in 1850, 700 were American, and 70% of those came from New Bedford. The town’s whalers came to dominate the industry, and reap immense profits, thanks to a novel technology that remains relevant to this day. They did not invent a new type of ship, or a new means of tracking whales; instead, they developed a new business model that was extremely effective at marshalling capital and skilled workers despite the immense risks involved for both. Whaling all but disappeared as an industry after mineral oil supplanted whale oil as a fuel. But the business structures pioneered in New Bedford remain as relevant as they ever were. Without them, the tech booms of the 1990s and today would not have been possible.

Most historians trace the origins of the modern company back to outfits like the Dutch East India Company and its British equivalent. These were given national monopolies on trade in certain goods or with certain places. This legally buttressed status allowed them to fund themselves by selling shares to the public, helping to get stockmarkets off the ground. The managers of these multinational enterprises were professionals with only small ownership stakes. Lower-level employees generally had no shareholding at all.

By eliminating dependence on individual owners or managers, these entities became self-perpetuating. But their monopolies also embroiled them in politics and led inevitably to corruption. Both the British and Dutch versions ended up requiring government bail-outs—a habit giant firms have not yet kicked.

The whaling industry involved a radically different approach. It was one of the first to grapple with the difficulty of aligning incentives among owners, managers and employees, according to Tom Nicholas and Jonas Peter Akins of Harvard Business School. In this model, there was no state backing. Managers held big stakes in the business, giving them every reason to attend to the interests of the handful of outside investors. Their stakes were held through carefully constructed syndicates and rarely traded; everyone was, financially at least, on board for the entire voyage. Payment for the crew came from a cut of the profits, giving them a pressing interest in the success of the voyage as well. As a consequence, decision-making could be delegated down to the point where it really mattered, to the captain and crew in the throes of the hunt, when risk and return were palpable.

The investors often ended up underwater too

At the top of the New Bedford hierarchy was an agent or firm of agents like Gideon Allen, responsible for the purchase and outfitting of the ship, the hiring of the crew and the sale of the catch. To give them an incentive to cut the best deals possible, the agents put up a big share of the investment. Those with the best reputation received better terms from the other investors. Captains, who ran the show while the ship was at sea, often put up capital as well. A similar system of incentives is used in the riskier reaches of the investment-management business today, notes Mr Nicholas.

Investors received half to two-thirds of the profits. The rest was divided among the crew in what was known as the “lay” system. A captain might get a 12th lay (one-twelfth of the remaining profit). In Melville’s novel, Ishmael, who was new to the business, was originally offered a 777th lay but managed to haggle a 300th. Although that would probably have proved a paltry amount, it was a stake nonetheless, and set a benchmark for future pay. Ishmael’s friend Queequeg, a cannibal from the South Sea islands, got a 90th lay because he had experience with a harpoon. Demand for experienced crewmembers was so high that the Essex’s ill-fated captain, George Pollard, was immediately given a second command on the ship that rescued him (which sank as well).

Every participant wanted to bring in returns quickly, but there were no artificial deadlines—nothing resembling what is now called “quarterly capitalism”. When whales became rare in accessible places, the crews from New Bedford extended their search to every corner of every ocean, however many years that took.

Safety in numbers

To ensure that they were not ruined by a few disastrous voyages, the whaling firms invested in multiple expeditions at the same time, much as the venture capitalists of today “spray and pray”. A study published in 1997 concluded that, of the 787 boats launched from New Bedford during the 18th century, 272 sank or were destroyed. The firm that belonged to George Howland was not atypical: of its 15 ships, between four and nine were at sea at any given moment. One was sunk by a whale, three lost at sea, two burned by their crews, one destroyed by a Confederate gunboat during America’s civil war and five abandoned in Arctic ice. Yet Howland died a millionaire in 1852.

It helped that most of the whalers of New Bedford were strict Quakers, who prized frugality and shunned ostentation. This helped them not only husband their own capital, which was needed to finance voyages, but also to win over other investors. Hetty Howland Green, one of the richest agents, was said to have made her own shoes and to have owned only one dress.

It also helped that they were open-minded: they readily employed anyone who could contribute to their ventures. Perhaps the single most important technological innovation used by New Bedford’s whaling fleet was the “Temple Toggle”, a harpoon tip devised by Lewis Temple, a former slave from Virginia.

But the whalers’ main asset was their business model. In the 1830s, the legislatures of six American states approved charters for whaling corporations giving them the right to raise capital by selling shares to the public—much the same corporate structure as the Dutch and British East India Companies. None of the six survived the 1840s. “The diffuse ownership structure of the corporations, and the reduced stakes held by their managers, likely diminished the incentives for the managers to perform their role diligently,” concludes Eric Hilt of Wellesley College. Given the expense of buying, outfitting and launching a boat into the perilous ocean, the link between risk and reward needed, it seems, to be tighter.

The lay system could work to the crew’s disadvantage, however. In an effort to reduce claims on the crew’s share of the profits, ruthless captains were said to abandon men on the trip home. (Similar shedding of employees is not unheard of at contemporary tech startups before a big payout.) Other schemes existed to cheat crew members, such as forcing them to buy clothing at inflated prices or to pay usurious interest on advances on their pay. And open-mindedness went only so far: although black sailors were not discriminated against in terms of pay, they were treated less well in other respects, receiving less food and worse quarters.

Yet the New Bedford system was undeniably effective. It soon emptied the oceans of whales, even as other lucrative opportunities emerged for daredevils determined to strike it rich, such as the California gold rush. “The same industrial growth that initially supplied markets and profits for whaling activity ultimately yielded opportunities more attractive than whaling to local capital,” wrote David Moment, a student at Harvard Business School, in 1957. In short, with returns dwindling, the crews and the capitalists turned to other ventures. But the business practices they developed are used in high-risk, high-return industries to this day.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21684805-there-were-tech-startups-there-was-whaling-fin-tech/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

Tales of the unexpected

Five potential surprises for 2016

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

INVESTORS often start the calendar year in a buoyant mood, only to be caught out by unexpected events. It is almost inevitable that the consensus will be proved wrong in some respects, not least because the views of most investors will already be reflected in market prices.

So this column would like to suggest five potential surprises for 2016. The definition of a surprise is something that the consensus (as judged by betting sites or polls of fund managers) does not expect.

The first surprise may be that the dollar weakens, not strengthens. The consensus view is that the Federal Reserve, having pushed up rates before Christmas, will tighten monetary policy two or three more times in 2016. Higher rates will make investors eager to buy the dollar, especially as both the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan will keep their rates near zero. However, the dollar has already had a very good run, so higher rates may already be priced into the currency. As it is, investors seem to doubt that the Fed will tighten as much as the central bank currently projects. The actual outcome may be feebler still (see article).

The second surprise may be too familiar to deserve the name. Commentators have been calling an end to the bull market in government bonds for many years now, and the pundits are expecting much the same in 2016. But persistently low inflation and the support of central banks have kept yields low to date, and may keep doing so. It is all reminiscent of Japan: since 2000, so many investors have failed to profit from betting on higher Japanese yields that the trade is known as the “widowmaker”. In the developed world, pension funds, insurers and retired workers are all eager buyers of fixed-income assets. Perhaps bond yields will edge higher in 2016, but not by very much.

These two surprises may have a common cause: the failure of the global economy to grow as rapidly as some hope. In turn, economic sluggishness seems likely to drive voter discontent. And that may lead to the third and fourth surprises.

American political risk could dog the markets in late 2016. At the start of 2015, investors probably anticipated a dynastic clash between Jeb Bush and Hillary Clinton. But the Republican candidate seems more likely to be either Donald Trump or Ted Cruz. The former has argued for a ban on Muslims coming to America and a wall on the southern border; the latter’s proposals include a flat income tax, a sales tax and a monetary system linked to gold. Although Mrs Clinton would be the favourite in a race against either man, she is a flawed candidate, mistrusted by many voters. The prospect of a Cruz or Trump presidency would lead to considerable uncertainty in the markets: should either man be elected, would they try to stick to their campaign pledges and would Congress let them? Indeed, this uncertainty might be another reason why the dollar may struggle in 2016.

Political risk might also be a problem in Britain, which is likely to hold a referendum on leaving the European Union in 2016. It is widely assumed that Britons will vote for the status quo: that outcome has a 78% probability on the PredictIt website. But opinion polls show that the “remain” and “leave” camps are almost deadlocked and the press is fairly Eurosceptic. Voters might use the referendum as a means of protesting against high levels of immigration, which the government has promised, but failed, to reduce.

If Britain votes for exit, there will be much uncertainty about the country’s attractiveness to foreign investors. Scottish voters are much more pro-EU than English ones, and Brexit would prompt calls for a second independence referendum so Scotland could stay in the single market. David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, would surely have to resign if his referendum gamble backfired. All this might be good reason to sell the pound.



The final surprise might be more benign: emerging markets could perform rather better than investors expect. A poll of fund managers in December by Bank of America-Merrill Lynch found that pessimists on emerging markets outnumbered optimists by 27 percentage points. There is plenty of bad news: China’s slowdown, falling commodity prices and recessions in Brazil and Russia, for example. But this may have been built into prices; the MSCI emerging-market index has fallen by 20% over the past six years while the S&P 500 index is up by 40% (see chart). It may be time for a rebound.

Not all of these surprises will come to pass, of course. But it seems likely that at least one or two will. Predicting which ones may mark the difference between success and failure for investors in 2016.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21684807-five-potential-surprises-2016-tales-unexpected/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

European insurance firms

One rule to bind them all

New regulations will give a better sense of the soundness of Europe’s insurers

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



LIKE banks, insurers need a cushion of capital to ensure that they can meet customers’ claims in the event of unexpectedly big payouts or poor investment performance. As at banks, these cushions have at times proved woefully thin. In theory, all that changes on January 1st—in the European Union, at least—when a new set of regulations known as Solvency 2 comes into force. After more than ten years of negotiation, all European insurers will have to follow uniform rules on capital that are designed to make the firms more robust and allow investors and customers to assess their strength much more easily.

Not everyone is thrilled at this prospect. Mention “upcoming regulatory changes” to an insurance executive and a tirade inevitably follows about ambiguities and inconsistencies within the new rules, discrepancies in enforcement and the mountains of paperwork involved. Some firms have had to bolster capital in anticipation: Delta Lloyd, a Dutch insurer, announced in November that it would raise €1 billion ($1.1 billion). The rules favour diversified firms, so those that offer just one form of insurance are under pressure to merge. That impetus contributed to several deals involving specialist insurers in 2015, including Fairfax’s purchase of Brit in February and XL’s takeover of Catlin in May. Anxious bosses have trimmed the industry’s own debts to relatively low levels.

Some of the disgruntlement is legitimate. Regulators themselves seem to agree that the current risk weightings unduly penalise investments in long-term debt tied to infrastructure; some government bonds, in contrast, may be considered too safe. European firms with big international operations say it is not clear to what extent Solvency 2 applies to their non-European subsidiaries. Transitional rules designed to make life easier for German life insurers in particular will shield them from some elements of the new rules for up to 16 years.

Then there is the question of how many insurers will be allowed to substitute internal models for the standardised formulae used to calculate capital requirements. Some big firms, including 19 in Britain, have persuaded their national regulator that their own calculations are at least as good as the prescribed ones. More firms will apply in 2016, in the hope of trimming the amount of capital required and thus increasing profits.

To some extent that undermines the logic of a uniform system, by making insurers using internal models and those using the standard one hard to compare, says Jim Bichard of PwC, an accounting firm: “The solvency ratios will be all over the place and there’s a high risk of misinterpretation.” It also raises the concern that some of the national regulators charged with applying the new rules will be more lenient than others. The British and Dutch ones, for example, are thought to be more exacting than their Italian counterpart.

Yet whatever Solvency 2’s failings, the new regime will still provide a continent-wide benchmark for the first time. “It will confirm who is strong and who is weak,” says David Prowse of Fitch, a rating agency. The strong will presumably start to put their excess capital to work, making acquisitions or returning cash to shareholders. The weak, meanwhile, will have to boost their capital, trim their liabilities by offering stingier policies, sell capital-intensive parts of the business or fall into the arms of one of their brawnier counterparts.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21684810-new-regulations-will-give-better-sense-soundness-europes-insurers-one/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

South-East Asian integration

More hat than cattle

A seamless regional economic bloc is just around the corner—as always

Jan 2nd 2016 | SINGAPORE | From the print edition

Opening up, ASEAN-style

GRANDIOSE statements from the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) are the region’s Christmas crackers: they appear at regular intervals, create a commotion but contain little of substance. In November the leaders of the club’s ten members declared that the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC)—a single market around which goods, services, capital and “skilled labour” are supposed to flow freely—would come into being on December 31st. So will South-East Asia’s 622m people wake up in a new world in 2016, or will the AEC prove another paper crown?

The answer probably lies somewhere in the middle. For one thing, much of the work towards economic integration has been done: by ASEAN’s reckoning, 79.5% of the measures the AEC involves have already been implemented. ASEAN already attracts large amounts of foreign investment, and its leaders have been talking up integration and regionalism since the organisation was founded in 1967. So the AEC represents less a radical change than an attempt to accelerate existing trends.

But anyone hoping that ASEAN is about to turn into an Asian version of the European Union will be disappointed. European integration is fundamentally a political project with an inward focus, argues Jayant Menon of the Asian Development Bank, which has led to a mushrooming of institutions. The AEC, in contrast, is an economic project, with almost no institutional heft—just a small secretariat—devoted to “outward-oriented regionalism”. It is designed to make the region an easier and more attractive place for foreign companies to do business and thus to boost trade and investment.

Those missions are helped by ASEAN’s economic dynamism. Between 2007 and 2014 regional GDP doubled, from $1.3 trillion to $2.6 trillion, and GDP per person grew from $2,343 to $4,135. Total internal and external trade grew from $1.6 trillion to $2.5 trillion, and foreign direct investment rose from $85 billion to $136 billion. Viewed as a single economy, ASEAN is the world’s seventh-largest and Asia’s third-largest, behind China and Japan. And while China and Japan are ageing rapidly, ASEAN remains young, with more than half its population under 30. China’s slowdown has taken its toll on the region—particularly on commodity exporters such as Malaysia and Indonesia—but its young workforce, improving infrastructure and rising incomes leave it poised for strong future growth.

Behind those aggregate figures, though, lie vast differences, not all of which are conducive to economic integration. Vietnam and Laos are communist dictatorships; Brunei an absolute monarchy; the Philippines and Indonesia rowdy democracies. Singapore was founded as a trading entrepot in 1819; Indonesia has a history of protectionism. Perhaps inevitably, the commitment of such a diverse bunch to regional integration, and the pooling of sovereignty it implies, is not as strong as ASEAN’s triumphant statements suggest. There is no mechanism to enforce the group’s many agreements and treaties. Regional banking systems and capital markets remain unintegrated. Tariffs may vanish, but non-tariff barriers pop up in their place. Members continue to set their own intellectual-property, land-use and immigration policies.

The rules regarding the free movement of “skilled labour” provide a good illustration of the AEC’s limitations. Under its mutual-recognition arrangements (MRAs), certain professional qualifications from any member are deemed valid in all the others, allowing holders of them to work throughout the region. But the AEC’s MRAs cover only eight professions, accounting for just 1.5% of ASEAN’s total workforce. Moreover, even in these fields, other domestic regulations inhibit foreign workers. Nursing, for instance, is among the eight professions subject to an MRA, but to work in Thailand nurses still must pass a qualifying exam in Thai. As Mr Menon points out, this is short-sighted: English-speaking Filipino nurses would be a boon to Thailand’s burgeoning medical-tourism sector.

Knitting South-East Asia together economically sounds appealing, but the political will to make it happen is hard to find. For the moment, ASEAN seems more focused on the letter than the spirit of regional integration.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21684811-seamless-regional-economic-bloc-just-around-corneras-always-more-hat/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

Exit, pursued by bear

The Fed has at last raised rates. What happens next?

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS more than two weeks since the Federal Reserve raised interest rates for the first time in over nine years, and the world has not (yet) ended. But it is too soon to celebrate. Several central banks have tried to lift rates in recent years after long spells near zero, only to be forced to reverse course and cut them again (see chart). The outcome of America’s rate rise, whatever it may be, will help economists understand why zero exerts such a powerful gravitational pull.

Recessions strike when too many people wish to save and too few to spend. Central banks try to escape the doldrums by slashing interest rates, encouraging people to loosen their grip on their money. It is hard to lower rates much below zero, however, since people and businesses would begin to swap bank deposits for cash or other assets. So during a really nasty shock, economists agree, rates cannot go low enough to revive demand.

There is significant disagreement, however, on why economies become stuck in this quagmire for long periods. There are three main explanations. The Fed maintains that the problem stems from central-bank paralysis, either self-induced or politically imposed. That prevents the use of unconventional monetary policies such as quantitative easing—the printing of money to buy bonds. The intention of QE is to buy enough long-dated debt to lower long-term borrowing rates, thereby getting around the interest-rate floor. Once QE has generated a speedy enough recovery, senior officials at the Fed argue, there is no reason not to raise rates as in normal times.

If the Fed is right, 2016 will be a rosy year for the American economy. The central bank expects growth to accelerate and unemployment to keep falling even as it lifts rates to 1.5% or so by the end of the year. Yet markets reckon that is wildly optimistic, and that rates will remain below 1%. That is where the other two explanations come in.

The first is the “liquidity trap”, an idea which dates back to the 1930s and was dusted off when Japan sank into deflation in the late 1990s. Its proponents argue that central banks are very nearly helpless once rates drop to zero. Not even QE is much use, since banks are not short of money to lend, but of sound borrowers to lend to.

Advocates of this theory see only two routes out of the trap. The government can soak up excess savings by borrowing heavily itself and then spending to boost demand. Or the central bank can promise to tolerate much higher inflation when, in the distant future, the economy returns to health. The promise of higher-than-normal inflation in future, if believed, reduces the real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rate in the present, since money used to repay loans will be worth less than the money borrowed. Expectations of higher future inflation therefore provide the stuck economy with the sub-zero interest rates needed to escape the rut.

Governments pursued both these policies in the 1930s to escape the Depression. But when they reversed course prematurely, as America’s did in 1937, the economy suffered a nasty and immediate relapse. The liquidity-trap explanation suggests the Fed’s rate rise was ill-advised. The American economy, after all, is far from perky: it is growing much more slowly than the pre-crisis trend; inflation is barely above zero; and expectations of inflation are close to their lowest levels of the recovery. If this view is correct, the Fed will be forced by tumbling growth and inflation to reverse course in short order, or face a new recession.

Stuck in a glut

There is a third version of events, however. This narrative, which counts Larry Summers, a former treasury secretary, among its main proponents, suggests that the problem is a global glut of savings relative to attractive investment options. This glut of capital has steadily and relentlessly pushed real interest rates around the world towards zero.

The savings-investment mismatch has several causes. Dampened expectations for long-run growth, thanks to everything from ageing to reductions in capital spending enabled by new technology, are squeezing investment. At the same time soaring inequality, which concentrates income in the hands of people who tend to save, along with a hunger for safe assets in a world of massive and volatile capital flows, boosts saving. The result is a shortfall in global demand that sucks ever more of the world economy into the zero-rate trap.

Economies with the biggest piles of savings relative to investment—such as China and the euro area—export their excess capital abroad, and as a consequence run large current-account surpluses. Those surpluses drain demand from healthier economies, as consumers’ spending is redirected abroad. Low rates reduce central banks’ capacity to offset this drag, and the long-run nature of the problem means that promises to let inflation run wild in the future are less credible than ever.

This trap is an especially difficult one to escape. Fixing the global imbalance between savings and investment requires broad action right across the world economy: increased immigration to countries with ageing populations, dramatic reforms to stagnant economies and heavy borrowing by creditworthy governments. Short of that, the only options are sticking plasters, such as currency depreciation, which alleviates the domestic problem while worsening the pressure on other countries, or capital controls designed to restore monetary independence by keeping the tides of global capital at bay.

If this story is the right one, the outcome of the Fed’s first rises will seem unremarkable. Growth will weaken slightly and inflation will linger near zero, forcing the Fed to abandon plans for higher rates. Yet the implications for the global economy will be grave. In the absence of radical, co-ordinated stimulus or restrictions on the free flow of capital, ever more of the world will be drawn, indefinitely, into the zero-rate trap.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21684797-fed-has-last-raised-rates-what-happens-next-exit-pursued-bear/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Aircraft engines: Flying’s new gear

The future of the Nobel prize: Throw caution to the wind?

Meteorology: Barmy weather





Articles Sections Next

Aircraft engines

Flying’s new gear

A quieter, more economical jet engine, fitted with a gearbox, is about to arrive

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



EVERYONE remembers the Wright brothers, who made the first powered, heavier-than-air flights by human beings on a beach in North Carolina in 1903. Few, by contrast, remember Charlie Taylor, a mechanic at the brothers’ bicycle business in Dayton, Ohio. Yet it was Taylor who, by building an internal-combustion engine out of aluminium castings rather than iron ones, created a device both light enough and powerful enough to lift Orville and Wilbur into the sky.

Engine design has always been crucial to aviation. To start with, more powerful versions of the piston-driven motor pioneered by Taylor ruled the roost. Then, a radical, new approach emerged as the designs of Frank Whittle, a British engineer, ushered in the jet age. The jet has since evolved into the turbofan, whose gaping intakes have—as seasoned air travellers will have noticed—grown larger and larger over the years, to accommodate ever bigger and better fans. And now, as 2015 turns into 2016, another new design is being rolled out. This is the geared turbofan, which is available as an option on the A320neo, the latest product of Airbus, Europe’s biggest aerospace group.

Geared turbofans, as their name suggests, include a gearbox as part of the mechanism. Those on the A320neo are the brainchildren of engineers at Pratt & Whitney, a division of United Technologies, an American conglomerate. Designing and building geared turbofans, which Pratt & Whitney brands “PurePower”, is a gamble. The firm has spent two decades and more than $10 billion developing them. Connecting an engine’s inlet fan to the compressor and turbine in its core through a gearbox should give better fuel economy and make the thing quieter—both desirable outcomes. But the bigger the engine the bigger the forces on the gearbox and the more likely it is that something will go wrong. So, though gearboxes are found in turboprops (jet engines that turn a propeller) and in a few executive jets, no one had until now managed to scale one up to cope with the 30,000 horsepower delivered by the core of an airliner’s engine.

Pratt & Whitney has persevered because it thinks the conventional, ungeared turbofan is reaching its limits, and that only by adding a gearbox can airlines achieve the performance and economy which will be required of them in the future. Airlines, though, are notoriously conservative, and are wary of new, complicated kit like gearboxes, which are yet one more thing that can go wrong. So Pratt & Whitney has had its work cut out to persuade them.

Meshing it together

A jet engine works according to Newton’s third law of motion: to every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. The reaction is forward movement. The action which provokes that is the ejection from the back of the jet of fast-moving gas. This gas generates thrust in proportion to its mass and to the speed with which it is being ejected. In the early, ear-splitting jet engines designed by Whittle and his contemporaries, the thrust came from air that entered the engine’s core at the front (see diagram) where it was squeezed by a compressor, mixed with fuel and ignited to produce hot gases that rushed out of the rear. Though the mass of this exhaust gas was small, its velocity was high, so the resulting thrust kept an aircraft fitted with such an engine aloft. The compressor, meanwhile, was turned by a turbine propelled by the exhaust gases.



A turbofan works in a broadly similar way, but with a fan also turned by the turbine to push some of the air around, rather than through, the core. Though this core-bypassing air is not moving as fast as the exhaust gases, there is a lot of it—so it, too, produces a great deal of thrust. The upshot is a system that is more efficient and quieter than earlier jet engines.

The proportion of air going around the core compared with that going through it is known as the bypass ratio. Some of the latest turbofans have bypass ratios as high as 9:1. It is to achieve this that fans (and therefore inlets) have increased in size. But as fan blades get longer, their tips travel faster—and now those tips are going at close to the speed of sound. Accelerating them any further would cause shock waves, and these might result in dangerous vibrations.

A gearbox gets around this by letting the fan turn more slowly than the compressor and the turbine. This means the fan can be made bigger (and can thus accelerate a greater volume of air) without slowing everything else down to its rev rate. This arrangement permits all parts to be engineered for optimal performance. As a result, PurePower has a bypass ratio of 12:1.

Doing all of this does, though, require an utterly reliable gear box. Pratt & Whitney uses advanced nickel-based alloys for the components of the box itself. The fan blades are made from a lightweight alloy of aluminium and lithium. And the turbine is composed of titanium aluminide, a substance developed in collaboration with MTU, a German firm, that has twice the strength of the conventional cast alloys used to make turbines.

The upshot is that a pair of PurePower engines slung under an A320neo’s wings promise to reduce fuel consumption by 15% compared with a standard A320. This could save an airline more than $1.5m a year per aircraft in fuel costs. Geared turbofans also give the plane a longer range and are markedly less noisy.

There have, inevitably, been teething problems. Industry reports suggest that the geared turbofan needs a slightly longer period to cool down than was expected, to avoid uneven wear when it is restarted. This might sound trivial, but at a busy airport it could cost a plane its take-off slot. For that reason Qatar Airways, which had been expected to be the first to take delivery of the A320neo, is believed to have postponed receipt. The honour of being first now looks like going to Lufthansa, a German carrier. Pratt & Whitney says the geared turbofan meets or exceeds all its performance requirements. During routine flight testing, ways to improve the engine were identified, but the company adds that any modifications will be minor.

Whether geared turbofans will sweep all before them remains to be seen—and depends, at least in part, on the response of Pratt & Whitney’s two big rivals in the jet-engine business, General Electric (another American firm) and Rolls-Royce (a British one). These companies are also working on more efficient aircraft engines. Both, though, think improvements can still be squeezed from the conventional turbofan design without resorting to a gearbox. General Electric, in partnership with Snecma, a French firm, is offering a rival engine, called the CFM Leap, for the A320neo. This will be available later in 2016 and is claimed by the partners to provide fuel savings similar to those of a geared arrangement. The Leap is a conventional turbofan, but it is made using some unconventional techniques. These include new composite materials and also additive manufacturing (popularly known as 3D printing). Rolls-Royce, too, aims to get greater efficiency from its turbofan designs, though it does also have a gearbox-development programme, with a view to making a geared turbofan that might enter service on large passenger aircraft in around a decade’s time.

As to PurePower itself, so far the opinion of airlines is divided. Airbus has taken orders for more than 4,400 A320neos. About a third of these will sport PurePower, a third Leap, and in the cases of the remaining third, the customer has yet to make up his mind.

Pratt & Whitney, though, does not plan to be tied only to Airbus. It is also offering versions of PurePower to firms trying to break the duopoly enjoyed on short-to-medium-range aircraft by that firm and Boeing. Bombardier of Canada is one such. Its competitor to the A320 is called the CSeries. The Mitsubishi Regional Jet, from Japan, is another plane which Pratt & Whitney hopes might use PurePower. And there are also the MC-21, a 180-seat airliner from Irkut, a Russian aerospace company better known for its Sukhoi fighter jets, and the E-Jet from Embraer, of Brazil. Whether Pratt & Whitney’s PurePower play will pay off remains to be seen, but as Charlie Taylor knew over 100 years ago, gearing up for success does mean taking risks.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21684775-quieter-more-economical-jet-engine-fitted-gearbox-about/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The future of the Nobel prize

Throw caution to the wind?

For everything to stay the same, everything may need to change

Jan 2nd 2016 | Stockholm | From the print edition



FEW events exceed the splendour of the Nobel ceremony and gala dinner held every December in Stockholm. After champagne toasts to Sweden’s king, and to the memory of Alfred Nobel, 1,300 guests sitting in the city hall cheer the latest crop of laureates in chemistry, physics, physiology or medicine, literature and economics. (The peace prize is awarded at a separate shindig, in Oslo.) For many of the winners, perhaps more used to sporting white coats than white ties, the occasion is a career-defining moment of glamour. No other prize has anything like the stature of a Nobel. In scientific circles it is known simply as “the trip to Stockholm”. But some do whisper the question, “for how much longer?”

Nobel, who made his money by inventing dynamite, set things off with a bang. In 1895 he bequeathed 31m kronor (roughly $200m at today’s values) to create a foundation, the income from which would pay for the prizes. The endowment is now worth 4 billion kronor (some $500m). That sounds like a lot, but it hardly represents a spectacular return after 120 years.



As a result, the prizes have suffered. Today, an individual award—which can be split up to three ways—is worth 8m kronor in addition to the 18-carat gold medal each recipient receives. A handy sum, but one whose lavishness has fallen as cautious investing has failed to increase the pot as fast as economic growth has increased people’s incomes. According to the foundation’s boss, Lars Heikensten, who was once governor of Sweden’s central bank, when the first prizes were awarded, in 1901, they represented 25 times the annual salary of a professor at a typical university in Europe or America. Now, the ratio is more like ten. Meanwhile rivals, such as the Kavli and Breakthrough prizes, are being endowed by more recent plutocrats. Many of these (see chart) pay out more than the Nobel Foundation—in the case of the Breakthrough prize, three times as much. The Nobel brand may thus be in danger of erosion, as the foundation itself admits in its most recent annual report. This says that “ensuring the importance of the Nobel prize in the long term continues to pose a significant challenge”.

Mr Heikensten is trying to take matters in hand. He has overseen a big awareness-raising push on social media, and through conferences and debates that carry the Nobel name. And, sometime in the next 12 months, work will start on a Nobel visitor centre and conference venue in the heart of old Stockholm. This controversial cube of glass, costing 1.2 billion kronor, will be paid for by private donors, with much of the money coming from two families of Swedish billionaires, the Wallenbergs and the Perssons. Which is all well and good, but does not really get to the heart of the matter—that the whole Nobel proposition needs dragging into the 21st century.

One ticklish question is whether the prize categories are still relevant. The science prizes—the core of the foundation’s fame—reflect the academic priorities of the founder’s era. Things have changed. Galling though it is to the memory of Nobel, a chemist, pure chemistry is largely worked out as an academic discipline. These days, most of the winners of the chemistry prize could have fitted just as easily into the physics or physiology-or-medicine categories. Meanwhile, biology has hypertrophied. Shoe-horning it into “physiology or medicine” seems bizarre, and excludes important fields such as ecology.

Rivals have prizes for categories such as neuroscience and nanoscience. Changing or adding to the Nobel list, though, has not found favour. Even the economics prize, introduced in 1969, is looked down on by traditionalists as not being a proper Nobel.

Then there is the question of replenishing the coffers. A praiseworthy desire to preserve independence by not taking donations into the endowment has become something of a drawback. This, as much as overcautious investing, is responsible for the prizes’ diminished financial value. A more welcoming attitude to donations (even if these are restricted to the personal, rather than the corporate, and perhaps to legacies rather than lifetime gifts that might be seen as involving some quid pro quo) might be sensible, to boost the prizes’ value. For reputation is a funny thing. Scandal can destroy it overnight, of course, and the foundation’s trustees might fairly argue that their cautious approach has avoided that fate. But reputation can also slip away, unnoticed, as the world’s attention shifts elsewhere.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21684774-everything-stay-same-everything-may-need-change-throw-caution/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Meteorology

Barmy weather

The rain gods have brought a dreadful Christmas

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



THE year 2015 was probably the hottest since meteorological records began. It certainly ended with a flourish. On North America’s east coast, dreams of a white Christmas were banished by springlike temperatures. In New York, for instance, the mercury hit 22°C (72°F) on Christmas Eve. Europe, too, enjoyed unseasonal warmth. But this was no festive gift, for the warm, moist air that caused it also brought humungous storms.

In South America flooding has forced 130,000 Paraguayans from their homes. In the United States tornadoes before and after Christmas have killed at least 29 people. Thirteen more have drowned in floods caused by a storm that this week tracked across the Atlantic (see map), where it may add to the misery of people in large parts of northern England, who have already been inundated several times this year, the Christmas period included (see article).

As The Economist went to press, forecasters were warning that this storm, dubbed Frank by British meteorologists, may develop into what is known as a bomb cyclone, undergoing a sudden, drastic drop in air pressure at its centre in a way that will suck warm air from the tropics and funnel it northward. If these predictions prove correct, the temperature at the North Pole is likely to rise a little above freezing. Though that is still chilly by most people’s standards, it is an extraordinary 30°C above the average for this sunless time of year.

One explanation for the weird weather, at least in the Americas, is El Niño—a phenomenon in which a slackening of trade winds over the Pacific allows warm water to slosh back eastward, increasing the amount of heat and moisture in the atmosphere in a way that has various predictable effects across the tropics. The floods in South America are part of a typical Niño pattern, and the tornadoes in the United States tend to fit, too.

Another factor is that the polar vortex, which traps cold air in the Arctic, has taken a form which permits balmier than normal weather in much of the northern high latitudes. This week’s bomb cyclone may change that, though. Bits of Europe could be in for a cold new year.

Climate change is a contributor too. The greenhouse effect warms the oceans as well as the atmosphere, and they have stored up quite a lot of heat in recent years. The oceans are therefore unusually warm—not just the eastern Pacific, but the Indian and Atlantic, too.

Kevin Trenberth of the National Centre for Atmospheric Research, in Boulder, Colorado, points out that a lack of hurricanes—which most people would welcome—may explain some of the effects around the Atlantic at the moment as heat normally released by summer hurricanes stayed in the ocean. As ever, connecting weather patterns across the seasons and across the globe is difficult. But learning how to do so is becoming ever more important.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21684773-rain-gods-have-brought-dreadful-christmas-barmy-weather/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




The Great War at midpoint: A most terrible year

China and India: Clash of the titans

Ukraine’s war-torn history: Keeping hope alive

Non-Western classical music: Voyages of discovery

New film: Bearing down

New film: Correction: Whatever should I do?





Articles Sections Next

The Great War at midpoint

A most terrible year

Two long battles of attrition engulfed the European powers in 1916, a year crammed both with horrors and with consequences, many of which still endure

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



BOOKS that focus on what happened in a particular year have become a publishing phenomenon. So Keith Jeffery, a British academic historian whose last work was a fascinating, if slightly plodding, official history of Britain’s secret intelligence service, MI6, must have thought it a clever idea to go for 1916, the midpoint of the first world war. Mr Jeffery’s purpose is to show that not only was it a year of tremendous events, but one in which the effects of the war spread across most of the world, often with consequences that can still be felt a century later.

By 1916, the war that some had believed would be over by Christmas 1914 had become an attritional slog on both the largely static Western Front and on the rather more fluctuating front in the East. To break the deadlock, the general staffs of all the main belligerents continued to work on new tactics, such as the creeping artillery barrage, and to seek new technologies, including the tank, which first saw action in September 1916. Contrary to a widely held view, the second half of the war was a period of unprecedented military innovation.

The idea that sheer offensive élan could overcome well-entrenched defences equipped with modern weaponry, in the form of accurate artillery and the machine- gun, had died during the appalling bloodletting of late 1914. In the four months before the war of movement in the West ground to a halt, France and Germany had between them suffered over 1.5m casualties—a loss rate that was not exceeded until manoeuvre returned to the battlefield in the final months of fighting. By 1916 most of the soldiers on both sides had not only lost faith in imminent victory, but had become fatalistically resigned to the war as permanent crucible for their generation which civilians and politicians at home could not begin to comprehend.

The last hope that the war might be brought to a swift conclusion by a stroke of strategic brilliance had faded with the abject failure of the Gallipoli campaign to deal the expected blow to the Ottoman Empire. Just a few days before the close of 1915, the Allied forces withdrew stealthily from the beaches at Suvla Bay and “Anzac” Cove (the acronym for the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps, which fought there with great gallantry, but, contrary to national myths, did not suffer the bulk of the casualties). The withdrawal, in contrast to the rest of the shambolic campaign, was rather brilliantly conducted. But the lesson was still a painful one: although “sideshows” continued to exercise the imagination of those with an imperialistic mindset, the grim reality for Britain and France was that the war would be won or lost on the Western Front.

That realisation fed into something else. By 1916 sentiment had hardened into a widespread feeling on both sides that the sacrifices had already been so great that the possibility of a negotiated peace had ceased to be politically conceivable. The only way forward, it seemed, was to prevail in a fight to the finish whatever the cost. That was one reason why 1916 saw two of the most terrible confrontations of the war: the battle of Verdun, which began in February, and the battle of the Somme, which was launched on July 1st.

During the whole of 1915 there were 1.8m casualties on the Western Front; in just eight months of 1916, thanks to those two epic struggles, France, Britain and Germany together sustained 2.2m casualties. For the German chief of staff, Erich von Falkenhayn, the fortress at Verdun was chosen as the place where “the forces of France will bleed to death”. Verdun, writes Mr Jeffery in “1916: A Global History” (Bloomsbury, $32 and £25) “became a byword for the manifest horrors of industrialised, ‘total’ war”. But for France, the defence of Verdun in the face of Germany’s greatest onslaught of the war so far became the ultimate symbol of national heroism. For the British, the battle of the Somme came to represent something less noble. At the outset, the British army suffered its greatest-ever loss in a single day (more than 57,000 casualties). The shock of July 1st 1916 came to stand for not just the suffering and courage of the soldiers, but, later, anger over the human cost of flawed tactics and supposedly callous military leadership.

Yet at the time the battle, which continued until November, was not regarded as a disaster. The French made significant gains during September, which, William Philpott, author of “Bloody Victory” (2009), believes was the “tipping point” of the war. He argues that the Somme “relieved the pressure on Verdun, restored the initiative of the Allies, wore down the enemy’s manpower and morale and…stretched German resources dangerously thin”. With their superior manpower and resources, the Allies believed the Somme was “a strategic victory in a war of attrition” which they would eventually win.

Paradoxically, the great naval battle of Jutland, two months before the Somme offensive, looked at best like a costly draw for the Royal Navy, which lost more ships and men than Germany’s High Seas Fleet, but was in fact a strategic success. Although, as Mr Jeffery points out, contrary to myth, it was not the last time the High Seas Fleet ventured out of Wilhelmshaven, the damage done to its smaller naval force at Jutland underlined the risks of seeking a definitive engagement. As a result, there was no further real threat to Britain’s naval blockade of Germany which, according to German apologists for their eventual military defeat, led to deteriorating conditions on the home front (malnutrition and sickness if not actual starvation) and the myth of the “stab in the back” by treacherous republican politicians.

A further consequence of Jutland was that with waning appetite for another major fleet action and its attendant risks, German U-boats went back to a largely commerce-raiding role. It was the fateful decision early in 1917 to expand into unrestricted warfare that led directly to America’s entry into the war a few months later, in April. A thread thus leads from Jutland to the single event that perhaps did most to ensure that Germany would lose the war.

The attritional struggles on both the main fronts were directly connected to the wider impact of the war as the fragile regimes of three of the belligerents, Austria-Hungary, Russia and the Ottoman Empire, began to crack under the strain. Austria-Hungary, whose attempt to chastise rebellious Serbia fuelled the initial descent into war, was by 1916 buckling at the seams. Neglecting the struggle against Russia in the East, Austria-Hungary’s chief of the general staff, Franz Conrad von Hötzendorf, had sent his best troops to fight the Italians, but had still got bogged down. Things turned from bad to worse when the Russian general Aleksei Brusilov launched a brilliantly conceived offensive in June. The Russian advance put intolerable pressure on the fragile loyalties of the multi-ethnic Habsburg armies. There were mass defections of Czech, Ukrainian, Croat and Slovenian units who were deeply reluctant to fight fellow Slavs.

Brusilov eventually ran out of steam when German divisions arrived to stiffen Habsburg resistance. But his offensive proved to be another major turning point. Austria-Hungary was more or less destroyed as a military power, increasingly dependent on Germany to stay in the fight. Less obviously, exhausted by the inconclusive effort of its greatest feat of arms in the war, the Russian army turned in on itself, creating the conditions for the revolution the next year that was hijacked by Lenin with help from Germany.

The battles on the Eastern Front in 1916 “crucially accelerated the political and social destabilisation of both the Russian and Habsburg empires”, as Mr Jeffery notes. Nearly all the areas where the fighting took place were in the colonised spaces of eastern Europe: that is to say, in places where “the population felt itself under the domination of a foreign power”. The war encouraged people to challenge the imperial status quo and assert their right to national self-determination, still a relatively new concept and one that has remained a source of conflict and controversy.

With every major belligerent by 1916 in extremis, it was not just in eastern Europe and the Balkans that nationalist movements surfaced to exploit the distraction of the colonial power. Ireland saw the Easter Rising when 1,400 armed republicans seized a number of Dublin landmarks, including the GPO building, only surrendering when British artillery was used to shell their positions. The subsequent execution of 15 of the rebels and the imposition of martial law increased opposition to Ireland’s role in the war and gave a boost the republican cause that led to the establishment of the Irish Free State six years later.

In the Middle East, the British and French pursued a policy of fomenting Arab nationalism as a means of undermining the Ottoman Empire and staving off German attempts to promote a pan-Islamist jihad against the two older colonial powers. In May 1916 two rather obscure diplomats, François Georges-Picot and Sir Mark Sykes, reached an agreement that divided Arab Ottoman provinces into areas of future British and French control or influence. The baleful results of their insouciant map-drawing are still being felt today, notably in the turmoil of Syria and Iraq.

That 1916 was an extraordinary year is not in doubt. It was the pivotal year of the Great War, which as Fritz Stern, a German-American historian, rightly observed, was “the first calamity of the 20th century, the calamity from which all other calamities sprang”. The intensity and scale of the fighting was the trigger for a wave of political, economic and social upheavals that destroyed empires and forged national identities, sometimes for the better, very often for the worse. Historians have been hard at work teasing out the threads; readers can expect a deluge of new books in the coming months.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21684766-two-long-battles-attrition-engulfed-european-powers-1916-year-crammed-both/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

China and India

Clash of the titans

The war that echoes down the decades

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

Kennedy and Nehru step out

JFK’s Forgotten Crisis: Tibet, the CIA and the Sino-Indian War. By Bruce Riedel. Brookings Institution Press; 256 pages; $29.

IN THE autumn of 1962 Chinese troops invaded Indian-held territory, attacking across the 1,800-mile (2,880km) border that stretches along the Himalayas between the two giants of Asia. Mao Zedong instructed his army to expel Indian soldiers from territory that China claimed in Kashmir. In Washington the Chinese offensive was seen as a serious communist move in the cold war.

It was an inconvenient moment for the White House. President John Kennedy was absorbed in an even bigger crisis with communism closer to home: the flow of Soviet missiles to Cuba which threatened a nuclear conflict. Luckily for Kennedy, he had his own man in New Delhi. His friend from Harvard, John Kenneth Galbraith, was the American ambassador. So in a relatively easy act of delegation, Galbraith was put in charge of the “other” crisis.

Galbraith proved up to the task, in part, as Bruce Riedel writes in “JFK’s Forgotten Crisis”, because he had access to the president and his aides. Most ambassadors report to the State Department, but the blunt Galbraith told the president that going through those channels was “like trying to fornicate through a mattress”.

The border war did not last long. The Chinese crushed the Indians. Mao declared a unilateral ceasefire a month later and withdrew Chinese forces. He had prevailed over his Asian rival, humiliating the Indian prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru.

But victory was not just about Chinese might. At Galbraith’s urging, the Americans had quickly backed the distressed Nehru. An emergency airlift of supplies was sent to Calcutta and a carrier battle group was dispatched to the Bay of Bengal. In the end, Mao judged that the Americans might actually come to the help of India. He did not want to suffer huge losses of Chinese soldiers so soon after the Korean war. Thus American deterrence worked, and a confrontation between America and China was avoided, Mr Riedel writes.

The actual war is just one facet of this high-wire story of the geopolitics of the period, with its outsized characters and decisions that still reverberate today. Mr Riedel puts his experience as a former CIA analyst and a senior adviser on the National Security Council to canny use, uncovering details about an American covert operation in Tibet that has been mostly forgotten, though not by China.

Between 1957 and the early 1970s America spirited young Tibetans out of their homeland through Bangladesh (then East Pakistan), trained them in Colorado, and parachuted them back into Tibet, where they fought the Chinese army. Galbraith described the covert effort as “a particularly insane enterprise”. But the CIA prevailed. In 1961 the Americans were so starved for information about China that the CIA bragged about the ambush of a Chinese army truck by the Tibetan rebels. Mr Riedel describes how a bloodstained satchel of Chinese documents from the truck was taken to the White House as prized bounty. The Americans were so ignorant about the early years of communist China, he writes, that the operation was deemed worth the risk because of the documents’ descriptions of the status of Sino-Soviet relations, and the grim conditions in the Chinese countryside.

The current alliances on the subcontinent and the unsettling arms race between Pakistan and India hark back to the war of 1962. Kennedy’s decision to help India drew Pakistan closer to China. India started down its path to becoming a nuclear power after its defeat by China. When India tested a nuclear weapon in 1998, the rationale was the threat from China.

Today China and India are competitors, not enemies. But more than 50 years after the war, the border dispute remains unresolved. The two countries account for more than a third of the world’s population. In July 2014 at the first meeting between the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, and Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, Mr Xi said: “When India and China meet, the whole world watches.” This superb history shows why.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21684764-war-echoes-down-decades-clash-titans/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Ukraine’s war-torn history

Keeping hope alive

Why the struggle for Ukraine is the key to Europe’s future

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

Remembering the revolution

The Gates of Europe: A History of Ukraine. By Serhii Plokhy. Basic Books; 395 pages; $29.99. Allen Lane; £25.

ROWS over inheritances are bitter—within families and between countries. At the heart of the conflict between Russia and Ukraine is the contested legacy of a long-forgotten superpower: Kievan Rus. Both Vladimir Putin’s Russia and post-Soviet Ukraine lay claim to the mantle of Vladimir the Great, a prince who just over 1,000 years ago accepted Christian baptism for his unruly tribes of Slavs and Vikings. To patriotic Russians, that was the founding action of their statehood. For Ukrainians, the story is the other way round: their country, so often wiped off the map by its neighbours, is the true descendant.

That dispute underlies today’s smouldering war. Many Russians find it hard to accept that Ukraine is really a state; moreover, Ukrainians (especially if they speak Russian as a first language) are essentially Russians. The territory they inhabit is therefore part of Moscow’s patrimony.

Ukraine’s identity and its enemies over the past ten centuries are the central threads of Serhii Plokhy’s admirable new history. He eschews polemic—almost to a fault, given the horrors he describes. The subject material could seem dauntingly dense: few readers will be familiar with the twists and turns of the history, and unfamiliar names and places abound. But Mr Plokhy—a Harvard historian whose previous book, “The Last Empire”, was a notable account of the Soviet Union’s downfall—treads a careful path.

The story is not just of high politics, gruesome and enthralling though that is. Even when Ukraine did not exist as a state, he writes, “language, folklore, literature and, last but not least, history became building blocks of a modern national identity”. He pays particular attention to the linguistic complexities. Ukrainians may speak Russian yet also identify profoundly with the Ukrainian state. The real linguistic divide is with Polish: western Ukraine was for many decades under Polish rule. Memories of massacres and oppression are recent and vivid, making the reconciliation between those two countries all the more remarkable.

The epilogue to “The Gates of Europe” rightly describes the Ukraine crisis as central to Russia and Europe as a whole. It is widely known that the Ukrainian national anthem begins: “Ukraine has not yet perished”. Mr Plokhy points out that the Polish one begins in similarly mordant style. The question for Ukrainians—and for Europe—is whether the country can summon up the determination that Poland has shown to tread the hard road which history has set before it.

The stakes are high: a successful, stable Ukraine would be a strong candidate to join and strengthen the European Union. It would also be a devastating refutation of the Putin regime’s contention that bellicose autocracy is the best way of running a large ex-Soviet Slavic country.

But the odds are uncomfortably long. Ukraine returned to statehood in 1991 shorn of its elites, thanks to famine, repression and Russification. The creeps and cronies who have so signally misruled the country since then have acquired great riches, and put down deep roots. Two democratic upheavals—the Orange revolution that began in late 2004 and the Maidan protests of 2013—have failed to dislodge this parasitic ruling class.

Yet belief in Ukraine’s history of tolerance and legality, rooted in European Christian civilisation, keeps hope alive. In his elegant and careful exposition of Ukraine’s past, Mr Plokhy has also provided some signposts to the future.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21684765-why-struggle-ukraine-key-europes-future-keeping-hope-alive/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Non-Western classical music

Voyages of discovery

Classical music that no one talks about

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



The Other Classical Musics: Fifteen Great Traditions. Edited by Michael Church. Boydell Press; 426 pages; £25.

ANY self-respecting arts-lover living in America or Europe is familiar with a smattering of writers, painters and sculptors from outside the West. But few cultural buffs could name a single composer from, say, China or Turkey, let alone give any detail about them. A collection of essays, entitled “The Other Classical Musics”, shows how much they are missing.

Intelligently edited by Michael Church, a British critic, the book looks at the canons of different parts of the world (India and China are deemed worthy of two chapters each, though Latin America is ignored). Written by different scholars, each chapter has a common structure, with a concise outline of the instruments, the style and the social relations behind the music. Lots of beautiful pictures and extracts of musical notation break up the text.

The chapters on Indian classical music will be of particular interest to many readers, who may already have a vague understanding of it through the works of Ravi Shankar, a sitar-player (pictured). The book shows important differences between north (Hindustani) and south (Carnatic) Indian styles. For instance, tablas—drums with heads usually fashioned from goat skin—are more commonly used in Hindustani music; Carnatic melodies tend to contain more flourishes. (Shankar played largely Hindustani music.)

Such characterisations are helpful for the lay reader; but the contributors also show a keen eye for historical nuance. Many of them question the usefulness of the term “classical”, arguing that what people may now perceive to be traditional has in fact constantly changed over time. In the chapter on classical Japanese music there is a wonderful illustration of two sheets of musical notation, one from 1303 and the other from the present day; their different styles hint at how the form has evolved.

Classical Iranian music has likewise seen much change. During the 1950s it fell under the sway of European musical practices, but as the government grew concerned about Westernisation it sponsored efforts to reassert a Persian flavour. As for India, before the 20th century the country’s music was no more than “a variety of musical traditions performed in different places by different social groups”. Some historians argue that Indian “classical” music was really a cobbling together of different traditions by 20th-century nationalists.

Alongside other chapters on places like Tajikistan, north Africa and Java, the book has one on European classical music. For many readers this chapter will be rather familiar; but for those who know little about composers like Pérotin (who was born in Paris and active in the late 12th century, when he came to be known as Pérotin the Great) or John Dunstable (c.1390-1453), a celebrated English composer of polyphonic music, it will be just as interesting as the others. And in fewer than 30 pages it offers as good a summary of the Western canon as can be found anywhere.

Readers should not try and digest the whole book in one go; far better to use it for reference. Indeed, the best way to appreciate it is to read it while listening to the music under discussion (your reviewer searched for the relevant compositions on YouTube and played the extracts of notation on the piano). There is a treasure trove of underappreciated music out there; this book will convince many to explore it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21684767-classical-music-no-one-talks-about-voyages-discovery/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

New film

Bearing down

“The Revenant” comes so close to being an action classic. Why does it fail?

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

Dealing with the wildlife

WHEN one online reviewer misinterpreted a key sequence in “The Revenant”, Alejandro Iñárritu’s harrowing wilderness-survival drama acquired a nickname: “The Bear Rape Movie”. It is important to clarify, then, that Leonardo DiCaprio’s character, a shaggy-bearded 19th-century frontiersman called Hugh Glass, is not raped by a bear, although ursine sexual assault is just about the only ordeal he is spared.

At the start of the film, Mr Iñárritu’s first since his Oscar-winning Broadway farce, “Birdman”, Glass is a member of a fur-trading party that is ambushed by Arikara natives. The ensuing forest battle has the nerve-shredding immediacy of the D-Day set piece in “Saving Private Ryan” (1998), Steven Spielberg’s second-world-war drama. Shortly afterwards, Glass is bitten, clawed, trodden on and flung around (but not raped) by a hulking grizzly, and then left for dead by a treacherous colleague (Tom Hardy). But he forces himself to trek for hundreds of miles to his associates’ fort, via frozen landscapes as hostile and beautifully strange as the surface of an alien planet.

Mr DiCaprio has said that his notoriously gruelling experiences on the set of “Titanic” nearly 20 years ago were a breeze compared with making “The Revenant” on location in Canada and Argentina. But his tribulations have paid off. Like Mr Hardy’s recent hit, “Mad Max: Fury Road”, “The Revenant” is a thunderous riposte to those blockbusters in which digitally rendered cities are flattened, but the violence never registers as anything other than what it is: the reorganising of pixels on a computer screen. Watching Mr Iñárritu’s visceral film, the viewer feels Glass’s pain. Every plunge into an icy river, every mouthful of twitching raw fish, every arrow through the throat seems excruciatingly real.

It is unfortunate, then, that the director has given in to his fatal weakness for distracting subplots and mystical hallucinations. If Mr Iñárritu had not fallen for padding out his primal revenge yarn to an unnecessary 156 minutes, the overpowering scenes of Glass struggling against the bear, his human enemies and nature itself would have made “The Revenant” into a classic of the action-movie genre.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21684768-revenant-comes-so-close-being-action-classic-why-does-it-fail-bearing-down/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Correction: Whatever should I do?

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition

In a piece on historical agony aunts in our Christmas issue ("Whatever should I do?"), we described a British bigamist as having been transported to Australia before Captain Cook "discovered" the place. The two-timer may well have been shipped to another colony, such as America. Thanks to an alert reader for spotting this.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21684769-correction-whatever-should-i-do/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Elsie Tulead: From missionary to firebrand





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Elsie Tulead

From missionary to firebrand

Elsie Tu, campaigner for the people of Hong Kong, died on December 8th, aged 102

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



HAD you visited the squatter slums of Kai Tak in Kowloon, Hong Kong, in the 1950s, a curious sight might have met your eyes. Among the thousands of tiny dilapidated wooden huts, crammed with refugees from newly communist China, threaded with muddy paths where adults clopped in wooden sandals and children splashed in storm-drains, a prim Englishwoman would be picking her way with care. Her fair hair was brushed in an immaculate shape, her flowered dress suitable for Cheltenham; a large handbag was on her arm. Her large eyes and prominent teeth gave her a look of keen concern.

Her name then was Elsie Elliott. Later she was Elsie Tu. Under both names she was a formidable advocate for the rights of the downtrodden in Hong Kong, shaming and tormenting the police, the Legislative Council and successive British governors for more than 30 years. Wherever second-class citizens—that is, Chinese—lacked transport, housing, education, fair wages or a voice, she would be there, on their side.

This transformation surprised even her. She had arrived in the colony in 1951 as a meek missionary’s wife from the north of England, ready to support her husband, Bill Elliott, in the saving of souls. The merry notes of her piano accordion rang out then over the huts of Kai Tak, inviting everyone to be washed in the blood of the Lamb. Otherwise she made no noise, for women in the Plymouth Brethren were consigned to silence. But gradually, surrounded by such privation, she grew restless. Eventually she left both the Brethren and her husband. Christian witness, to her, meant being “good and useful”, the motto she had adopted as a timid, studious schoolgirl. It meant speaking out, too—even, as her pacifist father had hoped, getting into politics.

Hong Kong in those days had no social welfare. It was run by British officials and rich businessmen for themselves alone. The poor Chinese who wandered into her tiny church had boils from malnutrition and fungus-encrusted feet; she set up a clinic to treat them. Children, desperate to learn, sat in the street devouring cheap comics; in 1954 she set up Mu Kuang Middle School, which grew from a 30-desk army tent, flapping in winds and summer downpours, to a seven-storey block with 1,300 pupils by 2015. Buying land and buildings, hurdling regulations and dealing with the Education Department introduced her to Hong Kong’s subculture of corruption, in which the ba wong, or triads, extorted protection money from every hut-dweller and even from street hawkers; in which everyone expected backhanders; and where the police were up to theirkhaki shorts in the narcotics trade.

Her relentless exposure of the police, in reports and letters to the South China Morning Post (her favourite, “restrained” modus operandi), became an all-out war, especially when after 1963 she sat on the Urban Council. In 1966, when she campaigned against a fare rise on the Star Ferry linking Hong Kong island and Kowloon, the police accused her of inciting violence among the protesters; she proved them liars and became wildly popular, as well as later winning the CBE for her anti-corruption efforts. To her backers she was invaluable, a British gadfly with pretty good Mandarin and passable Cantonese, who could intercede easily with those in power and could neither be silenced nor deported.

Love and politics

The authorities themselves, in the governor’s office and on the Legislative Council (where she also sat, from 1988 to 1995), were less certain what to make of her. She had no stated ideology, beyond “justice for the people”, but was scornful of the favours shown to Taiwanese and would not censure China. In the run-up to the handover of the colony to China in 1997 she attacked the “disgraceful” reforms belatedly introduced by the British, and belittled the self-styled democrats who attacked the Basic Law agreed on, with some input from her, with the Chinese. In 1995 she lost her seat at the age of 82 to a “pro-democracy” candidate whose hand she refused to shake.

Her motivations were in fact rather simple. She hated colonialism, believing that it brought out the worst sort of arrogance in the British. She championed the Chinese because, to her, they were its victims. But she embraced them, too, because she fell in love with—and, in 1985, married—a Chinese patriot from Inner Mongolia, Tu Hsueh-kwei. He had joined her church and co-founded her school; they had taught each other their respective languages. She called him “Andrew” after the apostle who cared for the needy. Through him she absorbed the philosophy and poetry of China, the songs of the Beijing Opera, the habit of patience and an enhanced sense of racial injustice. In return he supported her in every way he could—except publicly, which might have meant deportation.

With him she experienced a strange reversal of her first role in Hong Kong. Then, as a missionary wife, it was she who had been silent and second-class, reduced to making the refreshments at meetings. Now it was Andrew who would greet her, after another rowdy day on the Legislative Council, with a cup of tea just as she liked it. But then, reverting to the natural shyness she always felt she had, she would say “Thank you, husband,” and sip demurely, as if the order of things were not inverted; and as if she posed no threat to anyone.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21684754-missionary-firebrand-elsie-tu-campaigner-people-hong-kong-died-december/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

GDP forecasts

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21684852/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21684790-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21684785-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21684787-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

GDP forecasts

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition



WORLD GDP is forecast to grow by 2.7% in 2016, according to the Economist Intelligence Unit (in 2015 the economy is estimated to have expanded by 2.4%). This moderate outlook reflects the fact growth is still lacklustre in the euro area, Japan and emerging market economies as a whole.

The picture is particularly gloomy for commodity-exporting nations such as Venezuela, which is in deep economic recession. The outlook for Brazil is not positive either: falling oil prices combined with the implications of the Petrobras scandal will affect investment in oil and gas. War-torn countries also feature in the projected worst performers of 2016. Libya’s GDP has been contracting since 2013; continued fighting and political uncertainty means that it will continue to shrink this year.

There are a few bright spots however. Although GDP growth in Turkmenistan is slowing, the construction of a new branch of the Central Asia-China gas pipeline will support exports until the end of 2016. A few emerging Asian countries make a notable appearance in the top-ten: growth in the region is buoyed by rising private consumption, and in particular a revitalised tourism sector in Laos.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21684788-gdp-forecasts/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Jan 2nd 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21684789-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Fri, 01 Jan 2016]

The world this week



The world this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



Latin America: Brazil’s fall





Travel visas: Sticker shock





Republican tax plans: Be serious





Global inflation: Low and behold





Internet security: When back doors backfire





Letters



On business, species, elections, whistleblowers, plurals, Donald Trump: Letters to the editor





Briefing



Brazil’s crisis: Irredeemable?





United States



Republican tax plans: Indecent disclosure





Race on campus: Of slavery and swastikas





Rating police officers: Revenge of the nerds





Election forecasting: Prediction 2016





Lexington: Pitchfork politics





The Americas



Human rights in El Salvador: Digging for justice





Argentina’s new president: A fast start





Asia



Japan, South Korea and their history wars: Saying sorry for sex slavery





Family planning in Vietnam: Running deer





Thailand’s southern insurgency: No end in sight





Simplifying Indian taxes: One country, but no single market





China



Social media: Weibo warriors





Economic ideology: Reagan’s Chinese echo





Middle East and Africa



Iraq: Reclaiming the ruins from Islamic State





Christians in the Middle East: And then there were none





Enforcing morality: No sex please, we’re Middle Eastern





Ethiopia: What if they were really set free?





Europe



Russia’s Far East: Snow job





Vladivostok’s new casino: Russian roulette





Spanish politics: The chore of the Spanish succession





Poland’s religious politics: Courting disaster





Educating refugees: Learning the hard way





Britain



Funding the police: Counting up the coppers





Floods: Northern waterhouse





Bagehot: Bring on the tempest





International



The unexplored world: A new age of discovery





Business



Travel visas: A strange sort of welcome





Companies’ investment plans: From diggers to data centres





Activists and resources companies: Icahn, you can’t





Cruise lines: Eastward ho!





Schumpeter: Social saints, fiscal fiends





Finance and economics



Global inflation: Low for longer





The first venture capitalists: Fin-tech





Buttonwood: Tales of the unexpected





European insurance firms: One rule to bind them all





South-East Asian integration: More hat than cattle





Free exchange: Exit, pursued by bear





Science and technology



Aircraft engines: Flying’s new gear





The future of the Nobel prize: Throw caution to the wind?





Meteorology: Barmy weather





Books and arts



The Great War at midpoint: A most terrible year





China and India: Clash of the titans





Ukraine’s war-torn history: Keeping hope alive





Non-Western classical music: Voyages of discovery





New film: Bearing down





New film: Correction: Whatever should I do?





Obituary



Obituary: Elsie Tulead: From missionary to firebrand





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





GDP forecasts





Markets





