The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Technology Quarterly

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Articles Sections Next

Politics this week

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



Brazilian police detained Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a former president, for questioning on suspicion that he had benefited from bribes paid to Petrobras, a state-controlled oil giant. He was released after three hours. In a separate investigation, state prosecutors charged him with concealing his ownership of a seaside property. He denies wrongdoing. The judge investigating the Petrobras scandal sentenced Marcelo Odebrecht, a former chief of Brazil’s biggest construction company, to 19 years in prison for corrupt dealings with the oil company.

Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, described Donald Trump’s rhetoric as a danger, saying, “that’s how Hitler got in.” Mr Peña added that there was “no scenario” in which Mexico would pay for the wall that Mr Trump plans to build on the border if he wins the American presidency.

The opposition alliance that controls Venezuela’s National Assembly said it will use “all constitutional means” to force the populist president, Nicolás Maduro, from office. These include launching a referendum to recall him, and peaceful street protests against the government.

Peru’s electoral court barred two candidates from a presidential election, to be held on April 10th. Julio Guzmán, who is second in the polls, was disqualified because his party failed to obey its rules when it nominated him. César Acuña was excluded for giving money to voters while campaigning.

The Brexit bandwagon

Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, was accused of promoting pro-European Union views for saying that a British exit from the EU would pose the “biggest domestic risk” to financial stability. Mr Carney tried to re-establish his neutrality by suggesting EU membership brought risks, too. The Sun, a populist newspaper, claimed the queen favours Brexit. An official denial and complaint to the press regulator swiftly followed. Boris Johnson, London’s mayor and a Brexiteer never far from controversy, described an e-mail that sought to gag pro-EU views within his office as a “cock-up”.

In Slovakia Robert Fico, the prime minister, won a general election but failed to secure a parliamentary majority. Despite Mr Fico’s anti-immigrant rhetoric the far-right People’s Party Our Slovakia won 8% of the vote and 14 seats in the 150-seat parliament.

Leaders from the EU and the prime minister of Turkey, Ahmet Davutoglu, agreed on the outline of a deal to deport boat people back to Turkey. The terms, which will be confirmed at another summit later this month, have been criticised by international aid organisations and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. But as more refugees are expected in the spring, it may be the only hope for Europe.



At least 200,000 union-led protesters and students took to the streets of France and railway workers held a national strike for 37 hours. Their main grievance was the French government’s labour-reform bill, which would help companies bypass tricky unions when they want to alter working times and cut the cost of redundancies.

Junior doctors in England held their third, and longest, strike, walking out for 48 hours. Only emergency cover was provided; 5,000 surgical procedures were cancelled. Last month the health secretary said he would impose new contracts after negotiations with doctors failed. The doctors have the public’s sympathy; two-thirds back their actions.

Hopes, and fears

Talks aimed at finding an end to the conflict in Syria were postponed again, but are now set to start next week. A ceasefire, which has been in place since February 27th, is continuing to hold generally, though numerous minor violations have been reported, and aid is getting through to more areas.

The UN warned that a humanitarian disaster is looming in the western Iraqi city of Fallujah, held by Islamic State but under siege for many months by Iraqi forces. Tens of thousands of people in the city are facing food shortages.

A survey found that almost half of Israeli Jews think that Israeli Arabs, who make up a fifth of the population, should be expelled or transferred from Israel.

America launched an air strike at a camp belonging to al-Shabab, a terrorist outfit in Somalia, killing 150 fighters.

A stinging Bern

In the biggest upset in America’s primary elections so far, Bernie Sanders proved the pollsters so very wrong by beating Hillary Clinton in Michigan’s Democratic primary by 50% to 48%. Mrs Clinton had been expected to win handily. Her defeat raised questions about the breadth of her appeal outside heavily black electorates in the South (she trounced Mr Sanders in Mississippi and Louisiana), but she remains on course to take the party’s nomination.

On the Republican side Donald Trump chalked up big wins in Michigan and Mississippi, though he won Louisiana and Kentucky by smaller margins. Marco Rubio’s campaign seemed all but over after another dismal showing.

Michael Bloomberg, a former mayor of New York, said he would not enter the presidential race as an independent, after months of apparently planning to do so. He is concerned that a three-way race would benefit Mr Trump, whose campaign Mr Bloomberg described as “the most divisive…I can remember”.

You can clap now

As the annual session of China’s toothless National People’s Congress got under way, the one-party state forbade the country’s media from reporting on diverse topics including smog, the use of land for burials and delegates’ wealth. They were, however, ordered to “thoroughly report” on the participation of Xi Jinping, the country’s president.

The son of a liberal Pakistani politician, Salman Taseer, who was assassinated by his bodyguard for opposing harsh blasphemy laws, emerged near Quetta after five years of captivity. Shahbaz Ali Taseer had been kidnapped by Islamic extremists eight months after his father’s killing.



For the first time, a computer beat a world champion at the Asian board game of Go, when Google’s DeepMind AlphaGo outclassed Lee Se-dol of South Korea, who has won 18 championships. Computers have beaten the world’s best chess players, but Go is much more complex.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21694573-politics-week/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Business this week

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition

The Volkswagen scandal rumbled on. Prosecutors in Germany expanded the number of employees at the carmaker who are under investigation to 17. But they have yet to find firm evidence that senior executives had knowledge of the rigged software in diesel cars that yielded false readings in emissions tests. In France authorities opened a formal inquiry into “aggravated fraud”. VW’s chief in America, Michael Horn, resigned. Matthias Müller, VW’s chief executive, warned of “substantial and painful” financial damage at the company because of the scandal.

Pay attention

Under pressure to hand over more tax in Britain, Facebook reportedly told its larger British advertisers to pay it via its UK subsidiary rather than through its office in lower-tax Ireland. Earlier it was revealed that in 2014 Facebook paid just £4,300 in corporate tax; the next year British tax authorities paid the social-network company £27,000 ($44,000) to place ads reminding people about tax commitments.

Chevron announced additional cuts to its capital-spending plans on top of the ones it outlined last December. Like its rivals, the oil giant has been hurt by the prolonged fall in oil prices. The further reduction in spending should shore up its dividend to shareholders, which it has paid out continuously since 1926.

Oil prices have been rallying recently, however. Brent crude rose above $40 a barrel for the first time since early December and at mid-week was priced 47% higher than the 13-year low it had sunk to in mid-January. The price has risen in part because oil production in America, where output from shale fields has boomed in recent years, is dropping. The price of iron ore soared by record amounts after Chinese officials said they would do what it takes to boost growth.

The prospect of building Hinkley Point C, a proposed nuclear-power plant in Britain, was thrown into turmoil after the chief financial officer of Électricité de France, which is to build Hinkley, quit over concerns that the project threatened EDF’s future. At £18 billion ($25 billion), Hinkley would be the most expensive power plant in history. The British government has promised to pay the French utility company up to £92.50 per megawatt hour (three times the current wholesale price) for its output. Despite this generous offer EDF could still lose out as it is liable for cost overruns.



A vigorous campaign by officials in China to slow the flow of money leaving the country seems to be working. Foreign-exchange reserves dropped by $29 billion in February to $3.2 trillion, a sharply lower monthly amount than the $100 billion that has been the norm recently. Meanwhile, new figures showed that China’s exports plunged by 25% in February compared with the same month last year and imports fell by 14%.

Mystery shoppers

News that an investor had accumulated a 5% stake in Burberry prompted speculation that the British luxury-goods company may become a takeover target. The identity of the investor was not known, but Burberry asked HSBC, which is the custodian of the stake, who it was. The bank was reportedly said to be holding it on behalf of multiple investors.

Three years after the country was bailed out, euro-zone officials confirmed that Cyprus will conclude its €10 billion ($11 billion) rescue programme at the end of this month.

Supercell, the Finnish mobile-gaming firm behind “Clash of Clans” and three other blockbuster games, reported a 37% rise in sales last year to €2.1 billion ($2.3 billion). Owned by Softbank, a Japanese conglomerate, Supercell also announced that for the first time 100m users were playing its games on a daily basis. Its games are played in every country of the world, bar Tuvalu.

Break point

Corporate sponsors reacted swiftly to the revelation that Maria Sharapova, a five-time Grand Slam tennis champion, had failed a doping test earlier this year. At least three sponsors either cut or suspended their ties with the world’s highest-paid female athlete. Ms Sharapova tested positive for meldonium, which she said was prescribed to her for medical conditions. It was banned by the World Anti-Doping Agency only at the start of the year.

In another crack at shedding its cheap image in order to appeal to business travellers, Ryanair, Europe’s biggest low-cost airline, started hiring out a customised Boeing 737 with 60 business-class seats for flights. The chartered corporate jet will provide “fine dining”, a far cry from the “hot chips, chicken nuggets, hot dogs…snack boxes and more!” offered in economy class (if passengers can get a meal at all).



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21694584-business-week/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

KAL's cartoon

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/world-week/21694583-kals-cartoon/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Leaders




After Moore’s law: The future of computing

The Petrobras scandal: Interrogating Lula

Farming in Africa: Miracle grow

China’s economy: Ore-inspiring

Europe’s migrant crisis: A messy but necessary deal





Articles Sections Next

After Moore’s law

The future of computing

The era of predictable improvement in computer hardware is ending. What comes next?

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



IN 1971 the fastest car in the world was the Ferrari Daytona, capable of 280kph (174mph). The world’s tallest buildings were New York’s twin towers, at 415 metres (1,362 feet). In November that year Intel launched the first commercial microprocessor chip, the 4004, containing 2,300 tiny transistors, each the size of a red blood cell.

Since then chips have improved in line with the prediction of Gordon Moore, Intel’s co-founder. According to his rule of thumb, known as Moore’s law, processing power doubles roughly every two years as smaller transistors are packed ever more tightly onto silicon wafers, boosting performance and reducing costs. A modern Intel Skylake processor contains around 1.75 billion transistors—half a million of them would fit on a single transistor from the 4004—and collectively they deliver about 400,000 times as much computing muscle. This exponential progress is difficult to relate to the physical world. If cars and skyscrapers had improved at such rates since 1971, the fastest car would now be capable of a tenth of the speed of light; the tallest building would reach half way to the Moon.

The impact of Moore’s law is visible all around us. Today 3 billion people carry smartphones in their pockets: each one is more powerful than a room-sized supercomputer from the 1980s. Countless industries have been upended by digital disruption. Abundant computing power has even slowed nuclear tests, because atomic weapons are more easily tested using simulated explosions rather than real ones. Moore’s law has become a cultural trope: people inside and outside Silicon Valley expect technology to get better every year.

But now, after five decades, the end of Moore’s law is in sight (see Technology Quarterly). Making transistors smaller no longer guarantees that they will be cheaper or faster. This does not mean progress in computing will suddenly stall, but the nature of that progress is changing. Chips will still get better, but at a slower pace (number-crunching power is now doubling only every 2.5 years, says Intel). And the future of computing will be defined by improvements in three other areas, beyond raw hardware performance.

Faith no Moore

The first is software. This week AlphaGo, a program which plays the ancient game of Go, beat Lee Sedol, one of the best human players, in the first two of five games scheduled in Seoul. Go is of particular interest to computer scientists because of its complexity: there are more possible board positions than there are particles in the universe (see article). As a result, a Go-playing system cannot simply rely on computational brute force, provided by Moore’s law, to prevail. AlphaGo relies instead on “deep learning” technology, modelled partly on the way the human brain works. Its success this week shows that huge performance gains can be achieved through new algorithms. Indeed, slowing progress in hardware will provide stronger incentives to develop cleverer software.

The second area of progress is in the “cloud”, the networks of data centres that deliver services over the internet. When computers were stand-alone devices, whether mainframes or desktop PCs, their performance depended above all on the speed of their processor chips. Today computers become more powerful without changes to their hardware. They can draw upon the vast (and flexible) number-crunching resources of the cloud when doing things like searching through e-mails or calculating the best route for a road trip. And interconnectedness adds to their capabilities: smartphone features such as satellite positioning, motion sensors and wireless-payment support now matter as much as processor speed.

The third area of improvement lies in new computing architectures—specialised chips optimised for particular jobs, say, and even exotic techniques that exploit quantum-mechanical weirdness to crunch multiple data sets simultaneously. There was less need to pursue these sorts of approaches when generic microprocessors were improving so rapidly, but chips are now being designed specifically for cloud computing, neural-network processing, computer vision and other tasks. Such specialised hardware will be embedded in the cloud, to be called upon when needed. Once again, that suggests the raw performance of end-user devices matters less than it did, because the heavy lifting is done elsewhere.

Speed isn’t everything

What will this mean in practice? Moore’s law was never a physical law, but a self-fulfilling prophecy—a triumph of central planning by which the technology industry co-ordinated and synchronised its actions. Its demise will make the rate of technological progress less predictable; there are likely to be bumps in the road as new performance-enhancing technologies arrive in fits and starts. But given that most people judge their computing devices on the availability of capabilities and features, rather than processing speed, it may not feel like much of a slowdown to consumers.

For companies, the end of Moore’s law will be disguised by the shift to cloud computing. Already, firms are upgrading PCs less often, and have stopped operating their own e-mail servers. This model depends, however, on fast and reliable connectivity. That will strengthen demand for improvements to broadband infrastructure: those with poor connectivity will be less able to benefit as improvements in computing increasingly happen inside cloud providers’ data centres.

For the technology industry itself, the decline of Moore’s law strengthens the logic for centralised cloud computing, already dominated by a few big firms: Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Alibaba, Baidu and Tencent. They are working hard to improve the performance of their cloud infrastructure. And they are hunting for startups touting new tricks: Google bought Deepmind, the British firm that built AlphaGo, in 2014.

For more than 50 years, the seemingly inexorable shrinking of transistors made computers steadily cheaper and more capable. As Moore’s law fades, progress will be less metronomic. But computers and other devices will continue to become more powerful—just in different and more varied ways.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21694528-era-predictable-improvement-computer-hardware-ending-what-comes-next-future/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Petrobras scandal

Interrogating Lula

Justice, not political war, should determine the fate of Brazil’s government

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



YOU don’t have to be Brazilian to have been astonished by the events of recent days. In the early hours of March 4th police showed up at an apartment block in São Bernardo do Campo, near São Paulo, and took away for questioning a former president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who is beloved by many for his humble origins and his pro-poor policies. They were looking for evidence that Lula and his associates benefited from the gargantuan bribery scandal centred on Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company (see article). Five days later, in a separate case, prosecutors charged the former president with hiding his ownership of a beachfront flat.

Dozens of politicians suspected of taking bribes, and businessmen thought to have paid them, have been caught up in the Petrobras scandal. Lula, president from 2003 to 2013, is the most consequential figure among them. He denies wrongdoing. On March 8th Marcelo Odebrecht, former head of Brazil’s biggest construction company, was sentenced to more than 19 years in prison for corrupt dealings with Petrobras.

Brazilians take consolation from seeing the rich and powerful held to account. Sérgio Moro, a judge who is leading lava jato (car wash), the main investigation into the scandal, is a hero to many. But the scandal is also the focus of a ferocious political battle between the left-wing Workers’ Party (PT), to which both Lula and his successor as president, Dilma Rousseff, belong, and an opposition composed of disparate political parties and popular movements.

Lula’s detention and the filing of charges against him have escalated those hostilities. Anti-government groups are to hold demonstrations on March 13th to renew their demand that Ms Rousseff be impeached. Her allies intend to hold counter-protests on the same day. Both camps are in danger of forgetting that justice is, or ought to be, blind. PT politicians accuse prosecutors of plotting a “coup”. But the opposition’s demands for impeachment have also raced ahead of evidence that would justify such a drastic step. The one charge that has stuck, that Ms Rousseff used accounting tricks to hide the true size of the deficit in 2014, does not provide legal grounds for evicting her from office.



Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts

Brazilians rarely settle their political differences through violence, but the ferocity on both sides risks damaging the consensus that underpins the country’s admirable democracy. The PT and its allies are the worst offenders. After Lula’s detention the party’s leader in the lower house of Congress declared a “political war”. In a tweet it later erased, the PT called Lula a “political prisoner”. At the same time, in forcibly detaining Lula, rather than asking him to volunteer to be questioned, Mr Moro may also have gone too far. A supreme-court justice accused him of breaking “basic rules”.

Keep calm, and carry on investigating

The Petrobras scandal could yet fell the government. The electoral court is looking into whether Ms Rousseff’s re-election campaign in 2014 was financed with money siphoned off from the oil company. If so, the court could annul the election and call a new one, which any candidate from the PT would almost certainly lose.

A new government would stand a better chance of pulling Brazil out of its morass. Faced with a choice between sane economics and political survival, Ms Rousseff has chosen the latter. She has backpedalled on fiscal reforms, which alone can restore confidence in an economy suffering its worst recession since the 1930s. Her departure would, surely, be cause for celebration—but only if it comes about through the courts or the ballot box, not cynical political machinations.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21694535-justice-not-political-war-should-determine-fate-brazils-government-interrogating-lula/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Farming in Africa

Miracle grow

After many wasted years, African agriculture is improving quickly. Here is how to keep that trend going

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



SOMETIMES it seems as though Adam’s curse, which promises mankind a harvest of thorns and thistles, applies only to African farmers. The southern part of the continent is in the teeth of a drought, which has been blamed on El Niño. The weather has been even worse in northern Ethiopia, where crops are shrivelling and cows are dying. But droughts, unlike biblical curses, end eventually. El Niño does not change the fundamental, remarkable fact about farming in sub-Saharan Africa: it is rapidly getting better.

The post-war green revolution that transformed Asia seemed to have bypassed Africa. But between 2000 and 2014 grain production tripled in countries as far-flung as Ethiopia, Mali and Zambia. Rwanda did even better (see article). Farming remains precarious in a continent with variable weather and little irrigated land. But when disaster hits, farmers nowadays have a bigger cushion.

African countries are on the whole more peaceful and better run than they were. Farmers are no longer forced into disastrous socialist collectives or banned from selling their crops in open markets. Border tariffs are lower and export bans rarer. As a result, innovation is accelerating. Africa has seen an explosion of seed companies producing clever hybrids, which can endure drought and resist disease. Perhaps the best proof of the importance of good government comes from Zimbabwe. It has an awful one, and productivity has crashed.

The progress that has been made elsewhere is wonderful, but not enough. African farms remain far less productive than Asian ones: Chinese farmers harvest more than three times as much grain per hectare. Climate change is expected to make conditions harder. Yet agriculture is essential for firing economic growth across the African continent. More people still live in the countryside than in cities and many of Africa’s cities are not all that dynamic. Asia has a tight grip on labour-intensive manufacturing, although there is certainly space for more food-processing factories in Africa—so, for example, it could export cocoa powder instead of cocoa beans.

Turning an agricultural uptick into a lasting boom will demand more reforms. One priority for Africa’s governments is to dismantle the remaining barriers to innovation in farming. It still takes years to approve new hybrid seeds in some countries. With a few exceptions, such as South Africa, the continent is holding the line against genetically modified crops. This is mad. GM is particularly helpful in making plants resistant to pests—a terrible scourge. The region’s governments should also take greater advantage of mobile technology. Many try to subsidise fertiliser for poor farmers, only for the stuff to be stolen before it reaches the intended recipient. They should be sending money or vouchers directly to mobile wallets.

Africa’s cities are swelling, and the people who live in them crave meat and processed food. That is a huge opportunity for local farmers, but it will be missed if transport does not become far cheaper and easier. At the moment, the rule of thumb is that it costs three times as much to move goods one mile along an African road as it does to move them along an Asian one—and that is before the police shake you down. As a result, fertiliser is expensive and much food is wasted on the way to market. More investment in upgrading shoddy rural roads would be good. Better still would be an assault on the trucking cartels that keep prices high.

Clearing out the weeds

It would help a lot if farmers—particularly women—had clearer rights over land. Proper titles would encourage them to make long-term investments, like terracing and tree-planting, and allow them to use land as collateral for loans. Getting there is tricky. Many countries have long traditions of communal land management and a complicated web of customary farming rights. Charging in and handing out freeholds can actually strip people of rights. But a sensible first step, which a few countries are trying, is to register farmers’ entitlements so their land cannot be pinched.

The rest of the world can help, too. Although some egregious subsidies have been trimmed, the rich world’s taxpayers still spend vast sums propping up their own farmers. America heavily subsidises peanuts and cotton—two things that Africa can grow well. Why shell out to make Africans poorer?



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21694539-after-many-wasted-years-african-agriculture-improving-quickly-here-how-keep-trend/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

China’s economy

Ore-inspiring

In leaning towards stimulus rather than reform, China’s leaders are storing up trouble

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



IN DECEMBER an adviser to China’s government predicted that GDP growth would soon rebound. Now was a good time, he said, to buy shares in companies that mined copper, nickel and coal—though even he drew the line at investing in iron ore, whose supply was simply too abundant. The adviser sounded insanely bullish back then; he might now rue his caution. On March 7th the price of iron ore jumped by 19%, a record one-day rise, in a sign of renewed optimism about China’s growth.

The spike in the iron-ore price came hard on the heels of a speech by Li Keqiang, China’s prime minister, to the annual National People’s Congress in Beijing. In it, Mr Li announced a punchy GDP growth target of 6.5-7% for 2016, along with the means he hoped would secure it: a bigger budget deficit than had been planned for last year and faster credit growth.

With sufficient stimulus China will avoid a sharp economic slowdown. But Mr Li did not simply open the macroeconomic spigots. He hinted that the fiscal boost would be designed to help rebalance the economy: China is aiming for just 3% growth in government revenue this year, suggesting that more of the deficit will come from tax cuts to private firms. He made clear that reforms to reduce overcapacity in low-end and inefficient industries were a priority. And by switching from a single-figure growth target to a range, Mr Li gave himself more flexibility in trading off some GDP growth for more reform.

Look closer, though, and there is little sign of any real commitment to reform (see article). Promises to slim industries such as steel and coal sound tough—the government expects nearly 2m workers will be laid off—but the planned reduction would make only a small dent in oversupply. Instead the government seems to be doubling down on its well-worn recipe of debt- and investment-fuelled growth.

Reaching the goal of 6.5-7% GDP growth will require either a fudging of the figures or investment in projects of dubious worth. A second train line to remote and mountainous Tibet is planned. Banks are being leant on to juice up the economy. Credit is growing at twice the rate of nominal GDP, in a country already overburdened by private debt. A big increase in the money supply will put downward pressure on China’s currency, which in turn will lead either to a rapid rundown in foreign-exchange reserves or a devaluation.

In theory, China’s capital controls can ease the pressure, by making it harder for money to leave the country. And the latest figures suggest they are becoming more effective. Reserves dropped by just $29 billion in February, to $3.2 trillion, after three months of heavier falls. But even if China can successfully police its financial borders, rapid credit growth will fuel asset prices at home. Wary of the stockmarket, investors with cash to spare see property as the safest bet. Unregulated online lenders are helping them pile on leverage, skirting rules requiring minimum down-payments on homes. There are worrying signs of a bubble in several big cities: house prices in Shenzhen have risen by 53% in the past year (see article).



China's debt binge: putting of the inevitable

Supporting a sagging economy with cheap money and tax cuts is sensible. But China also needs to put in place the structural reforms that will make such stimulus both more effective and less destabilising.

The mañana strategy

The default of a few of the most hopeless state-owned enterprises, something Mr Li again promised in his speech, would set a useful precedent. It might also nudge banks into lending to profitable businesses instead of firms they expect to be bailed out by government. New homes with few ready buyers in lower-tier cities should be turned into social housing; better that than trying to pump up a broader property bubble to clear unsold stocks. In places where house prices are soaring, the government should summon the courage to introduce a long-discussed property tax to cool speculation. And now would be a good time to recapitalise China’s banks in readiness for a write-down of the latent bad debts on their balance-sheets.

Yet the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, apparently wishes to avoid even mild turbulence in the economy, at least until he has appointed his own nominees to the Standing Committee of the Politburo, a key decision-making body, in 2017. (Many suspect that reform will remain elusive even after that date.) Mr Xi is scarcely alone among world leaders in setting policy with an eye on the political calendar. But financial markets cannot be relied on to play along with this schedule. At some point, China must deal with its excess debts and industrial overcapacity. By taking bolder steps on reforms now, China would do more to entrench faith in its longer-term economic outlook than stimulus measures ever could.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21694533-leaning-towards-stimulus-rather-reform-chinas-leaders-are-storing-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Europe’s migrant crisis

A messy but necessary deal

A European bargain with Turkey is controversial, but offers the best hope of ending migrant chaos

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



THROUGHOUT the cold war, Turkey was one of Europe’s bastions against Soviet armies. Now it is being turned into Europe’s barrier against the huddled masses of the Middle East. At a summit on March 7th, European leaders and the Turkish prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, agreed on the outline of a strikingly ambitious deal. Turkey will take back all the boat-people setting off from its shores to Greece. In return, Europe is promising lots of things: money; the resettlement of many refugees now in Turkey; visa-free travel for Turks; and a revival of negotiations for Turkey to join the European Union.

Every element of the arrangement is politically, legally or morally problematic. To make matters worse, the behaviour of the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, is increasingly autocratic: the weekend before striking the accord with the EU, his government took over a prominent opposition newspaper. But Europe is doing the right thing. The deal’s principles are sound (and have, indeed, been advocated by this newspaper): it would control chaotic mass-migration while preserving a generous European asylum system, and enlist Turkey as a gatekeeper by binding it more closely to Europe. It offers the best prospect of ending the uncontrolled influx that has been feeding anti-immigrant populism and undermining EU integration. And it provides a way for Europe to seek Mr Erdogan’s co-operation without flinching from criticising him.

Deal with Erdogan

Most of the 1.2m migrants who arrived in the EU last year came via Turkey. Donald Tusk, president of the European Council, had been negotiating a deal whereby asylum-seekers would be sifted on arrival in “hotspots” in Greece and Italy, and those rejected would be sent back to Turkey. The new scheme, championed by the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, is a more ambitious arrangement—all boat-people would be sent back to Turkey and processed there. This would avoid turning Greece into a refugee camp, offer a stronger disincentive to illegal migration and ensure that Europe grants protection to the most deserving, not those most able to pay people-smugglers.

But lawyers and UN agencies are already questioning the legality of mass deportation, which would require Europe to declare Turkey a “safe” country for asylum-seekers. For all its generosity to Syrians, Turkey formally applies the 1951 convention on refugees only to those fleeing war or persecution in Europe. Unless Turkey can bring its asylum system up to international norms, the EU may have to fall back on Mr Tusk’s original plan. Either way, Europe will have to be generous to refugees—it has promised to take one Syrian from Turkey for every one that is sent back from Greece—though it still cannot agree how to share them out for resettlement.

Visa liberalisation will be contentious, too. Turkey is the only EU candidate country not to enjoy visa-free travel already. The biggest obstacle, a framework for Turkey to take back illegal migrants, would be addressed by the new deal. But Turkey has yet to meet many of the EU’s 70-odd preconditions, including the introduction of biometric passports. And while a deal may limit the influx of Syrians, Afghans and others, freer travel would inevitably increase the migration of Turks into the EU.



INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers

Hardest of all will be any discussion of Turkey’s accession to the EU. Not even Turkey’s closest friends would claim that it meets the democratic standards required to begin EU negotiations, let alone gain membership. Mr Erdogan would dislike the constraints and scrutiny that membership would bring. So Europe should call his bluff by opening the two accession chapters that Mr Erdogan least wants to discuss—chapters 23 and 24, on justice and the rule of law. It should also press Turkey to do more to support talks on the reunification of Cyprus.

Ultimately, Europeans must come to terms with two realities. First, they cannot change geography: they need Turkey because it stands between Europe and much of the Eurasian landmass. Second, they cannot seal their borders entirely: the only alternative to chaos is a fair and orderly migration system, which would most benefit Europe—and those fleeing war. This week’s proposed deal is messy, but it is Europe’s best option.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21694536-european-bargain-turkey-controversial-offers-best-hope-ending-migrant/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Letters




Donald Trump, trachoma, trust companies, China, the Maldives, English law firms, Gaelic games: Letters to the editor





Articles Sections Next

Donald Trump, trachoma, trust companies, China, the Maldives, English law firms, Gaelic games

Letters to the editor

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



The Trump revolution

You used so much ink trying to convince us that Donald Trump is not fit for office (“Time to fire him”, February 27th). Do you think the type of person who reads your erudite publication would ever consider voting for him? Not likely. The people who will vote for The Donald are the disaffected bitter-clingers whom the last candidate you passionately begged us to vote for—Barack Obama—disparaged in his campaign. Those same disaffected people haven’t been doing well over the past eight years, and in case you haven’t noticed, they are mad as hell.

Government isn’t working for us. There are few good jobs, we’ve been stuck with a joke of a health-care system, the few rights we still enjoy are under siege and the future looks dim for our children. We are powerless to foment a revolution while working two part-time jobs to make ends meet, so all we can do is register a protest against the Dickensian nightmare that the elites have created for us by voting. Apparently, nobody listened (Republican or Democrat) to what we were trying to say in 2012. Come November, you’ll be hearing from us again, louder and clearer.

MARK KRASCHEL

Portland, Oregon

I say we look to Plato, as quoted by Cicero in “On Duties”: keep the good of the people clearly in view and care for the welfare of the whole body politic and not the interests of one party. Mr Trump may not fit your image of what an American president should be, but the American people crave a leader who has the interests of the body politic at heart, not the interests of a party. But, you may wonder, are we another Weimar Republic looking to fill a vacuum of leadership and greatness?

PETER ROBERTS

Seattle

Although it may have been true in the past to refer to the Republicans as “one of the world’s great political parties”, this is no longer the case. This is a party which has promoted some of Mr Trump’s more noxious ideas, just in coded language. It has abandoned its responsibility to govern. The prospect of a President Trump is indeed worrying, but after years of nativism and cynically pandering to the baser instincts of the masses, Mr Trump is the candidate the Republican Party deserves.

COLE COUTURE

New York



Your cover of Donald Trump as Uncle Sam pins very nicely to my dart board. Thank you.

DAVE LEWIS

Healdsburg, California

The debates and the election have turned into a reality TV show, perfect for a media feeding-frenzy. No wonder Mr Trump is winning. He understands how to entice the media and their fascination with the Kardashians and their ilk. I’m not worried.

When President Trump takes on Xi Jinping over the South China Sea, what chance will President Xi have? What does he know of celebrity TV? We’ll destroy them in the ratings.

DENNIS MERRITT

Rockledge, Florida

“From the Tower to the White House” (February 20th) stated that Mr Trump was “sensible enough to get out of casinos in Atlantic City”. With each successive bankruptcy of his casino company (four in total), his ownership interest was diluted down to practically nothing. I’m not sure that this qualifies as a sensible exit, although Mr Trump continues to portray his serial bankruptcies as a brilliant strategy.

RICHARD COHEN

Margate, New Jersey



An end in sight

* Thank you so much for your article highlighting the Global Trachoma Mapping Project (“Now is the time to say ‘goodbye’”, February 27th). The agony of the trachoma infection (dubbed “blinking hell” at Sightsavers) is profound and the blindness it causes impacts both individuals and their communities.



Never have I seen such an amazing example of collaboration and determination. Some 24 organisations (NGOs and academics—and notably the International Trachoma Initiative in Atlanta) worked together, along with the World Health Organisation, to make the mapping happen. The Ministries of Health in these 29 countries all provided resources and agreed to standard processes on data management and methodologies. Approximately 2,500 people were involved altogether—a great feat—and it should be a model for disease mapping in the future. The British government provided most of the money but as the project expanded the American government stepped in to help—a brilliant example of coordination between donor nations.

Programmes are in place to fight the infection and we have at least some of the money needed.



Now we know exactly where the suffering from this disease is, let’s seize the moment and confine trachoma to the history books where it belongs.



DR CAROLINE HARPER

CEO of Sightsavers

Melksham, Wiltshire





Know thyself

* You assert that American states “such as South Dakota and Nevada” carry “strong secrecy laws and weak oversight” but fail to provide the substance to back the claim (“The Biggest Loophole of All”, February 20th). Instead you validate the assertion with vague statements derived from Die Zeit, the German newspaper, noting that “Everyone is doing or looking into it.” This is both an intellectual and geographic stretch.



In Nevada, both financial institutions and trust companies exist in a strong, stable jurisdiction and are governed by many state and federal anti-money laundering, anti-terrorism, and bank secrecy reporting requirements. Furthermore, annual on-site examinations are lengthy and thorough. Every Nevada institution must “know their client” before ever putting them on the books. This means that Nevada’s trust companies offer both strong privacy protection for clients and they adhere to effective government oversight—a combination that is clearly attractive to the legitimate global elite, not those of “dubious legality”.



GREGORY CRAWFORD

President

Alliance Trust Company of Nevada

Reno, Nevada





What would Tim do?

* One question I would like to ask Tim Cook in the dispute between Apple and the FBI (“Code to ruin?”, February 27th) is, if the San Bernardino shootings had happened in China and the Chinese government asked you either to unlock the attacker’s iPhone or have your products banned, what would you do?



S. VISWANATHAN

Bangalore, India





The situation in the Maldives

You suggest that criminal charges against opposition politicians in the Maldives are “overblown” (“Archipelago of ire”, February 20th). In fact, the charge against the former president is very clear: ordering the arrest of a judge for releasing one of his political critics, a crime he has publicly admitted to. Charges against another Islamist politician stem from his call for violence against the police.

The current president, Abdulla Yameen, is confronted with political opponents with scant regard for the law, yet he personally wants multiparty talks, under foreign mediation, to reconcile the challenges the Maldives faces. This initiative did not feature in your piece, and neither did the views expressed by British members of Parliament who visited recently: that it is the claims of opposition politicians, from prison numbers to the threat from terrorism and more, that are overblown. Our government was voted into office in an election recognised by the international community as free and fair, another detail that is too often overlooked.

HASSAN SHIFAU

Deputy high commissioner of the Maldives

London





English commercial law

You repeated the canard that commercial law firms benefit from the courts (“Law in a time of austerity”, February 27th). A more nuanced point might be that English law firms have benefited from the long cultural tradition of English law which has allowed them to build immensely successful international practices, but again the point is too simplistic. The partners in the great English commercial law firms started investing their own money in foreign offices and banging the international drum for the use of English law 40 years ago. Without that personal investment, English law, and its courts, judges, barristers and English commercial law firms, would have remained domestic and parochial, irrespective of its long heritage. With that investment, the international practice of law is one of the few British business sectors where we can claim to be a world leader, with commercial firms generating 1% of Britain’s GDP and a trade surplus of over £3 billion ($4.3 billion).

ALASDAIR DOUGLAS

Chair

City of the London Law Society

* You said that “Bodies such as the Law Society and the Bar Council often act as much to protect their members’ interests as to regulate them.” The Bar Council delegated responsibility for regulating barristers to the independent Bar Standards Board in 2006. As the representative body for barristers in England and Wales the Bar Council acts in its members’ interests as well as in the public interest. For example: in relation to challenging proposals to restrict judicial review; supporting the removal of the criminal courts charge; and safeguarding access to justice especially for the poorest and most vulnerable in society.



The Bar thrives on competition. Through the lower overhead structure of chambers, compared with the traditional law firm model, barristers’ services are increasingly reaching consumers including through Direct Access and through the provision of unbundled services which offer value for money. These actions are not driven by self-interest but by our mission to ensure that justice is available for all.



CHANTAL-AIMEE DOERRIES QC

Chairman of the Bar

London





The puck of the Irish

The photo you used of Xi Jinping kicking a football, in a story about China’s spending on foreign players, was taken in Dublin’s Croke Park, the headquarters of the Gaelic Athletic Association (“Patriotic goal”, February 27th). The GAA is the governing body for Ireland’s popular indigenous sports of hurling, handball and Gaelic football. Founded in 1884, it has helped heal divisions and nurture community spirit. It would be difficult to overstate the role it continues to play in Irish life. Today, Gaelic games are played throughout the world and GAA clubs support the Irish diaspora. If Mr Xi needs a reminder of the benefits of this spirit he should visit his own local club, Beijing GAA.

RONAN MURPHY

Washington, DC

Mr Xi may dream that China could one day lift the World Cup, but with only 33 teams (31 county teams, and teams from London and New York), it might be more realistic for China to try and win the coveted All-Ireland Gaelic football title. Indeed, one player with Chinese links, Jason Sherlock, who has an Irish mother and a father from Hong Kong, succeeded in winning the title with Dublin in 1995.

STEPHEN O’KANE

Swatragh, Derry

* Letters appear online only



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/letters/21694492-letters-editor/print





Articles Sections Next





Briefing




African agriculture: A green evolution





Articles Sections Next

African agriculture

A green evolution

The farms of Africa are prospering at last thanks to persistence, technology and decent government

Mar 12th 2016 | GITEGA | From the print edition



NOT so long ago Jean Pierre Nzabahimana planted his fields on a hillside in western Rwanda by scattering seed held back from the last harvest. The seedlings grew up in clumps: Mr Nzabahimana, a lean, muscular man, uses his hands to convey a vaguely bushy shape. Harvesting them was not too difficult, since they did not produce much.

This year the field nearest to his house has been cultivated with military precision. In February he harvested a good crop of maize (corn, to Americans) from plants that grew in disciplined lines, separated by precise distances which Mr Nzabahimana can recite. He then planted climbing beans in the same field. On this and on four other fields that add up to about half a hectare (one and a quarter acres) Mr Nzabahimana now grows enough to enable him to afford meat twice a month. He owns a cow and has about 180,000 Rwandan francs ($230) in the bank. Although he remains poor by any measure, he has entered the class of poor dreamers. Perhaps he will build a shop in the village, he says. Hopefully one of his four children will become a driver or a mechanic.

According to the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation, Rwanda’s farmers produced 792,000 tonnes of grain in 2014—more than three times as much as in 2000. Production of maize, a vital crop in east Africa, jumped sevenfold. Agricultural statistics can be dicey, African ones especially so. But Rwanda’s plunging poverty rate makes these plausible, and so does the view from Gitega. Another farmer, Dative Mukandayisenga, says most of her neighbours are getting much more from their land. Perhaps only one in five persists with the old, scattershot “broadcast” sowing—and most of the holdouts are old people.

Rwanda is exceptional. But in this respect it is not all that exceptional. Cereal production tripled in Ethiopia between 2000 and 2014, although a severe drought associated with the current El Niño made for a poor harvest last year. The value of crops grown in Cameroon, Ghana and Zambia has risen by at least 50% in the past decade; Kenya has done almost as well.

Millions of African farmers like Mr Nzabahimana have become more secure and better-fed as a result of better-managed, better-fertilised crops grown from hybrid seeds. They are demonstrating that small farmers can benefit from improved techniques. Despite some big, much-publicised land sales to foreign investors, almost two-thirds of African farms are less than a hectare in their extent, so this is good news. Progress need not mean turfing millions of smallholders off the land, as some had feared—though by making them richer it may yet give them and their children the means to move, should they wish.

For the time being, though, more than half of the adult workers south of the Sahara are employed in agriculture; in Rwanda, about four-fifths are. With so many farmers and not much heavy industry, boosting agricultural productivity is among the best ways of raising living standards across the continent. And there is a long way to go. Sub-Saharan Africa’s farms remain far less productive than Latin American and Asian ones. The continent as a whole exports less farm produce than Thailand.

The revolution will not be broadcast

Since 1961 the total value of all agricultural production in Africa has risen fourfold. This is almost exactly the improvement seen in India, which sounds encouraging; after all, India had a “green revolution” during that time. But whereas Indian farmers got far higher grain yields per hectare, in Africa much of the new production just came from new land. In the early 1960s sub-Saharan Africa had 1.5m square kilometres given over to arable farming; now it uses 800,000 square kilometres more.

Another thing African farming had more of was people. Even today, when population growth has slowed in rural Asia and Latin America, in rural Africa it is still 2%. More people meant more workers, which can mean more yield from a farm in absolute terms. But it also meant more mouths to feed. Africa’s population grew more steeply than India’s, and as a result production per person fell in much of the continent during the late 20th century.

The explanations for Africa’s difficulties begin with geology. Much African bedrock is ancient, dating back to before the continent’s time at the heart of a huge land mass known as Gondwanaland. For hundreds of millions of years Africa has seen little of the tectonic activity that provides fresh rock for the wind and rain to grind into fertile soils. There is some naturally fertile land in the south and around the East African Rift, which runs through Rwanda. But much of the interior is barely worth farming (see map).



Only about 4% of arable land south of the Sahara is irrigated, so local weather patterns determine what can be grown. Those patterns vary a lot from time to time and place to place. Variations in time make farmers more inclined to stick with hardy but low-yielding varieties of crop. Variations in space mean that crops and diets differ a lot across the continent. In Rwanda, white maize and beans are the staple foods. In other places millet, teff, sorghum, cassava or sweet potatoes are more important. Asia’s green revolution was a comparatively simple matter, says Donald Larson of the World Bank, because Asia has only two crucial crops: rice and wheat. Provide high-yield varieties of both and much of the technical work is done. African agriculture is so heterogeneous that no leap forward in the farming of a single crop could transform it. The continent needs a dozen green revolutions.

Humans have added to these handicaps in all sorts of ways. Beginning in the 1960s, Africa’s newly independent nations—often, thanks to colonial borders, small and landlocked—taxed farm produce heavily to finance industrial ventures which often failed. They did little to improve the colonial era’s scant and inappropriate infrastructure, which tended to concentrate on railways from mines to ports. Africa still has a thin road network; in rural areas the roads are often primitive and impassable after a heavy shower.

Governments frequently imposed price controls, reducing what farmers could earn. And in some places, such as Ethiopia, farmers were subjected to oppressive command-and-control regimes that sapped their will to work. “We lost two and a half to three decades,” says Ousmane Badiane of the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).

The sorry history of fertiliser subsidies shows the cost of official ineptitude. Worldwide, about 124kg of artificial fertiliser is used per hectare of farmland per year. Many would argue that this is too high. But the 15kg per hectare in sub-Saharan Africa is definitely too low (see chart). Some countries, like Ghana and Malawi, have thrown money at fertiliser subsidies in flush years only to cut back when budgets tighten. Subsidised fertiliser intended for smallholders has often been resold at market rates with middlemen pocketing the profit. Nigeria’s system became so corrupt that in 2012 the agriculture minister, Akinwumi Adesina, estimated that as little as 11% of subsidised fertiliser was actually getting to small farmers at the subsidised price.



Like the clumps of earth that African farmers whack with their hand hoes, these natural and human obstacles are stubborn and hard to break down. But bit by bit they can be worn away. African agriculture is improving not because of any single scientific or political breakthrough, but because the things that have retarded productivity for decades, both on the farm and off, are being assailed from many sides.

For farmers, perhaps the most potent symbol of change is hybrid seed, often dyed a bright colour and usually burdened with an unlovely name, such as SC719. Joe DeVries of the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa, based in Kenya, says that by raising the prospect of higher yields, these seeds persuade farmers to spend money and time on fertiliser, weeding and pesticides. Today AGRA collaborates with more than 100 seed companies, representing about a third of the market. They produced about 125,000 tonnes of improved seed last year—up from 26,000 tonnes in 2010.

Many of these seeds are being developed in Africa for Africans. N’Tji Coulibaly of the Institut d’Economie Rurale in Mali has developed six hybrid maize varieties. Because these tolerate drought well, they can be planted north and east of the capital, Bamako, in fields where sorghum is now the dominant crop. As though in retaliation, another nearby team has created a variety of sorghum that yields about 40% more than the indigenous kind even without additional fertiliser.

Governments and charities are rushing to teach farmers how to plant the new seeds. In Rwanda, One Acre Fund, a charity, provides its clients seeds, fertiliser, know-how and, crucially, credit. To upgrade to hybrids means changing to a system where new seed has to be bought every year, because the plants that grow from hybrid seed do not produce seed of the same sort. And small farmers are usually starved of credit—one large survey for the World Bank found that only 1% of Nigerian farmers borrowed to buy fertiliser.

Last year One Acre Fund’s large network of instructors, farmers themselves, taught some 305,000 more east African smallholders skills such as carefully spacing seeds so as to maximise productivity and measuring fertiliser using bottle caps. Mr Nzabahimana is a client, as are about a third of the farmers thereabouts. In parts of Kenya where One Acre Fund has been operating for at least four years, even the farmers who are not clients get about 10% more maize per hectare than similar farmers in areas where the charity recently arrived. Know-how spreads.

Too few trucks, too many tariffs

Untouched, if marginal, land used to be plentiful in Africa. Today it is rare, so farmers must work out how to grow more on each plot. And even countries with plenty of land have little to spare near their growing cities; given the difficulties of moving fresh produce over long distances that makes intensification near the big markets particularly attractive. These urban markets can also change what farmers grow. Farmers close to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia’s capital, are switching from red teff to fancier white teff because that is what city folk increasingly want. White teff is harder to grow, so the farmers are using more fertiliser and improved seed. Elsewhere, urban hunger for meat and eggs is persuading more farmers to keep cows and chickens.

Poor roads are not the only reason it is hard to move farm produce long distances. In 2013 the UN estimated that African businesses that exported goods to other African countries faced average tariffs of 8.7%, compared with 2.5% for those that exported goods beyond Africa. But the tariffs and barriers are gradually coming down. Maximo Torero, an analyst at IFPRI, points out that 31% of the food calories exported from African countries went to other African countries in the mid-2000s—a low proportion, but an improvement on the 14% rate ten years earlier. The El Niño droughts of the last few months in Ethiopia and southern Africa have not yet led to widespread bans on food exports.

Reform has been slower in another area. African farmers often have few or no rights over the land they work. Insecure farmers tend not to invest much, either because they do not see the point or because they cannot get credit. These problems can be particularly bad for women. One study in Ghana found that women farmers were less likely to let their land lie fallow (a simple way of increasing its fertility). They seem to have feared losing it if they did not plant it continuously.

Well-intentioned attempts to entitle farmers have sometimes made things worse for women: as customary rights are replaced with legal ones, men tend to assert control. Still, things are improving in a few countries. In Ethiopia, where land is formally owned by the state, farmers’ rights to cultivate it and rent it out have been clarified. That reform, combined with a change to family law, seems to have increased women’s control. The Rwandan government has changed inheritance law to give women more rights.

Few of these benign changes would have taken place without a rash of superior government. Sub-Saharan Africa still has some awful regimes in Equatorial Guinea and Zimbabwe (where agricultural productivity is dropping). It has some failed states such as the Central African Republic, South Sudan and Somalia. Yet some terrible rulers have gone and border wars are rare.



In part as a result, the region is more placid than it was. The Centre for Systemic Peace, an American think-tank, tallies civil and ethnic conflicts, assigning them a seriousness score of one to ten. Between 1998 and 2014 the total conflict score in sub-Saharan Africa fell from 55 to 30. More peaceful land is more productive. So is land where the people are healthier. The World Health Organisation estimates that 395,000 Africans died from malaria in 2015, compared with 764,000 in 2000. New HIV infections are down by about two-fifths in the same period.

There is still much to do. When Mr Nzabahimana wants to sell food, he simply hawks it around the village or hires a woman to carry it on her head to Rubengera, a tiny market town a few miles away. He does not know in advance what price his crops will fetch. As Africa’s fields grow more productive, such thin, fragmented markets are becoming a bigger problem. Too few agricultural buyers reach villages, and the ones that make it can often dictate prices. “The traders have all the information—they pay the farmers what they want,” says Mr Adesina, who is now head of the African Development Bank.

Technology can help, to an extent: in Kenya, where mobile phones are ubiquitous, farmers can subscribe to services that give them price data. But rural roads will have to improve, as well as rural phones, if smallholders are to obtain better prices. So will the ability to store crops somewhere other than in their houses, where the weevils get them. Processing foods near farms, something Mr Adesina is keen on, would help reduce such waste and provide decent paying jobs.

A lack of clouds on the horizon

Another boost would come from better livestock. Far more of Africa is grazed than is planted, and demand for animal products is rising. Yet there are few meaty analogues to hybrid seeds. African cows are increasingly crossbred with European breeds to create tough animals that produce lots of milk; fodder yields are improving, just like yields of other crops. But animal vaccines remain expensive and are often unavailable, since they need to be kept cold. A pastoral revolution remains in the future.



Mr Adesina likes to say that African agriculture is not a way of life or a development activity; it is a business, and it is as a business that it will grow, through investment and access to markets. That said, it will remain a risky business, one in which a vital input, rain, cannot be controlled—as millions of farmers are regretting at the moment.

One way to face that risk is to encourage irrigation, especially water-hoarding drip-irrigation. Another is to offer some sort of crop insurance that pays out in particularly bad seasons, as Ethiopia is trying to do. Both are good options. How much they can do in the face of increasing climate change, which is likely to render the dry parts of the continent drier still, and which will do some of its damage just by making peak temperatures even hotter, remains to be seen. Some crops may become impossible to grow in the places where they are grown today.

As with hoes and hard soils, there are no easy breakthroughs to be had. But for a long time Mr Adesina’s idea of African agriculture as a business to build up would have seemed alien inside the continent and fantastical beyond it. That it no longer does is as strong a basis for hope as any.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21694521-farms-africa-are-prospering-last-thanks-persistence-technology-and-decent/print





Articles Sections Next





United States




Varieties of inequality: The great divergence

Justice in Louisiana: The ruin of many a poor boy

Polling flops: Mich-fire

GOP souvenir edition: Heard on the trail

The primary race: Trump done well

Becoming an astronaut: The mice in their million hordes

Lexington: Not so special





Articles Sections Next

Varieties of inequality

The great divergence

America’s most successful cities, states and firms are leaving the rest behind

Mar 12th 2016 | DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA | From the print edition



IN THE Nuvotronics factory in Durham, North Carolina, small is beautiful. The firm, founded in 2008, uses a process resembling 3D printing to make miniaturised radio chips for jets and satellites. Typically, such chips are the size of a chocolate bar; Nuvotronics’s widgets are smaller than a breath-mint. Such innovation is lucrative; every kilogram saved makes a satellite $15,000 cheaper to launch. Nuvotronics is part of a cluster of high-tech firms that have increased Durham’s GDP per person by 28% since 2001. By the same measure, North Carolina as a whole grew by just 3% over the same period. Durham’s success reflects an emerging trend: high-flying cities, and the successful firms they contain, are detaching from the rest of the economy.

Cities have long been the most productive places to do business, because they bring firms, customers and workers closer together. A banker in New York is only a taxi ride away from her clients; a new restaurant there immediately has 8.4m potential customers on its doorstep. Where clever people congregate, innovation results.

For the most successful cities, these advantages seem to be getting bigger. In 2001 the richest 50 cities and their surroundings produced 27% more per head than America as a whole. Today’s richest cities make 34% more. Measured by total GDP, the decoupling is greater still, because prosperous cities are sucking in disproportionate numbers of urbanising Americans. Between 2010 and 2014 America’s population grew by 3.1%; its cities, by 3.7%. But the 50 richest cities swelled by 9.2%.

Durham, whose population grew by about 7% in that period, provides some hints as to what makes a place flourish. The city thrives on its proximity to three leading universities—Duke, North Carolina State and the University of North Carolina. Far-sighted planning in 1959 led Durham and its close neighbours, Raleigh and Chapel Hill, to establish a research park between the three cities. The idea was to coax the universities’ boffins into business ventures. It worked; today 50,000 people work there.

Unlike much of America, the area has not shied away from infrastructure investment. Raleigh-Durham airport has been renovated with a helping hand from local businesses. The roads are well maintained, if a little crowded. Bill Bell, the city’s mayor, hopes to develop a light-rail system for the city; in 2011 voters approved a sales-tax increase to help pay for it.

Investment has also revitalised a deprived downtown area. For most of its history, Durham made tobacco and textiles. When those industries went into decline in the latter half of the 20th century, they left a vacuum in the city. But over the past decade the gap has been plugged. The tower of the old American Tobacco factory, emblazoned with the “Lucky Strike” logo, still stands—but the factory is now a “campus” featuring bars, restaurants and the kind of tech firms where staff ride around on scooters. The city’s performing-arts centre, across the road, is one of the four best-attended theatres in the country. Mr Bell says public-private partnerships account for much of the investment.



Durham is unusual for its failure to drag up state-wide incomes. The state’s labour-force participation rate, at 61%, is grim even by American standards. Elsewhere, the presence—or absence—of rich cities determines economic fortunes. States with one of today’s richest 50 cities have grown 13% in per-person terms since 2001. The 18 (mostly southern and south-western) states without such a city saw growth of just 7%. As a result, inequality between states has risen for most of the past decade-and-a-half (see chart).

Rich cities typically attract successful, growing firms. Nuvotronics is young, employing fewer than 100 people, and did not move to Durham until 2013. But the city also plays host to well-established firms like Cree, which makes LED lighting, and giants like Quintiles, a consultancy which works on pharmaceutical trials. Attracting the right companies matters because America’s firms, too, are diverging. In the past two decades returns to investment at the most profitable 10% have more than doubled by one measure. Returns for middling performers have increased only a little (see chart). A recent paper by Jason Furman of the White House and Peter Orszag, a former budget chief, says this could be because the best firms are gaining market power (think of Apple’s dominance of the smartphone market). A report by McKinsey attributes the divergence to the varying pace of digitisation across industries. Highly digitised industries such as technology, media and professional services—all common in successful cities—have benefited from the juiciest increases in margins. Digital laggards, such as health care and offline retailing, are doing less well.



This bears directly on the inequality which matters most: that in wages. Two recent studies suggest that most of the increase in inequality over the past four decades is explained by wage gaps between firms rather than within them. A secretary will probably earn more working for Goldman Sachs than working for the local plumber; it is more lucrative to be a programmer at Facebook than in a corporate back-office. This means that bringing highly skilled workers to an area is not enough to guarantee high wages; the right firms must come to town, too.

The end of mediocrity

In 2013 Tyler Cowen, an economist at George Mason University, predicted in his book “Average is Over” that the fortunes of both people and places would become more polarised. Ambitious and talented workers, he argued, would want to work in a relatively small number of cities and regions. These vibrant clusters would then benefit from increasing returns to scale, cementing their advantages. Mr Cowen’s predictions are already coming true. While successful cities grow, almost 60% of rural counties are losing population. With America’s shale and manufacturing industries suffering, the pull of successful cities is becoming greater still.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21694356-inequality-between-states-has-risen-most-past-15-years-americas-most-successful-cities/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Justice in Louisiana

The ruin of many a poor boy

A crisis in Louisiana’s courts is emblematic of broader pathologies in both the state and American justice

Mar 12th 2016 | NEW ORLEANS | From the print edition

Wear that ball and chain

OF THE shackled, jumpsuited defendants making their first appearance in the New Orleans criminal court, the first to rise in the dock was relatively fortunate. Up for possession of drugs, he was deemed indigent, and the city’s public defender was appointed to represent him. After a brisk back-and-forth of previous convictions and mitigating circumstances (a baby on the way, a job), bail was set at $5,000. The next man’s predicament was grimmer. Barely speaking English, he too was deemed indigent; but because his alleged offence—sexual battery—was more serious, the public defender reluctantly declined to represent him. Which means that, for the time being, no one will.

He is not alone. At the last count, 52 people were stuck in jail in New Orleans without representation; a further 27 lacked counsel but are out on bail. The problem is that, while these defendants can’t afford lawyers, the lawyers say that, after drastic budget cuts, a hiring freeze and a spate of resignations, they can’t afford to act for the defendants. In 2010 the public defender’s office of Orleans Parish (coterminous with the city) employed 78 lawyers; since its budget fell by a third, it has 42, for an annual caseload of 22,000. In January the office began to refuse new clients accused of serious crimes, such as armed robbery and murder (capital cases are an exception). The rationale is that these graver accusations require resources the office cannot provide. In a city where 85% of felony defendants are considered indigent, the numbers are rising fast.

“It’s terrible,” acknowledges Derwyn Bunton, the parish’s chief public defender. Mr Bunton grew up in poverty; several of his relatives have been through the courts. Like most of the clients his team serves, he is black. Yet he decided he was “not going to be complicit in the injustice” of providing inadequate defence. The tipping-point was the story of a man arrested for a multiple shooting in a city park. The man hired a private lawyer, who hired an investigator, who unearthed videotape proving he was in Houston when the crime was committed. Mr Bunton was “not sure we would have made it” before the tape was erased. The issue at stake, he says, is “Do poor people deserve equal justice? Do poor people deserve justice at all?”

It isn’t only New Orleans. Jay Dixon, the state public defender, says offices in 13 districts have imposed restrictions on their services; the one in Plaquemines Parish temporarily closed altogether. G. Paul Marx, a veteran defender whose office covers Acadia, Lafayette and Vermilion Parishes, says his payroll has declined from 62 lawyers in early December to 16 now. He estimates the number of defendants without representation at a whopping 2,300, rising by 300-400 a month (most are out on bail). Mr Marx calls the situation a “man-made disaster”. The cause of this widespread denial of basic rights—the sort of derogation which, if it happened abroad, would be denounced by American diplomats—is the volatile and eccentric way those rights are subsidised.

Louisiana is broke. Its legislature and new governor, John Bel Edwards, are struggling to repair its ruined finances, a mess many attribute to the doomed presidential ambitions and concomitant tax-cutting of Mr Edwards’s predecessor, Bobby Jindal. Like that for other essential services, state funding for public defenders is set to be severely squeezed. That will exacerbate the malaise, but is not its main cause, since roughly two-thirds of their income comes from a different source: punitive court fees and fines, including those for traffic offences. For various reasons—revised police priorities, pre-trial diversion programmes—in some parishes, such as Orleans, this revenue has crashed, though it has held up in places with lucrative stretches of highway. The state’s contribution was already too measly to compensate.

The trouble with these funding arrangements is not just that they are unreliable. They are also ridden with conflicts of interest, even or especially when the cash is flowing. Not just public defenders but Louisiana’s sheriffs and prosecutors, and the courts themselves, subsist partly on fees, fines and bonds imposed largely at judges’ discretion, mostly on defendants who plead or are found guilty. Thus, in a perverse reversal of the usual formula, public defenders routinely work on a “No lose, no fee” basis. Hurrying through cases benefits everyone. The risks were highlighted by a still-rumbling scandal over the judicial expense fund of the Orleans criminal court, meant to cover overheads using the court’s share of the revenues. An auditor’s report in 2012 found judges had spent hundreds of thousands of dollars from the fund on medical bills and insurance. The district attorney who blew the whistle recused himself from investigating, since he had enjoyed similar perks when he was on the bench.

The system bears an unfortunate resemblance to an extortion racket. Payments are often made on a schedule; people who miss them are liable to be locked up, alternatives known as “pay or stay”. Ashton Brown, for example, owed $500 arising from a theft conviction in 2013; he was also liable for probation-service fees. Arrested last year for possessing drugs, he was detained for an extra two weeks because of the old debt. The constitutional requirement to assess his ability to pay was ignored. Eventually his friends and grandmother came up with $100 to get him out. “It’s crazy,” says Mr Brown, who has yet to clear the debt (his record makes it hard to find work). He is among the plaintiffs in a suit filed by Equal Justice Under Law, a pressure group, alleging that Orleans Parish maintains an “unjust modern debtors’ prison” and that its officials “fund themselves off the backs of New Orleans’s poorest.” A court, says EJUL’s Alec Karakatsanis, “is supposed to be where justice is done, not where revenues are generated.”

Habeas corpse

In its criminal-justice excesses, as in other things, Louisiana is an outlier. Its incarceration and murder rates are the highest in America. In New Orleans, where malpractice has discredited both the police and prisons, both the violent-crime and imprisonment rates are double the national average. Yet these problems, while extreme, are also typical. Although no other state relies predominantly on court revenue to fund public defenders, many are overburdened; in the past, lawyers in Florida and Missouri have turned away clients, too. Unethical punishments are not uncommon: a judge in Alabama was recently suspended for ordering defendants to donate blood in lieu of money. The milking of poor communities by police and the courts, and enforcement of debts with jail time, were a factor in the unrest in Ferguson.

The underlying causes are typical, too. Chief among them is an old imbalance between, on the one hand, a fearsome appetite for prosecuting and jailing people, and, on the other, a reluctance to foot the bill. At least, to foot it up-front: shortchanging public defence, like some other seeming economies, is actually expensive, leading as it does to miscarriages of justice (Louisiana’s exoneration rate is the country’s second highest), longer sentences and so a higher, pricier prison population. Underneath that, says Jim Craig of the Roderick & Solange MacArthur Justice Centre in New Orleans, lies an “unAmerican belief that people who are charged with crime are a lower breed of human beings.” In the South, that view has a racial tinge. Mr Bunton ascribes the state’s stinginess in part to a hunch that indigent defence is “only a right that poor people of colour need.”

For now, in Louisiana, some of the slack is being taken up by private lawyers, whom some judges are ordering to defend cases pro bono. This fix has two obvious drawbacks: many of the lawyers don’t like it; and many are ill-qualified. Jack Bailey, who runs a personal-injury firm in Caddo Parish, says five felony cases were foisted on it last year, even though his three colleagues have no expertise in criminal law. He worries not only about the “expropriation” of his property in the form of their time, but also—after he exonerated two defendants—that innocent people will be failed by less assiduous lawyers, who may be inclined to prioritise paying customers. “Nobody cares about this”, Mr Bailey laments, “until it’s them.” It is absurd, he thinks, that this constitutional duty “should be inflicted on a small number of people who happen to have law licences.”

“If the right to counsel means anything,” says Marjorie Esman of the ACLU, a lobby group, “it means the right to a lawyer who knows what they’re doing.” The ACLU is suing Mr Bunton and Mr Dixon in a federal court, with the aim of having the situation in Orleans Parish declared unconstitutional. That manoeuvre suggests one possible outcome to this crisis, since such a ruling could eventually lead to remedial action by the state or federal government. Another is that a court finds Mr Bunton in contempt (some judges have threatened as much); the unserved defendants get lawyers, albeit in name only; and Mr Bunton winds up in jail himself.

There is a third possibility. Without lawyers, the cases of those languishing in prison will not be able to proceed. Sooner or later someone will file motions for their release; judges may have little choice but to comply. Legions of alleged killers and rapists walking free might just be embarrassing enough to galvanise reform.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21694525-crisis-louisianas-courts-emblematic-broader-pathologies-both-state-and/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Polling flops

Mich-fire

How pollsters missed Bernie Sanders’s surge in Michigan

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR Hillary Clinton, losing Michigan’s Democratic primary to Bernie Sanders was a nuisance. For pollsters, in contrast, the election was Armageddon. Eight different firms had surveyed the state in the previous month, and every one gave Mrs Clinton a double-digit lead. According FiveThirtyEight, a data-journalism website that had put Mrs Clinton’s chances of victory at greater than 99%, the 23-percentage-point gap between her average lead in the polls and the final result was the biggest error since Gary Hart’s victory in the 1984 New Hampshire Democratic primary.

What went wrong? To produce a misfire of this magnitude, just about everything. Pollsters both underestimated how favourable the electorate would be to Mr Sanders—according to the exit poll, it was younger, more male and included more independents than expected—and how big a share of each group he would capture. He lost black voters by merely a 2.4-to-one margin, half as big as his shortfalls among African-Americans in the South. And he limited his deficit among voters who earn more than $100,000 to three percentage points (it was 36 in Virginia).

Projecting the composition of the Michigan electorate was always going to be tough, since it was the first state in the rustbelt to vote this year, and it has not had a competitive Democratic primary since 1992. No live-interview surveys were conducted after a TV debate, preventing any measurement of its impact. Unseasonably warm weather could have boosted turnout and increased the share of less-reliable, Sanders-loving young voters. And complacent supporters of Mrs Clinton, expecting an easy victory, may have switched sides to meddle with their general-election opponents instead: 7% of voters in the Republican primary were self-identified Democrats. Now that the pollsters—who had previously performed fairly well this year by volatile primary standards (see chart), and did get Michigan’s Republican vote spot-on—have some egg on their faces, they are likely to pay extra attention to these factors before the upcoming votes in nearby Illinois and Ohio.

On the other hand, some red flags could have been spotted in advance. One-third of the polling average published by RealClearPolitics, and one-quarter of FiveThirtyEight’s, came from automated, fixed-line-phone surveys conducted by Mitchell, a Michigan firm. The sample’s demographic sub-groups were re-weighted to match targets provided by Mark Grebner, a consultant whose main business is selling voter lists in local elections. Mr Grebner foresaw an electorate resembling a retirement community, with 88% of voters aged 40 or older and 76% at least 50. Since elderly Democrats adore Mrs Clinton, the two Mitchell polls taken shortly before the vote duly estimated her lead at 27 and 37 percentage points, boosting her average.

However, the assumptions underlying the Mitchell numbers were inconsistent with exit-polls from northern states. Around half of Democratic voters were under 50 in each of Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Vermont. (The final number in the Michigan exit poll was 53%.) Had Mitchell simply copied the New England ratios, its forecast lead for Mrs Clinton’s would have shrunk to the mid-teens, the same range calculated by its competitors like Marist, YouGov and Monmouth. Such figures still would have left Mr Sanders a big underdog, but not a hopeless one.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21694564-how-pollsters-missed-bernie-sanderss-surge-michigan-mich-fire/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

GOP souvenir edition

Heard on the trail

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



Honest Don

“I can be more presidential than anybody […] other than the great Abe Lincoln. He was very presidential.”

Donald Trump prepares himself for office

Mittens has kittens

“He gets a free ride to the White House and all we get is a lousy hat.”

Mitt Romney, the Republican candidate in 2012, hits out at Mr Trump

Don-inatrix

“I could have said ‘Mitt, drop to your knees.’ He would have dropped to his knees.”

Mr Trump responds to being scolded by Mr Romney

Oh, Christopher

“No, I wasn’t being held hostage. No, I wasn’t sitting up there thinking, ‘Oh my God, what have I done?’”

Chris Christie explains his extraordinary glazed expression when on the podium with Mr Trump

Values voting

“[Marco Rubio] referred to my hands, if they are small, something else must be small. I guarantee you there is no problem. I guarantee.”

Mr Trump on the big issues

Mencken’s heirs

“You are the most dishonest human beings on Earth.”

Mr Trump on the reporters who cover his campaign

Primal colours

“The scream you hear, the howl that comes from Washington, DC, is utter terror at what we the people are doing together.”

Ted Cruz wins contests in Kansas, Maine and Idaho

Bye bye, Ben

“You know there’s a lot of people who love me, they just won’t vote for me.”

Ben Carson suspends, and then ends, his campaign

Electorus!

“I’m with Harry Potter, we’re not going to the dark side.”

John Kasich tries to rise above the tone of his party’s primaries

The withdrawal method

“[M]y candidacy could lead to the election of Donald Trump or Senator Ted Cruz. That is not a risk I can take in good conscience.”

Michael Bloomberg decides not to run for president. BloombergView



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21694565-heard-trail/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The primary race

Trump done well

The Republican front-runner gets a kick out of the Midwest

Mar 12th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition



FOR Donald Trump to get his mitts (which are of a decent size, he claims) on the White House, two things must happen. First, he needs to win the Republican nomination; second, he would need a colossal share of white votes to compensate for the disdain in which he is held by Hispanics and blacks. After the results came in from Mississippi and Michigan, the biggest of four states to hold primary votes on March 8th, both scenarios looked likelier.

Mr Trump won handsomely, despite having had the worst week of his campaign. He had caused disgust by talking up the size of his penis and alarm by leading a crowd in Orlando in a pledge of allegiance to himself, accompanied by a fascist-style salute. He had been castigated by Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee in 2012, as “a phony, a fraud”. On March 5th he was trounced by Ted Cruz in Kansas and Maine, where he had been predicted to win. It seemed Peak Trump had passed; Michigan and Mississippi showed it has not.

Mr Trump bagged more than the 59 delegates he needed to stay on track for the nomination there and in Idaho, where he came second to Mr Cruz—even before the results came in from Hawaii, which he also won. And he saw two possible obstacles, Florida and Ohio, where a total of 165 delegates are up for grabs on March 15th, shrivel with the fortunes of their local champions, Marco Rubio and John Kasich. The senator from Florida failed to win any delegate, leaving him with two poxy wins, in Puerto Rico and Minnesota, from 24. Mr Trump has won 15 states; Mr Cruz seven; Mr Kasich, the governor of Ohio, has yet to win any. He says he will quit if he fails to win Ohio; his third-place finish in Michigan, where he campaigned hard, was another blow to that ambition. Winnowing the field to a two-man fight between Mr Trump and Mr Cruz should, in theory, help Mr Cruz. Yet, if Mr Trump wins Florida and Ohio, it may be too late to stop him.

Mr Trump’s hope of sweeping the white vote in a general election was buoyed by a bigger upset, among the Democrats. Confounding the pollsters—who had given her a big lead in the state—Hillary Clinton lost Michigan to Bernie Sanders. She will probably still win her party’s ticket: she has a lead of more than 200 delegates. Yet the manner of her stumble suggests Mrs Clinton could be just the opponent Mr Trump needs.

Her dozen primary wins, including in Mississippi, were mainly founded on huge support from African-Americans. Elsewhere, Mrs Clinton has found the going harder, with Mr Sanders’s excoriations of Wall Street and globalisation winning the love of younger and white voters in most states outside the South. Exit polls in Michigan suggested he won 81% of its youngsters. Yet he also cut deep into Mrs Clinton’s lead among blacks, apparently, in a state that has lost thousands of factory jobs in recent decades, with his anti-globalisation message. He had sought to make this the defining difference between himself and Mrs Clinton, whom he has castigated for supporting trade deals. Mr Sanders duly won majorities of voters worried about the economy and who think international trade has cost America jobs.



America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

This suggests he could win again in a looming series of Midwestern states, including Illinois, Ohio and Wisconsin, prolonging the Democratic contest. More important, Mrs Clinton’s vulnerability in these states, and on this issue, signals Mr Trump’s likeliest path to the presidency. All Democratic-leaning states, they contain the rump of the party’s unionised, white working-class support; and Mr Trump, who is as protectionist as Mr Sanders, could conceivably storm that bastion. Mrs Clinton needs a better answer to the economic discontentment Mr Sanders and Mr Trump are drawing on. At this late stage in the contest, it will be hard to find without resorting to populism herself. Free traders could be in for a wretched few months.

Yet Mr Trump gave little thought to that encouragement in the bizarre victory speech he delivered in Florida, at one of his golf clubs. Stung by criticism of his business record, he took the opportunity to showcase some of the many products he has hawked: Trump wine, Trump vodka, Trump water and Trump steaks. “Trump steaks. Where are the steaks? Do we have steak? We have Trump steak,” rambled Mr Trump, sounding like a presenter on The Shopping Channel. Strangely, his meat business seems to have been non-functioning since 2007. So if the beef was his, it was unfit for consumption. For Mr Trump and America, it seems, the steaks have never been higher.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21694566-republican-front-runner-gets-kick-out-midwest-trump-done-well/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Becoming an astronaut

The mice in their million hordes

NASA receives a record number of applications

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition

THE odds of becoming an American astronaut have always been slim. But this year the competition will be cosmically difficult: over 18,300 people have applied to join NASA’s next astronaut class, over double the previous record in 1978 and almost three times the number that applied for the most recent class, in 2012. The would-be starmen and women will jockey for up to 14 spots. Stephanie Schierholz of NASA cites two main reasons for the spike. Collaborations with two commercial groups, SpaceX and Virgin Galactic, have boosted interest, as has the development of the Orion spacecraft, which will (in theory, at least) shuttle humans deeper into the solar system than ever before—perhaps even to Mars.

To examine what kind of health problems astronauts might develop during a 30-month mission to the red planet, NASA sent American astronaut Scott Kelly to the International Space Station for almost a year; his physical data will now be compared with those of his twin brother Mark, a retired astronaut who stayed at home. Scott returned on March 1st after 340 days in orbit, exceeding the previous NASA record of 215 days but well short of Russian and Soviet records. Astronauts who previously went on long-term missions endured changes to their vision, muscle atrophy and bone loss. On the bright side, NASA reports that while in space Mr Kelly’s excretions burnt up when entering the atmosphere. “Your faeces will not be shooting stars,” NASA’s website taunts readers who will never make it into space.

As if the promise of flaming poop were not enticement enough, NASA has also become cleverer at broadcasting new opportunities. To coax more women to apply, a group of female NASA astronauts answered questions for Glamour magazine’s website. “A lot of people who are qualified to be astronauts don’t realise it,” Ms Schierholz says, explaining that the only requirements are a bachelor’s degree in science, technology, engineering or maths, three or more years of related work experience or study (or 1,000 hours as a jet pilot, which it is easy to imagine might come in handy) and the capacity to pass a gruelling physical.

On Reddit, an online discussion forum, Shannon Walker, another astronaut, fielded questions about such requirements, as well as from users wondering how children who aspire to be astronauts can work towards their dream. Do well in school, was the predictable response. When one person inquired how many “parsecs it would take [for a NASA team] to make the Kessel Run”, a hyperspace trading route mentioned in “Star Wars”, Ms Walker replied that “NASA is not going to be using their technology to smuggle spice.” It may not be a requirement but, for long flights in tight quarters, a sense of humour surely helps too.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21694567-nasa-receives-record-number-applications-mice-their-million-hordes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Lexington

Not so special

The best way to deal with Cuba is to end the embargo and the special privileges for migrants

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



WERE Angel Rosabal Valdivia not Cuban, he might now be languishing in an immigration cell. In early March the 31-year-old computer technician crossed a bridge over the Rio Grande between Mexico and Texas without a visa and presented himself to border guards. Because Mr Rosabal is Cuban, he was swiftly granted leave to remain. Under a series of laws dating back to the cold war, notably the Cuban Adjustment Act of 1966, most arrivals from his island are welcomed as if they are political refugees, then granted permanent residency after a year and a day.

Lexington met Mr Rosabal in Miami on March 7th in the offices of Church World Service (CWS), a refugee-assistance ministry. He was one of a throng of new arrivals being processed into the Cuban-Haitian Entrant Programme, under a 1980 law that makes Cubans instantly eligible for public assistance that most immigrants wait years to receive. Fresh-faced, and proudly sporting a watch that he had refused to give to people-smugglers during a ten-month trek to America via Ecuador, Colombia, Panama and Mexico, Mr Rosabal said the journey cost him $3,000. He was robbed twice—Colombia is “so bad”, he shuddered. Drawing on government grants and private fundraising, CWS (run by a coalition of Protestant and Orthodox churches) was about to put him up in a hotel and help him apply for a work permit. Within a week the ministry would fly him to one of six cities where it works with churches and employers to resettle new arrivals, from Lancaster, Pennsylvania to Louisville, Kentucky. After six months, 90% of CWS’s resettled Cuban clients are self-sufficient. Mr Rosabal was told that within a fortnight he can expect to be working, perhaps in a hotel or egg-packing plant. He looked cheerful but a little dazed, after arriving at dawn on a minibus from Texas. He had been in Florida seven hours.

During his trek, other Latin Americans often asked Mr Rosabal why America offers special privileges to Cubans. Mr Rosabal would reply that back home with two jobs—working with computers by day and as a security guard by night—he earned $62 a month. Venezuelan or Colombian companions would gasp, asking: “How can you survive?” But Mr Rosabal misjudges his new American homeland. The special status of Cubans owes more to politics than to pity, and the politics is changing fast.

Cuban-Americans have long enjoyed outsize clout, thanks in part to their concentration in Florida, a presidential battleground state. But the Cuban-American vote is evolving. Once, conservative exiles could halt Miami traffic with vast anti-Castro protests. Now their grandchildren are more likely to support lifting the embargo imposed on the island 55 years ago.

When Republicans hold a presidential primary in Florida on March 15th, two of the four candidates will be Cuban-American senators, an astonishing feat for a community of about 2m people, or 0.6% of the national population. Both are supporters of the embargo. One of them, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, introduced a bill in January that would end welfare payments and public assistance for Cuban arrivals unless they can prove that they faced political persecution back home—though he stopped short of suggesting changes to the entry privileges in the Cuban Adjustment Act. Campaigning in snowy New Hampshire, Mr Rubio cited reports of “outrageous abuse”, such as Cubans who claim American pensions while living on the island. His bill matches one introduced in the House of Representatives by Carlos Curbelo, a Miami-area Republican, who scolds what he calls “non-refugee Cubans” for abusing American goodwill. The longest-serving Cuban-American in Congress, Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Miami, said late last year that “it wouldn’t break my heart” if the Cuban Adjustment Act itself were repealed.

Cubans sense the changes. Arrivals from the island have surged since December 2014, when President Barack Obama announced his plans to restore many diplomatic and economic ties. More than 43,000 Cubans applied for entry to America in 2015, a 78% increase on the previous year, some after perilous sea-crossings. Republicans blame Mr Obama. Ahead of his visit to Cuba on March 21st and 22nd, the first by a sitting president since 1928, Cuban-American members of Congress accused him of triggering “desperation” among Cubans with his policy of “unconditional engagement with the Castro dictatorship”.

Openness v isolation

Democrats blame Republicans for stoking fears on the island that the Cuba Adjustment Act will be scrapped. Annette Taddeo, a (Colombian-American) Democrat running for Mr Curbelo’s House district, accuses her Republican opponent of playing on resentments within their heavily Hispanic corner of south Florida. “The electoral calculation is to divide Cubans from non-Cubans, and older exiles from newer arrivals,” she charges. Ms Taddeo would preserve Cuban entry privileges until a broader immigration reform is achieved: a tough call in a year when voters are tingling at talk of border walls.

At root, today’s fights about Cuban migration turn on old arguments about whether the island is best liberated by openness or isolation. Bruno Barreiro is the Miami-Dade county commissioner for Little Havana, a bastion of anti-Castro fervour. He says the Cuban Adjustment Act was a mistake: if Cubans had been bottled up on the island, they would have exploded long ago. The act saved lots of lives, Mr Barreiro concedes: “Unfortunately, it also permitted the Castro regime to stay in place.” Not every anti-Castro politician goes that far, though the logic of isolation underpins politicians’ growling about Cuban-Americans showing disloyalty by returning to the island to visit their families.

In the end, the only sustainable Cuban immigration policy involves a free and prosperous island, 90 miles off Florida. Cubans’ entry privileges may be a relic of the cold war. But so is the failed embargo. Scrap both at the same time, and bet on openness.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21694524-best-way-deal-cuba-end-embargo-and-special-privileges/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





The Americas




Brazil’s political and economic crisis: Standing by their man

Caribbean prisons: Blue seas, black holes

Antiquities in Latin America: Returning the hatchet

Bello: The return of an old enemy





Articles Sections Next

Brazil’s political and economic crisis

Standing by their man

The accusations against a former president make a tense situation even more fraught

Mar 12th 2016 | SÃO PAULO | From the print edition



THE Speaker of Congress’s lower house indicted for corruption; the country’s most revered politician detained by the police and then charged; a billionaire sentenced to two decades behind bars. All this happened in Brazil this month. In 2014, when investigators made the first arrests linked to a bribery scandal at Petrobras, the state-controlled energy giant, few imagined that courts and the police would reach so deeply into the country’s elites. The fearlessness of law-enforcers cheers Brazilians, who are fed up with high-level impunity. But their recent successes deepen the country’s political paralysis and do nothing to alleviate its economic crisis.

The giant-killing began on March 3rd, when the supreme court voted to charge Eduardo Cunha, Speaker of the federal Chamber of Deputies, with accepting bribes linked to the award by Petrobras of contracts for building two oil-drilling ships. The chief prosecutor accuses him of managing the Petrobras “bribe pipeline”, which channelled billions of reais from construction firms to executives and politicians in the ruling coalition in exchange for padded contracts. Mr Cunha denies wrongdoing. On March 8th a federal court sentenced Marcelo Odebrecht, the former boss of Brazil’s largest construction conglomerate, which bears his family name, to more than 19 years in prison for corruption and money-laundering.

The biggest shock was the brief detention for questioning by police on March 4th of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Brazil’s former president and the mentor of its current one, Dilma Rousseff (pictured with him above). The bribery scheme appears to have started while Lula, as he is universally known, was in office from 2003 to 2010. Prosecutors say they have evidence that Lula, members of his family and the Lula Institute, an NGO he heads, received “undue advantages” worth 30m reais ($8m) after he left office from building firms embroiled in the affair. Lula was “one of the principal beneficiaries of the crimes” committed at the oil company, prosecutors allege. He denies any wrongdoing. After being released without charge, he fulminated against “persecution” and intimated that he would run for president again in 2018. On March 9th, in a separate investigation, São Paulo state prosecutors charged him with failing to declare ownership of a sea-side property. He says he is not the owner.

Where this leaves the country is uncertain. The real interrupted its recent slide, and São Paulo’s stockmarket surged by 18%, following Lula’s detention. The markets are hoping that, as the Petrobras investigations progress, Ms Rousseff will eventually be forced out of office and a new government will take charge of the economy, which is in the midst of the worst recession in decades. But uglier scenarios seem at least as likely.

Survival mode

After Lula’s detention, Gilberto Carvalho, a leading light of his (and Ms Rousseff’s) left-wing Workers’ Party (PT), warned investigators in a newspaper interview against “playing with fire”. José Guimarães, the PT’s leader in the lower house of Congress, urged supporters to wage “political war” against “coup-mongers”. A journalist covering the events at the former president’s flat in São Bernardo do Campo, on the outskirts of São Paulo, was roughed up for representing “fascist media”.

Feelings are likely to rise still higher on March 13th, when anti-government groups plan to hold demonstrations across the country to renew their demands for Ms Rousseff’s impeachment. The organisers, a hotchpotch of social movements ranging in ideology from centrist to loonily right-wing, hope to bring out more than the record 1m people, disproportionately from the middle class, who protested a year ago. The government’s supporters plan counter-demonstrations on the same day.

The threats to Ms Rousseff are growing. One motion to impeach her, on the grounds that she used accounting trickery to hide the true size of the budget deficit in 2015, is being debated in the lower house of Congress. To that charge her foes want to add fresh allegations that she tried to interfere with the Petrobras probes, which she denies. Brazil’s electoral tribunal is investigating whether Petrobras money helped finance her re-election campaign in 2014; its mastermind, João Santana, was arrested last month. If the tribunal concludes that the campaign was tainted, it could annul the election and call a new one.

The president’s survival strategy relies on mobilising her left-wing base. That is one reason she has failed to tackle the budget deficit, which widened to 10.8% of GDP in January. This has sapped confidence in the economy, which contracted by 3.8% in 2015 and is expected to shrink by as much this year. The PT’s opposition to austerity is likely to harden after the detention of Lula, who is still lionised by the left for his pro-poor policies.



Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts

But Ms Rousseff’s embrace of the PT risks alienating her centrist allies, whom she also needs. It is hard to impeach a president: both houses of Congress must vote in favour by two-thirds majorities. But that hurdle is not insurmountable. Just 100 left-wing deputies in the 513-seat lower house would never vote for impeachment, reckons João Castro Neves of Eurasia Group, a consultancy. In addition, Ms Rousseff needs 70-odd centrists to avoid the threat.

As the economy worsens and the president’s approval ratings remain barely above 10%, some are likely to waver. Members of the Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB), the centrist party of the vice-president, Michel Temer, are likely to call for a break with the government at a convention on March 12th. The indictment of Mr Cunha, also a member of the PMDB, may weaken the president still further. He was a leading champion of impeachment and a big obstacle to Ms Rousseff’s (half-hearted) efforts to rein in the budget deficit. But the threat of a Petrobras-related indictment limited his effectiveness. Anti-government forces may now find a less encumbered leader.

Ms Rousseff may yet survive until the end of her term in 2018. The demonstrations against her take place on Sundays, which limits their impact. The electoral authority will not annul her election without clear proof of wrongdoing, which has yet to surface. The PMDB may stick to its tactic of supporting Ms Rousseff in exchange for patronage. The party may not want to burden Mr Temer, who would succeed her if she is impeached, with responsibility for dealing with political paralysis and a stricken economy. But this month’s turbulence leaves the president weaker, Brazil less governable and policy adrift.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21694587-accusations-against-former-president-make-tense-situation-even-more-fraught-standing/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Caribbean prisons

Blue seas, black holes

Foul, crowded and dangerous, the region’s jails need reform

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



“FREEDOM! We want freedom!” cried inmates of the Camp Street prison in Guyana’s capital, Georgetown. But in three days of unrest that began on March 2nd, 17 of them burnt to death. The rioting started after guards seized drugs and mobile phones from prisoners awaiting trial for violent crimes. The prisoners set fires; on March 3rd one flared out of control. Trouble continued the next day, with prisoners knocking down wooden cell-block walls and the authorities firing tear gas.

That highly public tragedy is the consequence of a hidden one. Of the 50 countries with the highest incarceration rates, 15 are, like Guyana, former British Caribbean colonies or current ones. High levels of violence are partly to blame. So are the criminalisation of cannabis use and harsh sentencing laws. Last November Guyana’s former national football coach was sentenced to three years in prison, the minimum penalty for possessing more than 15 grams of cannabis.

In most of the English-speaking Caribbean, at least a third of prisoners are suspects awaiting trial. One inmate who died in Camp Street had been waiting eight years to be tried for murder. Suspects exploit pre-trial delays to have witnesses killed or silenced. Once trials begin, they drag on; Guyanese judges painstakingly record each word of evidence in longhand.

Conditions inside are often horrendous. Antigua’s prison, known as 1735 from the construction date carved above its entrance, was built to hold 150 inmates. It now houses around 400. Some are jammed 15 at a time into cells that are furnished with two bunk beds and two slop buckets. The government plans to install modern sanitation and convert a former nurses’ hostel into a remand prison. It may release 100 prisoners on parole to ease overcrowding.

When such overcrowding is not dealt with, rebellions can get out of control. In 2005 Glendairy prison in Barbados, then 150 years old, was burnt down by prisoners. Its replacement took two years to build, at a cost of $144m.

Guyana’s government, in office since May last year, reacted quickly to the Camp Street disaster. The public-security minister, Khemraj Ramjattan, met a group of prisoners during the protest and promised better meals and additional telephone calls. A public inquiry, chaired by a former judge, is to report within a month on what went wrong and what should be done to prevent a repeat of the violence.

Mr Ramjattan wants to build a new prison, but says the government cannot afford it now. He argues for judicial reforms to unclog the courts and prisons, including making it easier for young first offenders to be released on bail. Before the riot, backbench parliamentarians had proposed more lenient drug-sentencing laws.

Last September Britain’s prime minister, David Cameron, offered Jamaica $40m to help build a new prison to house both local inmates and some of the 600 Jamaicans serving time in British jails. The Jamaican government of the time, which lost an election last month, was cool to the idea, and many Jamaicans were outraged.

There is, to be sure, something tin-eared about a political leader offering to pay to lock people up in a former colony. But dirty, crowded prisons add to the misery of inmates, many of whom were impoverished before they turned to crime. If Jamaica does not want Mr Cameron’s money, perhaps he should offer it to Guyana and Antigua instead.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21694586-foul-crowded-and-dangerous-regions-jails-need-reform-blue-seas-black-holes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Antiquities in Latin America

Returning the hatchet

Governments are starting to return treasures to their neighbours

Mar 12th 2016 | TRUJILLO, PERU | From the print edition

An old-fashioned demand for restitution

THE basement of a petrol station is not an obvious place to display some 6,000 pre-Columbian ceramics. The shelves of the Cassinelli Museum are crammed with feline gods, copulating animals and vessels shaped like human faces. Many were made by the Moche and Chimú cultures, which peopled Peru’s northern coast for 1,400 years before the arrival of the Incas in the 15th century.

The artefacts are safer here, argued the museum’s late founder, José Luis Cassinelli, than in tombs that dot the desert or beneath the adobe city of Chan Chan. There, they were prey to huaqueros, poor relic-hunters who sold them on to smugglers. Many ended up in American and European private collections. But some were carted off to countries closer to home.

Lately, it has become fashionable to return antiquities to their countries of origin, as Yale University recently did with thousands of items taken from Machu Picchu in Peru. Latin American countries are starting to return artefacts, both ancient and modern, to their neighbours. The motives are often political.

In January, Argentina gave 4,500 artefacts back to Peru and Ecuador, many probably looted by huaqueros from northern Peru. Argentina’s former president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, who arranged the restitution before she left office, used the occasion to lambast European and American museums for having snatched “chunks” of Greece and Egypt. Last May, Chile returned 189 pre-Columbian items to Peru and Ecuador.

Some of the returned objects are less ancient but more politically symbolic. Throughout last year, Paraguay and Bolivia exchanged church bells and weapons carried off by one another’s soldiers during the Chaco war of 1932-35. Bolivia hailed one such swap as an “indisputable sign of fraternity” between historical enemies. Decades ago Brazil returned some of the archives it took from Paraguay in the war of the Triple Alliance of 1864-70. Such gestures are a low-cost way to improve relations, and can pave the way for political and economic deals, says Donna Yates, an expert in antiquities trafficking at the University of Glasgow. Bolivia and Paraguay followed up their swaps by signing agreements to increase economic co-operation.

Holding on to other countries’ relics can be a sign of continuing tensions. Chile, which has a lingering border dispute with Peru, still has the Huáscar, a British-built ironclad captured from Peru during the war of the Pacific of 1879-83.

Although Brazil has returned some documents to Paraguay, Rio’s Historical Museum still houses the captured ten-tonne “Christian” cannon. Vicenta Miranda, whose father built a museum to house cannonballs, bullets and other treasures from swampy battlefields around the fortress of Humaitá, thinks the unreturned Brazilian archives contain “explosive” accounts of atrocities committed by Brazilian troops.

Countries such as Peru and Bolivia have reduced the outflow of antique contraband. But few governments have protected the colonial-era art to be found in churches in all but the smallest Andean pueblos. The time of the huaqueros is not yet over, and conservationists like Cassinelli are rare.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21694585-governments-are-starting-return-treasures-their-neighbours-returning-hatchet/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bello

The return of an old enemy

An inflation test for Latin America’s central banks

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



OLDER Latin Americans still have vivid memories of hyperinflation. Bello recalls changing money in dark doorways in the mid-1980s in Bolivia and being handed a truncheon of greasy banknotes secured by rubber bands. Peru went through a futile currency reform in which the sol lost three zeros and was briefly renamed the inti, which promptly racked up more zeroes.

Hyperinflation destroys businesses, undermines political systems and hits the poor especially hard. Latin America should have learned this painful lesson. So when in Caracas recently Bello was given a large shoebox packed tightly with banknotes in return for a few hundred dollars, he received it with an eerie sense of déjà vu and dismay. Official statistics put the rise in the consumer-price index in Venezuela last year at 181%, the world’s highest; the IMF forecasts 720% this year. Venezuela is extreme in its economic mismanagement. But while the rest of the world worries about deflation, across Latin America prices are rising. In Argentina, inflation is forecast to spike from 27% to 33% at an annual rate; in Brazil it stands at around 10.5%; in Uruguay, it is only one point lower, and in Colombia it has climbed to 7.6%. In Chile, Peru and Mexico it has also ticked up.

The reasons vary somewhat. In Venezuela and Argentina, inflation is mainly the result of printing money to finance indiscriminate subsidies. Ironically, it is rising now in Argentina partly because the new government of Mauricio Macri is cutting those subsidies.

In Brazil, too, the government cut subsidies on electricity and petrol in 2015. But the main reason inflation is so high there, even though the economy is in deep recession, is price indexation, according to Edmar Bacha, an economist who helped tame chronic inflation in the 1990s. By law, the minimum wage was raised in January by 11.6%; it in turn has a big influence on other wages and the prices of services, as well as on pensions. And that, plus past fiscal laxity, has made a mockery of the Central Bank’s (unambitious) inflation target of 2.5-6.5%.

Elsewhere the rise in inflation is the result of currency depreciation, which is driving up the price of imports (see chart). This is also a factor in Brazil and Argentina. Though very large, these depreciations are healthy: they are the way that Latin America’s economies are adjusting to sharply lower prices for their commodity exports. But they pose a dilemma for central banks that are committed to inflation targeting. In Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru central bankers began raising interest rates last year even as their economies slowed or were stagnant. Argentina, too, put up its interest rate last month.

The good news is that the rate at which currency depreciation in Latin America is passed through into domestic price increases is much lower than in the past, according to Alejandro Werner of the IMF. The Fund’s research shows that before 1999, when several Latin American countries floated their previously fixed currencies and adopted inflation targeting, large depreciations were associated with very high rates of inflation. Now the average pass-through in these countries is below 10% (ie, if the currency depreciates by 10%, domestic prices will rise by less than 1%).

Mexico’s central bank also raised its interest rate last month even though inflation is below its target. The peso has been clobbered by the fall in the oil price and by the weakness of manufacturing in the United States, to which Mexico’s economy is closely linked. Because the peso is very liquid and trades round the clock offshore, betting against it seems to be “the path of least resistance” for currency traders, says Luis Arcentales of Morgan Stanley, a bank.

Mexico’s central bank also announced that it would start intervening at its discretion in the currency market. So is it now targeting the exchange rate, rather than inflation? Not really: it was worried that the speed of peso depreciation would feed expectations of higher inflation down the road. “By acting forcefully today it will probably need to tighten less later on,” says Mr Arcentales.

The currency depreciations of the past two years are the first big test for inflation targeting in Latin America. One can argue whether individual central banks should have tightened monetary policy earlier or later. The big picture is that those countries that have been serious about inflation targeting are adapting to a tougher external environment at much less cost than those that have not been. They, at least, have learned the lessons of the 1980s.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21694588-inflation-test-latin-americas-central-banks-return-old-enemy/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Asia




Elections in the Philippines: A family affair

Politics in Kiribati: Making waves

India’s guru-entrepreneurs: Holy noodles

Taiwanese identity: Multiculti roots

Japanese politics: Abe agonistes

Banyan: Not gloating, but fretting





Articles Sections Next

Elections in the Philippines

A family affair

After a Supreme Court ruling, the presidential field takes shape, dominated by familiar names

Mar 12th 2016 | MANILA | From the print edition



FOR decades political instability, a boom-and-bust economy and endemic corruption earned the Philippines the moniker of the “sick man of Asia”. But during the six years that Benigno Aquino has been president the country’s prospects have markedly improved. The economy has zipped along at an average growth rate of 6% a year, while foreign investment has more than tripled, with manufacturing, agribusiness and call centres all showing particular strength. Mr Aquino, whose family, huge landowners, is not short of a bob, has made a stand against corruption, and his approval ratings are high. But presidents may serve only one term, and an election for his successor takes place on May 9th. The question is whether Mr Aquino’s successor can keep the Philippines on the upswing. Five presidential candidates want to have a go.

In America, a vice-president might present himself as the candidate for continuity. But in the Philippines voters elect the vice-president separately, and Mr Aquino has long been at odds with his number two, Jejomar Binay, now a leading prospect to replace him. Until 2010 Mr Binay was mayor of Makati, the wealthy business and financial district of Manila. It is home to the country’s stock exchange and the biggest banks and corporations; it also has the capital’s least-awful traffic.



Over the past year Mr Binay has faced a stream of corruption allegations from his time running Makati, including not declaring properties, city contracts awarded to family members, the existence of bogus charities and hundreds of ghost employees on the government payroll. But the allegations seem hardly to dent his standing. Ordinary Filipinos care more about their own poverty and about lower-level graft: sticky-fingered bureaucrats and policemen. In Mr Binay they see less a corrupt politician than one who gets things done: he makes much of having got Makati residents free health care and better schools. In a televised election debate last month Mr Binay slammed the government for underspending on development and poverty alleviation (you could for a moment pretend that he was not part of the government he was railing against).

One of the candidates jostling with Mr Binay for pole position is Grace Poe (pictured), a 47-year-old senator with a thin record but a compelling back story. She is said to have been abandoned at a cathedral as a baby, and was adopted by a popular film star, Fernando Poe, himself a presidential candidate in 2004. With bags of charm, in 2013 she won the highest ever number of votes for a Senate candidate. She shone when handling a congressional hearing into a botched raid against terrorists last year in which 44 policemen died.

For some months Ms Poe’s candidacy had been in doubt. In December the election commission disqualified her, claiming that, as a foundling, she could not prove that she was a natural-born Filipina and that, as a former American resident, she had not lived in the Philippines for ten years—both constitutional requirements. Ms Poe appealed, and on March 8th the Supreme Court ruled in her favour.

Though an independent, Ms Poe has backed Mr Aquino in the Senate. Now the president may be backing her behind the scenes, even though he has formally endorsed Manuel “Mar” Roxas, an old family ally. A former banker and interior minister, and the grandson of an earlier president, Mr Roxas has promised to carry on along Mr Aquino’s “straight path” fighting corruption. But he struggles to connect with ordinary Filipinos. Ms Poe, all sparkle, stands a better chance of winning.

The other candidate with a chance is Rodrigo Duterte, or “Dirty Harry”, the crime-busting mayor of Davao, the largest city on the southern island of Mindanao. Though Muslims in western Mindanao have long waged a separatist battle, Davao is among the country’s safest cities, though the methods are dubious: vigilante execution squads that the mayor has endorsed. Mr Duterte speaks his mind. When a visit to Davao by Pope Francis last year caused traffic mayhem, Mr Duterte spluttered: “Pope, you son of a bitch, go home.” Asked about his womanising, he admitted to having two girlfriends, but complained that “without Viagra, I have a difficult time”. He appeals to people who want a strong leader. Others worry about how his rough edges will go down abroad.

In the end, the race may come down to Ms Poe’s star power versus Mr Binay’s support from his party and business, and his strong links with local governments. No candidate promises to upend Mr Aquino’s programme, but then policy has never figured strongly in Philippine politics. For all of the country’s robust economy and its growing middle class, politics is driven by personalities and dominated by a few powerful families. Whoever wins in May, that will not change.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21694550-after-supreme-court-ruling-presidential-field-takes-shape-dominated-familiar-names/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Politics in Kiribati

Making waves

In the South Pacific climate change animates a presidential election

Mar 12th 2016 | ABAOKORO | From the print edition

A tide in the affairs of Kiribati

LOUNGING under a thatch-roofed pavilion in the village of Abaokoro, a retired seaman, Tiree Tepenea, points at the turquoise lagoon that stops a few steps from his door. Flooding from the sea has become more common during his lifetime, he says, and dramatically eroded the coastline. Seawalls built with manual labour are of limited use against the restless tides. “Maybe in a few years the floods will cover this island,” Mr Tepenea says of Tarawa, one of Kiribati’s 33 wafer-thin islands and atolls. The country’s people “are just waiting for the problems that may come” as the climate changes.

Kiribati (pronounced “kiribass” and derived from the British colonial name for the islands, the Gilberts) is not close to much. Its total land area, about a third of tiny Luxembourg’s, is home to just 111,000 people. Yet in diplomatic terms it punches above its weight because many of its atolls, rising just 2 metres (6.6 feet) above sea level, could someday be consumed by rising waters. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts a mean global rise in sea levels of up to nearly a metre by 2100. A 195-nation deal in December to keep an increase in global temperatures to below 2°C may not be enough to save Kiribati or other low-lying atoll nations from rising waters.

The people of Kiribati, which declared independence in 1979, have long lived with the spectre of environmental catastrophe. In the 1950s drought forced colonial authorities to relocate hundreds to the Solomon Islands. The exhaustion of phosphate reserves on Banaba Island led to hundreds more being settled in Fiji. The El Niño weather system caused heavy rains and flooding on Kiritimati, or Christmas Island, in 1997. Severe overcrowding on South Tarawa is depleting fresh-water reserves. Now comes the threat of more-violent storms and rising sea levels.



Anote Tong, a charismatic leader who stepped down as president this week after reaching his three-term limit, has frequently lectured rich countries about the human impact of rising carbon emissions. He has also developed contingency plans in the event that the world’s biggest emitters do not change their habits. In 2014 he used nearly $7m of government money to buy 6,000 acres of land in Fiji. It was, Mr Tong says, partly a property investment aimed at making money for the state. But since it is a potential site for farming, there was also a food-security dimension. And in the worst case, he says, it could be used for relocating Kiribati’s population. Mr Tong has also championed programmes for vocational training, to ensure that Kiribati’s people can eventually migrate with “dignity” and not as “climate refugees”.

Mr Tong’s intense focus on climate change has made him a star on the international circuit, but his popularity is weaker at home. Tobwaan Kiribati (“Embracing Kiribati”), the lone opposition party, contends that Mr Tong has built an international brand while failing to deal adequately with alarmingly high rates of unemployment and infant mortality at home. Mr Tong’s predecessor, Tebururo Tito, even claims—with no evidence—that Mr Tong has deliberately left some villages vulnerable to dangerous floods in order to stoke international perceptions of Kiribati’s climate vulnerability. Mr Tito also says that Mr Tong’s faith in climate science is a brazen challenge to divine authority. (The country is fervently Christian, and churches hold enormous sway over public opinion.) Mr Tong bats away the charges as groundless.

On March 9th the opposition’s candidate, Taaneti Mamau, a former secretary of finance, won the presidential election. He is from one of the drought-afflicted southern islands of Kiribati, whose population has fallen by a quarter since 1995.

The question is whether Mr Mamau will continue to beat the drum on climate change, at home and abroad, and how this will go over. Educated young in Kiribati seemed especially receptive to Mr Tong’s migration-with-dignity mantra. “But the old ones, they’re not interested,” Teneti Bakarereua, a Catholic nun in South Tawara, says over a church breakfast. They mean to live and die where they were born.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21694548-south-pacific-climate-change-animates-presidential-election-making-waves/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

India’s guru-entrepreneurs

Holy noodles

The faith industry gains corporate smarts and political clout

Mar 12th 2016 | DELHI | From the print edition



“ITS time to charge yourself!” So, ungrammatically, the shiny wrappers of Lov Charger cream wafers declare. It is not just the peppy slogan and a pretty price (two rupees, or around three American cents) that make the biscuits sell. Their maker is a firm called MSG, letters that stand not for a flavour enhancer but—take your pick—either for Messenger of God or for the initials of the three gurus who have led Dera Sacha Sauda, a north Indian sect, since its founding in 1948. MSG and MSG2 are also the names of two films that star the sect’s current leader as a brawny, sequin-studded superhero who swats down goons and gangsters like flies while bursting into such lyrics as “I am so lucky because/You are my love charger.”

The talented writer of that song is none other than Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh Insan, the star himself (pictured, above). Mr Singh is far from the first religious leader in India to make money or a spectacle of himself. But his self-promotion via Bollywood-style films, music, gatherings like rock concerts and, since February, a line of some 150 consumer products, marks an important change. Mr Singh is one of a new, more sophisticated crop of godmen, as India’s press calls the country’s proliferation of spiritual entrepreneurs. They are seeking corporate-style synergies between religious messaging, personal celebrity, commercial success and political influence.

An early mover is Ramdev, a teacher of yoga whose television lessons are credited with popularising the discipline among India’s fast-growing middle class. Ten years ago he launched a range of “ayurvedic” drugs and beauty products. More recently Ramdev’s brands have expanded aggressively into foods and detergents, competing directly with big multinationals. When India last year slapped a ban on instant noodles produced by Nestlé, a global food giant, after a health inspection raised alarms, Ramdev quickly stepped in with a version of his own. His next venture is a line of yoga sportswear that he says will be made from khadi, the homespun cotton that became an emblem of India’s independence movement.

Advertising for the godman’s brands is not subtle. A recent newspaper spot suggests that most competing hair oil is “carcinogenic for every human being and may cause cancer”. Fine print urges customers to buy Indian so as to realise Mahatma Gandhi’s dream of self-reliance. Another product, a medicinal herb said to promote fertility, has stirred controversy. Some say its ancient name, which means “son’s life seed”, hints unethically at particular effectiveness in spawning male offspring.

Nor are Ramdev’s promotion campaigns small affairs. During one week in January his Patanjali brand was the top spender in Indian television advertising, beating such consumer giants as Unilever and Cadbury with a blitz of 17,000 showings. Annual sales have reportedly doubled in the past year, to nearly $750m. Such success clearly buys clout, too. Patanjali’s factory complex was recently granted protection by a crack anti-terrorist police unit. The only other private facilities in India with such a privilege are strategic installations such as oil refineries, steel mills and internet hubs.

Another of India’s god-magnates and a purveyor of traditional medicines is Sri Sri Ravi Shankar. He wields huge influence through his Art of Living foundation, a worldwide meditation franchise. When he decided to hold what is being billed as the world’s biggest arts fair on the banks of the Yamuna river, which flows through Delhi, a score of government agencies chose to overlook the fact that the river’s flood plain, a vital catchment area for drinking water, is meant to be protected from any encroachment. The prime minister, Narendra Modi, will even appear on a seven-acre stage along with the world’s biggest orchestra. Even the Indian army has chipped in, erecting a pair of pontoon bridges to carry what Art of Living says will be 3.5m visitors across the Yamuna.

Environmentalists have made a fuss, and India’s figurehead president has called off his planned visit. Delhi’s police, not known for their delicacy, declared it dangerous for big crowds to gather by a river that is inky black, infested with mosquitoes and reeks of sewage. But after much fluster and a hasty investigation, the authorities decided that the show, which runs from March 11th to 13th, must go on.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21694575-faith-industry-gains-corporate-smarts-and-political-clout-holy-noodles/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Taiwanese identity

Multiculti roots

A museum tells a new story

Mar 12th 2016 | TAIPEI | From the print edition



CHINA claims Taiwan as its own and has long attempted to stop the hapless country from joining international organisations or maintaining official ties with all but a tiny handful of states. So Taiwan has to employ other means to raise its standing. With the recent opening in Chiayi county of a southern branch of the vast National Palace Museum, “museum diplomacy” is becoming a part of that—a way not just to boost tourism but to assert Taiwan’s sense of its own history as distinct from China’s.

The main National Palace Museum in Taipei, the capital, which over 5m people visit a year, is an astounding receptacle for artefacts from imperial China. They were originally from Beijing’s Forbidden City and were brought by Chiang Kai-shek to Taiwan before his Kuomintang forces fled China from the all-conquering Communists in 1949. To Chiang and his followers, the collections of ancient works, imperial regalia and international treaties were a source of Chinese legitimacy. But a democratic Taiwan has developed a sense of identity rooted in something broader than a confining Sinosphere.

The Chiayi extension is billed as a museum of Asian art and culture. The focus is on historical interactions among Asian cultures. “Taiwan’s identity comes from Asia and the sea,” says Shieh Jyh-wey, a member of the government that commissioned the branch 15 years ago.

Some Chinese imperial artefacts from the Taipei collection are on display in Chiayi, but they are part of exhibitions with a pan-Asian theme. Exquisite silk wrappings used to cover Tibetan Buddhist texts, commissioned by the concubine of an early Qing emperor, are being shown for the first time; they illustrate the spread of Buddhist art across Asia. Another display of Islamic jade derives from a little-known collection of the Qing emperors.

A permanent exhibition on Asian tea culture shows how Taiwanese culture stands increasingly on its own terms. It elevates Taiwan’s tea-taking practices, introduced by Fujianese immigrants, to the level of the formal rituals of Japanese tea ceremonies or those from China’s Song and Ming dynasties. For Hans-Martin Hinz, president of the International Council of Museums, the stress on international perspectives rather than narrow nationalism makes the new museum a “trendsetter” in Asia.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21694576-museum-tells-new-story-multiculti-roots/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Japanese politics

Abe agonistes

Will the prime minister once again postpone a tax hike and call an election?

Mar 12th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



WHEN Shinzo Abe last called a snap general election, just two years after coming to power in 2012, Japan’s prime minister saw an opposition in disarray and a chance to consolidate seats in the Diet. Yet he presented the election as a matter of high principle: in the face of a sluggish economy he had chosen to delay a long-agreed rise in Japan’s consumption (value-added) tax, and such a portentous decision required the people’s approval. Mr Abe won handily. Now, principle appears to demand yet another election soon.

That is because, with an economy refusing to show any bounce, Mr Abe may well announce that he is putting off the tax hike (from 8% to 10% and promised for April 2017) a second time. Perhaps he will do so after he hosts a summit for G7 leaders in May. Precedent would make it very hard for him not to dissolve the Diet and announce a general election over the matter. The betting is that he would fix the election for the same time as a scheduled poll in June or July for half of the seats in the upper house.

Some of his colleagues want Mr Abe to hurry up and call a general election sooner, before his luck runs out. There are challenges on various fronts. The economy is the biggest worry: it shrank by an annualised 1.1% in the final three months of 2015, as consumer spending slowed. To boost demand the central bank announced a policy of negative interest rates in January. But the market reaction—a lower stockmarket and a higher yen—has been just the opposite of what was hoped for.

Sooner or later, voters will want to blame Mr Abe for an economy he promised to fix. And there are other policies that are unpopular but for which he has not yet been punished. They include attempts to get Japan’s nuclear power plants working again after all were shut down following the catastrophic meltdown at Fukushima Dai-ichi five years ago this week. And new security laws passed last year, allowing Japan to take a more robust stance overseas, appear, according to many experts, to be unconstitutional. They certainly make many Japanese uncomfortable.

Adding to the mood of discontent are the political scandals within the ruling party. In January the economy minister, Akira Amari, one of the prime minister’s key allies, resigned over a dodgy political donation. And a lawmaker in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) who had made much of his being the first Diet member to take paternity leave turned out to have been having affairs during his wife’s pregnancy. Since then the prime minister’s approval rating has fallen to below 50%.

As for the consumption tax, a first increase, from 5% to 8% in April 2014, knocked consumer spending. A key economic adviser to the prime minister, Etsuro Honda, now says that postponing the next hike is essential if people are not to lose faith in Mr Abe’s broader efforts to boost the economy. As it is, after three years of radical monetary easing, core inflation remains around zero, a long way from the central bank’s target of 2%. Not even Japan’s trade-union leaders are calling for big wage increases. And banks’ lending margins remain under pressure. It all threatens Mr Abe’s promises of a virtuous circle of higher wages, consumption and investment—and raises questions about how the Japanese might vote in the summer.

Plenty of people think that Mr Abe should redouble his efforts to liberalise the economy, including by introducing sweeping reforms to the labour market. He could push much harder to ensure that part-time workers, whose low wages are a drag on consumption, are treated better. But no menu of deeper reforms is about to be revealed, a government official says.

Meanwhile, however, though the opposition Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) is working hard to ready candidates for a general election, it is unlikely to gain much ground. It still has miserable levels of popular support: only a tenth of voters back the centre-left party, according to opinion polls, compared with two-fifths for the LDP. The DPJ would highlight a second postponement in the consumption tax hike as a sign that Mr Abe’s economic plans have failed. But it is unlikely to oppose a postponement, especially if ordinary households are suffering.

In weighing whether or not to call a double election, Mr Abe will consider the chances of a victory large enough to carry through his dream, that of rewriting Japan’s constitution in ways that erode the pacifist promises, laid down by the American occupiers in the late 1940s, that lie at the heart of it. He says that such a revision is necessary because, seven decades after a disastrous war, Japan no longer deserves to have its hands tied by an outdated pacifism when it lives in an increasingly dangerous neighbourhood.

Abe likes a sound constitution

Changing the constitution would require a two-thirds majority in both houses of the Diet, and a plain majority in a national referendum. The LDP and its coalition partner, Komeito, have more than two-thirds of the lower house, with 325 out of 475 seats, but a narrower majority, of 136 out of 242 seats, in the upper chamber. Mr Abe might pick up seats in the upper house, and also be able to rely on the help of a small right-wing party called Osaka Ishin no Kai. Yet attempting to revise the constitution would still cause deep alarm among the many Japanese who remain enormously proud of their country’s pacifism. In short, the main risk to Mr Abe’s hopes of securing electoral victory is his inclination to speak lovingly of his plans for constitutional change.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21694572-will-prime-minister-once-again-postpone-tax-hike-and-call-election-abe-agonistes/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Banyan

Not gloating, but fretting

Asians have nothing to cheer in the dysfunctional politics of America and Europe

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR many in Asia, resentful of the constant lecturing about the superiority, nay, the historical inevitability, of Western forms of government, it must seem like vindication. The European Union, which once held itself up as a model of regional integration and shared sovereignty, faces stagnation, uncontrollable migration, the rise of xenophobic political movements and a British referendum on whether to leave the union. As for America, its government is often gridlocked thanks to partisan animosity, while the campaign for November’s presidential election has plumbed depths of personal abuse, mendacity and barely disguised racism and sexism. Small wonder that a commentary published by China’s official news agency to celebrate the current sessions of that country’s toothless parliament and its gumless consultative body should lament that “many Western countries are split by elitism and populism”, smirking that “China’s unique ‘check and balance’ system could teach them a thing or two.”

Other Chinese commentators have taken wry pleasure in the discomfort within America’s political establishment over the emergence of Donald Trump, a self-promoting tycoon with flexible but mostly obnoxious ideas, as the leading contender for the Republican presidential nomination. If this is what Western democracy produces, the logic runs, maybe China’s illiberal form of self-proclaimed meritocracy is not so bad. Or conversely: what is wrong with Donald Trump? Curiously, he seems to have many fans in China’s cordoned-off sector of cyberspace. Writing in the Diplomat, an online journal, Dingding Chen of the University of Macau reports that many Chinese netizens like his brash, outsider image and his questioning of America’s military alliances with Japan and South Korea. Some even think that, as a dealmaker, China might negotiate with him more easily than with Hillary Clinton, the Democratic front-runner, who has a habit of talking about human rights (as long ago as 1995 she riled her hosts with a fiery speech at a UN women’s conference in Beijing). China also blames her for, as secretary of state, firmly asserting America’s interest in the disputed South China Sea in 2010.

As for the EU’s travails, they might be expected to provoke some Schadenfreude among the ten members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN). Asia’s most far-reaching attempt at regional integration, ASEAN is nonetheless often criticised for its failure to go further. Sure enough, Munir Majid, a leading Malaysian intellectual and banker, has observed “some self-satisfaction” within the club that the “ASEAN Way” does not envisage “ever-closer union”—in other words the group is spared some of the stresses afflicting the EU. Yet he notes that ASEAN suffers its own strains over the pace and direction of integration. It cannot afford to be smug at the faltering of the European project.

Nor for that matter is ASEAN really in a position to criticise Europe for its difficulties in tackling unprecedented waves of distressed refugees and migrants. ASEAN members have struggled to cope with far smaller numbers of boat people from the Muslim Rohingya minority fleeing Myanmar. And its solution to the question of labour mobility between ASEAN states is basically not to allow it at all, except for a few skilled professionals.

As with the EU’s predicament, America’s election campaign may provoke some Asian gloating, along with amusement, bafflement and disgust. A more pervasive emotion, however, is worry. In California last month at a summit Barack Obama held with ASEAN leaders, Singapore’s prime minister, Lee Hsien Loong, noted that the election was being followed with concern. The most obvious worry is the possibility of a President Trump. Asians can only assume that most of his threats and promises would splinter when they collided with the reality of office. But it would still be alarming to see him win. He has said he wants to slap punitive tariffs on Chinese imports (risking a trade war); renegotiate defence treaties that have underpinned regional security for decades; and curb immigration, including banning Muslims from entering America. Most of the world’s Muslims live in Asia.

Whoever wins, however, Asia may miss Mr Obama. The California summit capped his hallmark foreign policy, America’s so-called “pivot” or “rebalancing” to Asia. None of those vying to succeed him has such a personal stake in American policy in Asia—not even Mrs Clinton, who, at the state department, was present at the creation of the pivot. Indeed, she has turned against one of its most important aspects—the negotiation, pending ratification, of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a free-trade area including America, Japan and ten other Pacific Rim countries. In fact not one of the leading presidential candidates likes the TPP. Free-trade agreements are electoral poison. Its proponents insist TPP will be ratified but they have trouble explaining how. By a lame-duck Republican-majority Congress right after the election? Under Mrs Clinton as president, after a cosmetic renegotiation?

Three no-trumps

The same forces roiling American and European politics are also present in most of Asia: internal ethnic and communal tensions; protectionist fears about globalisation and job losses; and angry, assertive nationalism. India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, seems unwilling or unable to control the extreme Hindu-nationalist wing of his own party; Shinzo Abe in Japan is similarly loth to distance himself definitively from his party’s right-wing historical revisionists; China’s Xi Jinping is encouraging a resurgence of national pride which can take ugly, xenophobic forms. All three play variations of Mr Trump’s rallying cry: “Make our country great again!” The rise of nationalism at a time of economic gloom and geostrategic uncertainty is alarming for the region’s security. Europe, preoccupied with its own problems, has long forsaken any serious role in Asia. Now some Asians worry that America, needed more than ever to balance China and ensure the long peace, will start looking the other way.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21694546-asians-have-nothing-cheer-dysfunctional-politics-america-and-europe-not-gloating/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





China




The National People’s Congress: Unlucky for some

Political music: The song dynasty

Carbon emissions: Aiming low

Trade with North Korea: What sanctions?





Articles Sections Next

The National People’s Congress

Unlucky for some

The government’s economic plan for the next five years will not live up to its promises of bold reform

Mar 12th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



SOMETIMES leaders protest too much that all is well. Once a year, the 3,000 or so delegates of the National People’s Congress (NPC), China’s parliament, meet in Beijing to rubber-stamp decisions that have already been made in secret by leaders of the ruling Communist Party. At the session’s opening on March 5th (tea mugs, pictured, at the ready), the prime minister, Li Keqiang, announced that China had met all of the main targets that it set five years ago for completion by this year. A senior state-planning official told reporters covering the congress that the economy would “absolutely not” suffer a hard landing. The NPC’s chief said the government would act in full compliance with the constitution (which enshrines freedom of speech and assembly), and President Xi Jinping told delegates that capable, honest officials would be promoted.

Few will be reassured by the congress’s relentlessly upbeat tone (that the media are being cleansed of sceptical voices with more than usual vigour will not help either). Commodity markets perked up a bit in response to Mr Li’s speech, which gave hints of more stimulus measures in the offing to prop up growth. But bearish sentiment about the country’s economic prospects for the rest of the decade remains rife at home and abroad. It is compounded by a growing perception that the country’s leaders—once widely praised for their management of a prolonged and spectacular run of economic growth—are now floundering as it slows.



For the current year, Mr Li sensibly avoided the previous practice of declaring a specific aim for GDP growth. Instead he gave himself some wiggle-room by announcing a target range, of between 6.5% and 7%. By global standards, such a rate would be more than respectable. For China, it would be about the same as last year (see chart). But it will be difficult to achieve without more stimulus. And if China’s recent record is any guide, pump-priming may result in wasteful projects and even bigger piles of bad debt that could end up throttling the economy.

Mr Li gave hints that, to hit its growth target, China would lean more heavily on both the central government’s fiscal and monetary policy, rather than binge spending on construction projects by local governments. He said the budget deficit would reach 3% of GDP, up from last year’s 2.3% target, and M2 (a broad gauge of the money supply) would grow by 13%, compared with last year’s target of 12%. Those may sound like modest adjustments, but they should help to boost growth, at least in the short term. Monetary policy is already easing. In January new lending by Chinese banks was 2.51 trillion yuan ($385 billion)—the most ever in a single month.

The longer term looks more worrisome. One of the NPC’s duties during its ten-day session will be to approve China’s 13th five-year economic plan, the drafting of which was led by President Xi Jinping (see article). As expected, Mr Li said the government was aiming for average annual growth of 6.5% during the plan’s time-frame, which is from this year to 2020. But he acknowledged this would not be easy, thanks to problems such as an “extremely complicated and challenging international environment” and declining global trade. The superstitious in the party will be nervous, not because the number 13 suggests misfortune in China—it doesn’t—but because the progenitor of five-year plans, the Soviet Union, had barely embarked on its 13th one when it collapsed.

The full text of the plan had not been published as The Economist went to press. But snippets released so far suggest it will at least sustain the party’s rhetorical commitment to badly needed economic reforms. Mr Li restated the government’s belief in a “decisive role” for market forces, and in the necessity of “supply-side reforms” (implying a need for deep structural changes, such as reducing the dominance of inefficient state-owned firms in vital areas of the economy).

But leaders’ attempts at reform have failed to impress so far, and Mr Li gave no indication that he intends to launch any important new measures soon. He did not even mention the possibility of a property tax, a long-mulled measure that would help to reduce rampant speculation (see article). The plan includes some capital projects of questionable value, such as 50 new airports by 2020 and a second train line to remote Tibet. It even proposes to build, by 2030, a 126km (80-mile) high-speed rail link between China and Taiwan. That would be the world’s longest rail tunnel if it ever happens. It is highly unlikely to, if Taiwan has a say.

Instead of focusing on economic reform, Mr Xi appears more preoccupied with tightening his political grip. Only days before the NPC opened, the authorities closed a social-media account with 38m followers operated by Ren Zhiqiang, a former property developer and party member. Mr Ren had used it to criticise Mr Xi’s recent efforts to tighten the party’s control over the media. During the NPC censors removed an online article published by Caixin, a business magazine in Beijing. It was accused of posting “illegal content”, apparently by quoting an adviser to the NPC as saying “the right to speak freely must be protected”.

Optimists had once thought that Mr Xi, having secured political control, would eventually get around to using his power to attack foot-draggers on reform. Those hopes have not been entirely extinguished. But it is difficult to tell whether Mr Xi has gained the power he wants and now has little interest in reform, or whether he still does not feel politically secure. His strenuous efforts to crush opposition, more than three years after he took over as party chief, do not suggest that he has enormous confidence. Either way, it may be hard to square the party’s five-year plan with Mr Xi’s own personal one.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21694581-governments-economic-plan-next-five-years-will-not-live-up-its-promises-bold/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Political music

The song dynasty

Melodious love-offerings for Xi Jinping

Mar 12th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition

A psychedelic plan

LAST year a kitschy animated video about the drafting of China’s new five-year economic plan, probably commissioned by the government, attempted to sell the country’s road map to English speakers (see first video, below). “Every five years in China, man; They make a new development plan,” goes the country-style ditty. As the National People’s Congress (NPC), China’s parliament, prepares to approve that document, a new video aimed at audiences at home seeks to instil love for the plan’s drafter-in-chief, President Xi Jinping, or Uncle Xi as state media often call him. “If you marry someone, marry someone like Uncle Xi; Swift and decisive, conscientious in everything he does,” belts out a woman in the folk-bombast style beloved of China’s propagandists (the second video, below).

Such attempts to harness popular culture in the adulation of Mr Xi and his works are increasingly common. The latest fawning hit praises Mr Xi’s “heroism” and “unyielding spirit”, and lauds his war on corruption: “No matter whether it’s flies or tigers, monsters or freaks, he will fight them all down.” Accompanying footage shows goose-stepping soldiers and ballistic missiles at a parade last year celebrating the end of the second world war.

Since taking office in 2012 Mr Xi has been fostering a public image of himself as a staunch defender of the Communist Party and its Maoist traditions. Signs of a growing personality cult abound. Tibetan delegates to the NPC were spotted wearing badges with Mr Xi’s picture on them, a form of leader-worship that fell out of fashion in China in the 1970s. A new (big yellow) book called “Xi Jinping: Wit and Vision” will soon be in bookshops. When Mr Xi visited America last year, the party’s main mouthpiece, the People’s Daily, released a video in which foreign students in China called the solidly built leader “super-charismatic” and “so cute”; one hoped her future husband would resemble him.

Mao would have loved it. In parks across the country people still sing and dance to the hymns of his era; Mr Xi is reviving and remoulding a remarkably tenacious culture. The Xi ballads also echo Russian odes to President Vladimir Putin (“I want a man like Putin, who won’t be a drunk,” goes one). One song, “Uncle Xi loves Mama Peng”, praises a “manly” Mr Xi for his “fairy-tale” love for his wife, Peng Liyuan. “Xi Dada versus horrified corrupt officials” is a catchy hit about graft. Another one in the style of Peking Opera recounts Mr Xi’s visit to a pork-bun restaurant in Beijing in 2013. There is also a song praising Mr Xi for: “Always caring about what migrant workers need; Always thinking about how laid-off workers are doing.”

Some are probably the spontaneous work of amateurs; others are made at the behest of government officials, either to propagate Mr Xi’s message or impress him. They reflect a growing politicisation of the arts and media (last year the party banned 17 songs by a rap trio called In3, whose lyrics rail against high medical costs, Beijing’s traffic and officials who dine out on state funds). Mr Xi would like to teach China to sing in perfect harmony with him.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21694579-melodious-love-offerings-xi-jinping-song-dynasty/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Carbon emissions

Aiming low

Research shows China’s dirtiest days could be over sooner than officials say

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



ONCE an environmental sluggard, China now pursues green policies with gusto. Last September it announced plans to launch a national carbon-trading scheme in 2017 aimed at reducing emissions of greenhouse gases. It also played an important role in December in securing a global deal in Paris on combating climate change. On March 5th China announced that its new five-year economic plan would include a target to cap annual energy consumption at a tough-sounding 5 billion tonnes of coal equivalent by 2020, up from 4.3 billion now. It is beginning to make greenness sound all too easy.

A study by two researchers in Britain—Lord Nicholas Stern, a prominent environmental economist, and Fergus Green, an expert on climate policy—suggests it may indeed be relatively easy for China, because of the modest targets that it is setting for itself. The country says its emissions of carbon dioxide (CO²) will peak by 2030. But the academics’ paper, due to be published on the website of the journal Climate Policy later this month, shows that achieving this will pose little challenge.

The country’s coal consumption almost trebled between 2000 and 2013, the government says. But Lord Stern and Mr Green say it is possible that the highest peak of China’s CO² emissions may have been reached by 2014. Even if not, they are not going to rise anything like as fast as before, and are almost certain to begin falling by 2025. That assumes that GDP growth is in line with official targets of 6.5% a year on average for the rest of the decade, and 5.5% in the following five years. There are many who doubt such growth can be achieved. In any case, the decline of manufacturing as a source of growth will result in a diminishing need to burn fossil fuels to keep factories going. China may have been deliberately underestimating the rate at which this shift will happen.



Recent improvements in the way that China gathers coal-related statistics give the researchers greater confidence in their projections. Official figures show that coal production fell 2.5% in 2014 and that imports dropped by 10.9%; in the first three quarters of 2015 production sank 4.3%. This suggests that China’s emissions intensity—the amount of CO² it emits per unit of GDP—has already started falling. Lord Stern and Mr Green say the numbers showing falls in coal production and imports correspond with trends seen in the generation of thermal power (which are relatively easy to monitor, because related data come directly from meters) as well as in manufacturing output.

At the same time, the proportion of China’s energy generated by renewable sources, such as wind and the sun, is rising. The country already invests more in exploiting these than America and Japan combined. China believes its security might be threatened if it becomes overly dependent on imported fossil fuels, and it wants to reduce the smog created by coal-burning because it is causing public anger and many premature deaths.

Between 2010 and 2014, non-fossil energy generation capacity increased by 73%. But using such infrastructure effectively is not so simple. Within the energy industry, disputes are rampant over which generators should have priority in dispatching electricity to grids. Wind and solar farms often lose out. And coal-fired plants are still being built apace as local officials find the short-term economic benefits of such projects hard to resist. But many analysts still think it is likely that China is underselling its emissions-reducing abilities. In 2020, when signatories to the Paris accord on climate change are due to set themselves new carbon-cutting goals, the world’s biggest emitter may come under pressure to be more ambitious.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21694577-research-shows-chinas-dirtiest-days-could-be-over-sooner-officials-say-aiming-low/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade with North Korea

What sanctions?

On the border between China and North Korea it is business as usual

Mar 12th 2016 | DANDONG | From the print edition

From China, with gritted teeth

ONLY a few hundred metres separate the small but lively Chinese city of Dandong from Sinuiju, its drab North Korean counterpart on the opposite bank of the Yalu River. There are two iron-truss bridges in the city centre, built by Japanese who were then occupying the area: one in 1911 and the other in 1943. Both were badly damaged by American bombers during the Korean war of the 1950s. A surviving stretch of the older one, renamed “Broken Bridge”, is now a tourist attraction (on the right of the picture). The newer one (on the left) still carries road and rail traffic across the river, a vital conduit for North Korea’s trade with China.

In theory, that may now be disrupted by sweeping sanctions imposed by the UN, with China’s backing, on March 2nd. They ban trade in luxury items and call for (potentially time-consuming and costly) inspections of cargo going into, and coming out of, North Korea. China is by far the biggest trading partner of the North; if these sanctions are being applied rigorously, it should be evident in Dandong, which handles an estimated 70% of the trade between the two countries.

It is not, yet. The first reported case of sanctions being enforced involved the impounding of a North Korean cargo ship at a commercial port in the Philippines a few hours after the UN voted to impose fresh sanctions in response to tests by North Korea earlier this year of a nuclear device and a long-range ballistic missile (dressed up as a rocket carrying a satellite into space). But there has been no report of trade between North Korea and China being affected.

On March 9th your correspondent saw a sporadic flow of lorries travelling in both directions across the bridge. Locals said the volume looked normal. A foreign observer familiar with the area says it may be that the details of the new enforcement regime “have not yet trickled down to the person wearing the hat at the border”. Traders in the city say they have yet to feel the impact of sanctions. At a riverfront shop selling North Korean alcohol, cigarettes and ginseng, the owner shows no concern. He says the goods he sells will not be affected (he is right that they are not banned, unlike watches, snowmobiles and jet-skis).

It would certainly be a bother for traders if Chinese customs officials were to inspect every shipment for items prohibited by the UN, including anything that could be used to help the country’s nuclear and missile programmes. But it is far from clear that that is what China intends. The latest UN sanctions allow for less rigorous inspections in the case of goods needed for humanitarian purposes. China could argue that much of its trade with North Korea falls in that category: it is the main supplier of food and oil. Since the latest sanctions were imposed, Chinese officials have continued to sound lukewarm about them. China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, said this week that “blind faith” in sanctions was not a “responsible” approach.



Peninsula of provocation: A timeline of clashes between North and South Korea

South Korean press reports have said, however, that China had already begun restricting some North Korean transactions at Chinese banks and barring North Korean vessels at Chinese ports by late February, before the latest sanctions. China’s agreement to the tougher regime is certainly a sign of its frustration with its dangerously capricious neighbour, whose leader, Kim Jong Un, said this week that North Korea had developed miniaturised nuclear warheads that could be mounted on ballistic missiles. He even threatened a nuclear attack in response to large-scale South Korean and American military exercises now under way. Some observers are sceptical that the North has acquired such technology. Most discount its bellicose bombast.

If he wants to curry favour with China, Mr Kim could try holding up his end of a deal for building a new bridge in Dandong. Gleaming but still idle, it was built by China at a cost of more than $325m. China has publicly blamed North Korean foot-dragging: in North Korea, the bridge ends in an empty field, connected to nothing.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/china/21694578-border-between-china-and-north-korea-it-business-usual-what-sanctions/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Middle East and Africa




Women in Saudi Arabia: One step forward, one step back

Transport in the Middle East: Let’s go together

Equatorial Guinea: Palace in the jungle

Rwanda: A hilly dilemma

Energy in Rwanda: What lies beneath





Articles Sections Next

Women in Saudi Arabia

One step forward, one step back

Progress for women is going into reverse under the new king

Mar 12th 2016 | JEDDAH AND RIYADH | From the print edition



WHEN Hind Al-Otaibi went to the Riyadh Personal Status Court to have her father struck out as her wali, or guardian, the judges seemed sympathetic. Her father had raped and bruised her, Ms Otaibi, who was a teenager at the time, told the court. He refused to let her travel abroad, even to her mother’s funeral, and when she escaped from home had persuaded social services to send her back. After consideration, the judges determined last year that her father, an imam from the Saudi interior of Nejd, remained her legal guardian; but that a guardian only had powers to approve his ward’s marriage. If upheld on appeal, the ruling could topple the legal edifice of male control, depriving walis of their power over whether their women can study, work, travel or open bank accounts. “Emancipation from slavery,” says Ms Otaibi.

In recent years, the lot of Saudi women has improved. An increasing number of malls, gated communities and even private beaches, where women swap burqinis (the all-enveloping swimwear Saudi women must wear) for bikinis, were put off-limits to the prying eyes of the religious police. The government sent tens of thousands of women abroad to study in Western universities, where they could experience the freedom of moving, dressing and driving as they pleased. Those left behind could gawp at the gap between their own world and the virtual one to which many Saudis escape for hours every day.

Armed with doctorates, many have returned to prize open the job market. In 2012 the courts licensed their first female lawyer. Last December women for the first time stood for election to local councils. Bayan al-Zahran, a lawyer in Jeddah, has set up the first female-led law firm, and law faculties in women’s colleges churn out fresh attorneys.

The numbers, though, remain paltry. Only 18% of working-age Saudi women work (against 65% of men), one of the world’s lowest rates. And for all the headlines, the kingdom has only 67 female lawyers (out of 3,400), and 21 female councillors (out of 3,150). Female lawyers say they have to contend with judges who tell them to sit down when they stand up to represent clients. But over time the taboos on women in public life seem to fraying. “Women are better at representing other women because women natter more than men, and women understand them better,” says Judge Faisal Orani, fresh from sentencing a whisky-drinker to 80 lashes. He opposes the introduction of female judges, he says, “but over time, anything can change. Maybe I’ll change too.”

The kingdom’s joyless gender segregation persists. Banks maintain separate entrances for men and women, Starbucks restricts women from its open-air balcony and McDonald’s makes men and women queue separately for its burgers. In Riyadh and in Jeddah, though not in a few more liberal places such as Qatif, the clerics—who always opposed female participation in the elections—have stopped the new female local councillors from sitting in the council chambers with men.

But to clerical consternation, (veiled) women now operate the tills in Ikea, a Swedish furniture outlet, in a poorer part of Riyadh, and men and women queue in mixed aisles. At the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology outside Jeddah, male and female students attend the same lectures and mingle freely. Architects of new office blocks locate male and female toilets on the same floor.

Most Saudi women have yet to take the liberties their Iranian counterparts do with the veil. “Parents would object if I didn’t cover my face,” says a primary school headmistress who longs to remove it. But growing numbers of high-school girls are donning headscarves only, no matter that their elders consider that scandalous. In Jeddah, a more liberal port city, seamstresses design abayas with bright colours and women smoke water-pipes out of doors.

But worryingly, King Abdullah’s incremental reforms seem to be stalling and even going to reverse under his successor, King Salman. His young son, Muhammad, who operates most of the levers of power, says he is anxious to increase Saudi productivity, and to lower birth-rates, by getting women out of the home and into the workplace. But even so he seems nervous of confronting the religious establishment, on whom the Al Saud rulers depend for legitimacy. Many of Abdullah’s reformers have been shifted; and a host of hardliners are back. The only female minister, in the education ministry, was dismissed soon after Salman took the throne.

Four women who publicly defied the still unreformed ban on female driving were barred from contesting local elections. Shoppers in Jeddah report that the religious police are back, demanding that department stores black out any glimpse of unveiled women on their packaging. One executive at an international financial-services firm says that the snoops carried out three spot-checks on her office last year to check for signs of the sexes mingling. She is once again being forced to enter through side-entrances when visiting clients, while her male counterparts go through the front door; and they have to travel to meetings in separate cars.

In the new, more conservative environment, perhaps the best hope for women is that the country might rediscover its own traditions. A senior official admires footage of the Saudi state’s founder, Abdulaziz, holding court in 1930s Mecca, while women riding on horseback bring their wares to market. At Jeddah’s annual festival, the organisers display the colourful costumes women used to wear before the puritans imposed the black abaya of the central desert on the whole country. Most striking of all is the Prophet Muhammad’s own requirement that women and men perform the pilgrimage to Mecca together; and that when women go round the Kaaba, Islam’s holiest place, they show their face. Saudi Arabia’s new rulers might take note.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21694406-progress-women-has-gone-reverse-under-new-king-one-step-forward-one-step/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Transport in the Middle East

Let’s go together

Public transport is all the rage in the region. More is desperately needed

Mar 12th 2016 | BEIRUT AND CAIRO | From the print edition

Cairo needs a better metro

RIYADH, the Saudi capital, is no easy place to navigate. It sprawls over 1,500 square kilometres (580 square miles) and, but for a few exceptions, its drab, low-rise buildings all look much the same. For most of the year it is far too hot and dusty to walk anywhere. Little wonder the kingdom is touting a new 85-station metro, which is due to open in 2018, as a revolution for the city (it is expected that women will travel in separate carriages).

Public-transport systems are in vogue across the region. Doha, the capital of tiny Qatar, will open its metro a year after Saudi Arabia. Oman is building railways. And it is not just the Gulf: Algeria is also constructing railways. Morocco is interested in trams. Lebanon is looking into a rapid bus system—a bus and metro hybrid with its own lanes—for the areas around Beirut.

This trend is relatively new. Many Middle Eastern countries started to invest in buses only around a decade ago, but public networks are still limited; private minibuses abound. Dubai was the first place to operate a mass transit system when it opened its metro in 2009. In the few countries with railways, they are often out of use. Instead, governments have tended to build new roads. Amman and Beirut have no transport other than buses. Metro systems in Cairo and Tehran have failed to keep pace with urban expansion. Mostly, public transport in the region remains “really very bad”, says Ziad Nakat of the World Bank.

Demand for ways to get around has grown rapidly since the 1970s. Populations have exploded. The region is one of the most urbanised in the world: some 60% of Middle Eastern people live in cities. Poor urban planning means towns often sprawl in every direction. Greater Cairo boasts a population of some 20m people.

The lack of good public transport, coupled with rising incomes in some places, has pushed up the use of cars. Pew, an American research outfit, reckons 81% of Lebanese households have a car, not far off America’s 88%. Between 2012 and 2022, car ownership in the region is set to grow more quickly than any other, according to Carmudi, a car classifieds site. Meanwhile in poorer countries, such as Egypt, where cars are beyond measly pay packets, people struggle to get from A to B. Donkeys and carts endure. Tuk-tuks ply the streets in shanty towns and rural areas. People hang out of minibuses or are forced to squash up, faces against windows.

The ensuing mess makes for nasty air and grumpy people, not to mention some of the world’s highest rates of road fatalities. A World Bank study estimated (conservatively) that 4% of Egypt’s GDP was lost each year because of time wasted in traffic in Cairo, its capital and the Arab world’s megacity. Part of the reason is that tailbacks encourage people to move into cities rather than commute. This adds to the stresses on cities already struggling to provide services to their people, such as Beirut, whose 2m inhabitants do not receive 24-hour power and water.

The old solution of simply building more roads is unsustainable. For one thing, land has become too expensive to tarmac over. But shiny buses and trains—one of Riyadh’s stations is being designed by the architect Zaha Hadid—will not be enough on their own, either. People must be tempted to get out of the cool comfort of their car. Many governments, from Egypt to Iran, have started to remove fuel subsidies, causing the price of petrol to rise. But it is still only 20 cents per litre in Kuwait, compared with $1.40 in Britain. Road tolls, which exist in Dubai, and higher parking charges are needed across the region.

The biggest barrier to public transport, though, is the expense. Metros can cost millions of dollars per kilometre of track. At a time of low oil prices, even the oil-producing states are cutting back. The United Arab Emirates has stopped tenders for the second part of Etihad, a new 1,200km national railway that is costing 40 billion dirhams ($11 billion). But a day navigating Cairo’s roads is enough to show that inaction now will lead to higher costs in the future.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21694542-public-transport-all-rage-region-more-desperately-needed-lets-go/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Equatorial Guinea

Palace in the jungle

Ordinary folk see none of their country’s riches

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



TEODORO OBIANG, the president of Equatorial Guinea, and Teodorín, the most influential of his 42 recognised children, have expensive tastes. While most of his citizens live on less than $2 a day, the older Mr Obiang once shelled out $55 million for a Boeing 737 with gold-plated lavatory fittings. His son had at one point amassed $300m in assets, including 32 sports cars, a Malibu mansion and nearly $2m in Michael Jackson memorabilia.

The past few years have been less kind to the Obiang clan. In 2014 the United States Department of Justice forced Teodorín Obiang to sell off a Ferrari, his Los Angeles abode and six life-size Michael Jackson statues in a money-laundering settlement. (He was allowed to keep one of the King of Pop’s crystal-encrusted gloves.) His father, who enjoys the distinction of being the longest-serving president in the world (36 years), has seen his pockets increasingly pinched as oil prices have crashed.

While prices were favourable the country boomed. According to the IMF, its GDP expanded by an average of almost 40% per year between 1996 and 2006. But little wealth trickled down to the population. Though its GDP per head is the highest in Africa, over three-quarters of its population lives below the World Bank’s poverty line. Government spending on education and health lags far behind the sub-Saharan African average. Tutu Alicante, the executive director of EG Justice, an advocacy group, compares visiting a public hospital to “signing your own death sentence”. Patients must bring their own sheets and share their rooms with rats.

Mr Obiang has instead channelled Equatorial Guinea’s petrodollars into grand projects such as Oyala, a new city he is building deep in the jungle. He hopes to move his capital there to avoid seaborne coup attempts, such as the one he suffered in 2009. The area currently consists of a new 450-room luxury hotel and a warren of empty buildings intended to become an international university.

Such endeavours are becoming increasingly difficult to fund. Declining oil production, coupled with lower prices, have led Equatorial Guinea’s economy to shrivel since 2013. Last year was especially grim: GDP shrank by an estimated 10.2%. The great majority of citizens never reaped the benefits of their country’s upturn, so their experience of its downturn has been muted, but work is getting scarcer.

Mr Obiang, who overthrew his uncle to become president, has a deplorable human-rights record; dissidents who anger him sometimes end up in prison where guards have been known to shock, beat and carve up their wards with knives. Nobody would be surprised if the economic crunch results in even greater repression. In January, two members of an opposition party, Convergence for Social Democracy, were arrested for the crime of handing out leaflets announcing a future meeting.

As the 73-year-old Mr Obiang becomes frailer, his sons, including the prodigal Teodorín, have begun jockeying to succeed him. But in November, when Equatorial Guinea is scheduled to hold a presidential election, there is no doubt about who will prevail—whatever the price of oil.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21694543-ordinary-folk-see-none-their-countrys-riches-palace-jungle/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Rwanda

A hilly dilemma

Should Paul Kagame be backed for providing stability and prosperity or condemned for stifling democracy?

Mar 12th 2016 | KIGALI | From the print edition



AT SIX in the evening, as the streets start to throng with motorcycle taxis taking people home, a senior civil servant in Rwanda’s ministry of infrastructure sits back at his desk with a large flask of tea. The security officers on the entrance may have already left, but on the second floor officials are settling in for several more hours of work. Glance at their targets—more than doubling the amount of electricity generated in the country, providing infrastructure in cities to accommodate an urban population twice its current level, and all by 2018—and you can see why they are still at their desks. This is a country in a hurry. Twenty-two years since the start of a genocidal civil war that killed about a fifth of the population (and 70% of the minority Tutsis) and saw a third of the survivors fleeing across its borders, Rwanda is still racing to rebuild itself. And the sternest taskmaster is its president, Paul Kagame, who led the rebel forces that ended the genocide and has since shaped the country.

The country he liberated had suffered not just an unimaginable human disaster; it was also left wrecked at the end of the civil war. Soldiers and militias loyal to the genocidal Hutu regime had systematically destroyed power plants and factories as they retreated. Hospitals and universities were devastated, their staff butchered or in exile. “We lost a lot of scientists,” Gerardine Mukeshimana, the minister of agriculture, says matter-of-factly, when explaining why the country has only limited capacity for agricultural research.

It was also still dangerous, as forces from the former government attacked across the border from bases in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), to the west, killing civilians and soldiers. “The hills were alive with the sounds of bazookas,” recalls Praveen Moman, a British businessman who runs a string of eco-lodges in the region, of his visits in the late 1990s, years after the war had officially ended. “Now visitors get off the plane and think they’ve arrived in the Switzerland of Africa.”

By almost all social and economic measures Rwanda has proved to be the developing world’s shining star. Income per capita has doubled since 2000 and, unlike most other countries in the region, it has managed to grow quickly while also reducing inequality. One reason is that its Tutsi-dominated government (it would contest this designation, since talk of ethnicity is firmly suppressed) has bucked the trend of many of its neighbours. Instead of crafting policies aimed at benefiting the kin of those in power, many of its resources have gone to improving the lives of the rural poor, who are largely Hutu. The UN Human Development Index shows that Rwanda had improved by more than any other country over the past 25 years.

These achievements are the more impressive since Rwanda is small, hilly, overcrowded and landlocked. Yet with few natural resources other than its fertile soil and a few mines, it has cranked out average growth of 7.5% over the past 10 years.

Much of its success is due to effective government. It has clamped down on corruption—Transparency international, a Berlin-based organisation, ranks it as the fourth-least corrupt country in Africa, and well above places such as Greece and Italy. It is also because its government is both disciplined and technocratic. Officials and ministers are expected to work hard and are held accountable through performance contracts that extend right down to local mayors and other community leaders. Those who fail to meet targets (or who fiddle the numbers) are swiftly fired.

A third reason is that it has embraced economic policies that are friendly to investment, growth and trade with great vigour; it is rated by the World Bank as the easiest place in continental Africa to do business. Many of its policies read as if they could have been written by the IMF, or this newspaper. Take power, for instance. Instead of trying to boost supply by pouring money into a state-owned utility it has encouraged private investment. That has spurred a wave of projects including extracting gas from Lake Kivu (see article). “Rwanda is an absolute pleasure to do business in compared with a lot of other countries in Africa,” says Paul Hinks, the CEO of Symbion Power, an American firm that is building one of them.

Because of its relatively competent administrators and its commitment to the poor it has become the darling of Western governments and NGOs. More than a third of government revenues (and a tenth of GDP) come from aid. The fecund soils of its green capital, Kigali, sprout aid-agency offices like grass after the rains.

The downside

Yet those pouring money into Rwanda are confronted by a dilemma. As much as Rwanda has progressed on the economic front, its record is badly blotted when it comes to human rights. Domestic opponents of Mr Kagame have a nasty habit of getting locked up or being murdered, even once they have fled into exile.

Another stain was Rwanda’s destabilisation of the DRC in the late 1990s after Rwandan troops invaded to stop cross-border raids by forces of the former government. The subsequent violence led to more than 5m deaths and contributed to the disintegration of the DRC. Fear of Mr Kagame runs so deep that in Kigali’s drinking holes people glance left and right, and drop their voices to a whisper, when venturing an opinion on him. With almost no opposition, and no obvious successor, Mr Kagame recently won an overwhelming mandate for changes to the constitution that will allow him to run for a third term in office in 2017 (and two more after that, potentially leaving him in power until 2034, when he will be only 76).

The dilemma facing the West is whether to keep giving money to an authoritarian government with such scant regard for human rights and little more than the trappings of democracy. A consensus among aid and development workers in Kigali seems to be that it should; for in few other countries does assistance go so effectively to helping the poor. A broader conundrum facing the country’s benefactors is whether they ought to press Mr Kagame not to run in 2017. Yet aside from limp statements of disapproval (America said it was “disappointed” by his decision) from a few countries, many diplomats privately question whether anyone else could hold the country together. They point to its neighbour, Burundi, which is falling towards a civil war that is already being marked by ethnic killings. Without Mr Kagame’s firm hand, they argue, the miracle wrought in Rwanda could quickly be reversed.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21694551-should-paul-kagame-be-backed-providing-stability-and-prosperity-or-condemned/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Energy in Rwanda

What lies beneath

Exploiting a hidden menace

Mar 12th 2016 | KIBUYE | From the print edition

Could it explode?

THE breathtaking beauty of the Lake Kivu region, resting between the volcanoes and steep hills of the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda, is exceeded only by its mercurial temperament. A clear sunny day can turn to a tropical downpour in minutes, before the sun beats down again. The lake’s still waters also hide another face: dissolved within are billions of cubic meters of flammable methane and more still of carbon dioxide, the result of volcanic gases seeping in.

Two other lakes, in Cameroon, are filled with deadly carbon dioxide. One of them, Lake Nyos, belched out a huge bubble of it in 1986, asphyxiating about 1,700 people. But Lake Kivu is the only lake anywhere also to contain methane. The mix of gases, held tight by pressure like bubbles in a bottle of fizzy drink, presents both a source of power and a danger to hundreds of thousands of people living around the lake. If it were to froth over, as scientists think it has in the distant past, it could generate huge explosions and smother towns and villages in dense clouds of carbon dioxide.

Now several firms are working to harness the energy and mitigate the dangers by gingerly extracting the methane from the lake. Among them is Contour Global, an American firm with power projects across Africa. In December it started producing power from its KivuWatt project. Below a huge barge is a pipe that sucks up water, from which it extracts and purifies the methane before pumping the less-fizzy water back down.

In time the project will be expanded to produce about 100 megawatts of energy. That is more than half of Rwanda’s current, inadequate, generating capacity. Other firms are racing to catch up. Symbion Power, another American company, recently signed an agreement with the Rwandan government to build a 50MW power plant that will also run off methane tapped from the lake’s waters.

The technology being used to tap the lake’s gas is cutting-edge; but this generation of wildcatters is not the first to see power beneath its placid waters. In 1963 an intrepid businessman sent down a small pipe that he used to power a brewery to produce Primus, a light lager with bubbles altogether more palatable than those used to make it.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21694554-exploiting-hidden-menace-what-lies-beneath/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Europe




Europe’s migrant crisis: Desperate times, desperate measures

Regional elections in Germany: Mutti’s challenge

Nadia Savchenko: A modern martyr

Italy’s Five Star Movement: Smartening up

Charlemagne: The necessity of culture





Articles Sections Next

Europe’s migrant crisis

Desperate times, desperate measures

A deal with Turkey to stanch the flow of refugees may be the European Union’s last hope to find a solution

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



A DEAL born of political desperation and fraught with practical, legal and ethical difficulties. That would seem to be a fair description of the agreement hammered out between Germany and Turkey to tackle the refugee crisis, which was endorsed by European Union leaders and Turkey’s beaming prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, on March 7th. Last year 1.2m people entered Europe from Syria, Afghanistan and elsewhere. Without concerted action at least as many are expected to try to follow them this year.

The idea behind the agreement is to smash the business model of the people-smugglers. Any migrants landing on a Greek island after making the short but perilous voyage across the Aegean Sea will automatically be sent back to Turkey, where they will be put at the back of the queue of those seeking asylum. To relieve the pressure on Turkey, which has taken in 2.7m refugees since Syria’s civil war began five years ago, for each Syrian returned another whose asylum application has been properly processed will be allowed to enter the EU under an official resettlement scheme. If all goes to plan, migrants may be more reluctant to hand over their life savings to criminal networks and risk their lives making the crossing in capsize-prone inflatable boats.

Despite a recent slight drop, the number of people crossing the Aegean remains high (see chart). According to the International Organisation for Migration, more than 320 people have already drowned this year. Last week 25 died off the Turkish coast, including 13 children. For those who do make it across, conditions along the land part of the route have worsened. On the border of Macedonia, which has been closed to refugees since March 9th, thousands are waiting in squalid camps. Stemming the flow is of utmost urgency.



For Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, faced with important state elections, the political stakes have become much higher (see article). Mrs Merkel’s welcoming stance to refugees, which at first caught the national mood, has since strengthened opponents in her own party and dented her popularity.

Turkey’s government has made the most of the EU’s predicament. On March 4th a court placed the country’s largest-circulation newspaper, Zaman, under state control; its real crime, it seems, was to have links to Fethullah Gulen, a Muslim leader based in America—once an ally of the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, but now a rival. This latest authoritarian excess elicited only the mildest murmur of concern from the EU’s diplomatic service.

The terms extracted by Mr Davutoglu in his negotiations with Mrs Merkel are generous. They include the speeding up of a $3.3 billion payment pledged in October, with the sum eventually being doubled, to help pay for better conditions in Turkey’s refugee camps over the next three years; the opening of five new “chapters” in long-stalled discussions about Turkey’s bid to become a member of the EU; and the relaxation of visa requirements for Turkish citizens entering the EU.

All this has attracted plenty of criticism, though the deal could still be amended by European leaders next week before it is finalised at another summit on March 17th. Many are shocked that the EU has made such a lavish offer when Mr Erdogan has nothing but contempt for Europe’s values and is undermining the independence of Turkey’s courts and media. Some EU members, particularly those with strong right-wing parties, regard visa-free travel as “very sensitive and problematic”, says Camino Mortera-Martinez of the Centre for European Reform, a think-tank.



INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers

The legality of the proposal has also been questioned. Filippo Grandi, the head of the UN refugee agency, told the European Parliament he was “deeply concerned about any arrangement that would involve the blanket return of anyone from one country to another without spelling out the refugee protection safeguards under international law.” Lawyers are bound to challenge whether Turkey can be declared a safe third country. Under Turkish law, only those fleeing from Europe are granted refugee status, although temporary protection has been given to Syrians. Turkey has deportation agreements with some countries, including Afghanistan, that others consider to be war zones.

It is also far from clear whether the deal, if it is indeed agreed upon, can be implemented. The forcible deportation of many thousands of people from Greece will be a logistical nightmare. Much is made of the increasing NATO naval presence in the Aegean since February. The alliance’s mission, though, is not to turn back refugee-laden boats, but to provide real-time intelligence to Frontex, Europe’s struggling border agency, and to Turkish and Greek coastguards which, for long-standing historical reasons, find co-operation difficult. It is also unclear who will decide who gets into Europe. Will that be left to Turkey or will EU officials set up shop in the refugee camps? Finally, an equitable quota-based system for distributing refugees around Europe remains as far away as ever.

Yet for all the unease and scepticism, this rather tawdry agreement may be Europe’s last chance of regaining some control over the crisis. Somehow, it will have to be made to work.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21694569-deal-turkey-stanch-flow-refugees-may-be-european-unions-last-hope-find/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Regional elections in Germany

Mutti’s challenge

Angela Merkel’s refugee policy faces its first test at home

Mar 12th 2016 | LANDAU | From the print edition



LOCAL topics usually dominate regional elections. Improving schools and boosting infrastructure are normally the most hotly-contested topics of debate. But when three of Germany’s 16 federal states go to the polls on March 13th the elections will be dominated by one issue: Germany’s refugee policy. The results will be seen as the first big test for Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, since she opened the borders to refugees last year.

Currently Mrs Merkel seems to be doing relatively well in the polls, despite a backlash against her refugee policy from parts of the German public and several conservative politicians. In a poll in late February for ARD, a German television station, 54% said they were happy with her work, compared with 46% a few weeks earlier. The prospect of a deal between the European Union and Turkey could boost her standing further.

Even so the results look likely to be tricky for Mrs Merkel and her party. There are big regional differences between the three states (see map). Baden-Württemberg is an industrial powerhouse in the south-west; its neighbour, Rhineland-Palatinate, makes some of Germany’s best wines; Saxony-Anhalt is a much poorer state in what used to be East Germany. Only Saxony-Anhalt is governed by a Christian Democrat. Baden-Württemberg is currently run by Winfried Kretschmann, a popular premier from the Green party, while Rhineland-Palatinate’s incumbent is Malu Dreyer, a well-liked Social Democrat.

Part of the difficulty is that, despite the support for Mrs Merkel, the Christian Democrats have been faring less well in the polls. Many conservatives have defected to Alternative for Germany, a right-wing party founded in 2013, which is at about 10% in the two western states and an astonishing 19% in Saxony-Anhalt, ahead of the Social Democrats. In response the local Christian Democratic big-wigs, Guido Wolf in Baden-Württemberg and Julia Klöckner in Rhineland-Palatinate, have contorted themselves into campaigning with Mrs Merkel while simultaneously distancing themselves from her refugee policy. Ms Klöckner has even proposed a plan which resembles the daily refugee quotas recently adopted by Austria—an idea which Mrs Merkel opposes.

This helps the incumbents, especially Mr Kretschmann. People in Baden-Württemberg are a generally conservative bunch, but with an ecological bent. They like Mr Kretschmann because he is not like the leftist Greens in northern Germany, but rather prides himself on being pragmatic, pro-business and fiscally conservative. On refugees, moreover, Mr Kretschmann is closer to Mrs Merkel than to the Christian Democrats in the state. “I support the chancellor’s course with all my strength and passion,” he boasted at a campaign event in Stuttgart. That is awkward for the chancellor. In a television interview, she had to clarify that people who support her should vote Christian Democrat, not Green.

Something similar is taking place in Rhineland-Palatinate. Mrs Dreyer is so popular that the Social Democrats’s slogan is simply her first name, “Malu”. Suffering from multiple sclerosis, she campaigns with the aid of an electric tricycle, the “Malumobil”, and has a winning charm. This makes it hard for any of her opponents to find fault with her. She, too, supports Mrs Merkel’s refugee policy, making Ms Klöckner appear isolated on the matter.

Still, the outcome will be read as a signal of whether most Germans are still behind Mrs Merkel’s welcoming stance towards refugees. A vigorous showing by the centre-left parties would indicate that it is. Likewise a strong finish by the Alternative for Germany would point to a dangerous polarisation in German politics. But the outcome will also hint at how loyally the Christian Democrats will stand by their own chancellor. That is what will ultimately decide Mrs Merkel’s fate.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21694568-angela-merkels-refugee-policy-faces-its-first-test-home-muttis-challenge/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Nadia Savchenko

A modern martyr

Ukraine has got a new national hero

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition

A defiant Nadia Savchenko

UKRAINIAN historians may yet be grateful to Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. His war against the country has given it a rallying cause. He has also provided it with a national hero, a Ukrainian Joan of Arc. She is Nadia Savchenko, a 34-year-old military pilot who served in Iraq. In July 2014 Ms Savchenko was captured by pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine, smuggled by Russian security services across the border and put on trial for allegedly directing artillery fire that resulted in the death of two Russian television journalists. Prosecutors are demanding that she be sentenced to 23 years in jail and fined 100,000 roubles ($1,400). The fact that she was captured at least an hour before the journalists were killed did not seem to interest the court.

Ms Savchenko’s trial, which has been under way for nearly two years, has also turned into a prosecution of the Russian legal system. She has been made a member of Ukraine’s parliament and appointed to the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe. Western and Russian intellectuals have signed petitions in her support. John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, called for her immediate release, as did Federica Mogherini, the EU’s high representative for foreign policy. She has several admirers among prominent Russian liberals. Not since Soviet times has a case of a political prisoner in Russia caused such furore.

On March 9th Ms Savchenko, who has been held in prison in the small town of Donetsk, in southern Russia, made a closing statement in her trial: “I accept neither guilt, nor the verdict, nor the Russian court…I want the whole democratic civilised world to realise that Russia is a third-world country, with a totalitarian regime and a petty tyrant-dictator, where human rights and international law are spat upon.” She then leapt onto a bench inside a cage and showed her middle finger to the court’s three judges. She finished off by singing the Ukrainian national anthem.

Since her trial began Ms Savchenko has posed a direct challenge to the Kremlin: either it returns her to Ukraine or she dies in jail. Ms Savchenko is not bluffing: she has been on several hunger strikes, including one that lasted 82 days. On March 4th she refused to take water or food and said she would continue her fast until her verdict. But the court said this would not happen until March 21st. On March 10th she agreed to take water.

Ms Savchenko would not have become a martyr if she had not been abducted. She was one of the activists of the Kiev revolution in early 2014. After Russia’s annexation of Crimea she joined Aidar, one of the most controversial “voluntary” battalions fighting the separatists in the east of Ukraine. Amnesty International, an NGO, claims that Aidar was involved in several human-rights violations, including abductions and unlawful detentions.

But Ms Savchenko may turn out to pose as much of a threat to the Ukrainian government, which has been mired in corruption scandals and internal squabbling, as she does to the Kremlin. If and when she returns to Ukraine she will be given a hero’s welcome. She could well turn into a populist leader who could rally the people against the government.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21694580-ukraine-has-got-new-national-hero-modern-martyr/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Italy’s Five Star Movement

Smartening up

An anti-establishment political group becomes slightly more conventional

Mar 12th 2016 | ROME | From the print edition

Virginia Raggi, a sharp contender

EVEN fans of the Five Star Movement, an Italian political group often described as populist, maverick and anti-establishment, would never have credited it with slickness. So when the campaign video for Virginia Raggi, a 37-year-old running for mayor of Rome as the Five Star candidate, appeared online in late February, it came as a shock. Mute the soundtrack on Ms Raggi’s video, in which she declares that “we can again be a world city”, and her sharp suit and on-message presentation might be those of an aspiring Democratic congresswoman in America or Tory politician in Britain. A talented debater, Ms Raggi illustrates how Italy’s second-biggest political group is increasingly coming to resemble a normal party.

Polls are continuing to give the Five Star Movement a quarter of the electorate: about eight percentage points behind the governing centre-left Democratic Party (PD), but ten percentage points ahead of the right-wing Northern League. In Rome, a city that has long suffered from neglect and corruption at the hands of mainstream parties, Ms Raggi stands a fair chance of success when the vote is held, most likely in June. That she should have a video ready before her rivals hints at both the importance the Five Star Movement attaches to her campaign, and to its growing professionalism.

The enduring popularity of the group is all the more remarkable in view of recent setbacks and upheavals. In different ways, it is the most and least democratic of Italian political movements. Disdainful of conventional democracy, its leaders believe the internet offers a chance to return to an Athenian-style, direct democracy in which every major political issue would be submitted to an online referendum. Within the movement, online ballots are used to set policy and select candidates (and also to expel elected representatives who fail to abide by its strict rules).

But the really big decisions, over whether or not Italy should stay in the eurozone and the like, have always been taken by its two unelected co-founders: Beppe Grillo, a satirical comedian, and Gianroberto Casaleggio, a political activist and entrepreneur.

Although since last year Mr Grillo has started to concentrate more on his stage career, his influence is still decisive. Last month, as the Senate debated a bill to legalise civil unions, including same-sex partnerships, Mr Grillo unexpectedly announced he would give Five Star Movement senators a free vote on a clause that would allow gay partners to adopt each other’s biological offspring. Many Catholics and conservatives feared the provision would encourage surrogate births. The Movement subsequently withdrew its support for a motion that would have allowed the clause to go through unchallenged. That wrong-footed the PD, which had assumed the movement would not antagonise gay people. The PD had to turn to the centre-right for support. The measure went through without its contentious clause.

Commentators accused Mr Grillo of cynically pitching for right-wing votes in preparation for the election in Rome. But Mr Casaleggio said the decision was partly due to “different sensibilities” in the Movement. It is far less radical than Greece’s Syriza government or Spain’s Podemos. United by a loathing for Italy’s tainted mainstream parties, Five Star activists are a heterogeneous bunch, often disagreeing on issues such as privatisation or abortion. Most are progressive, some distinctly conservative. Mr Grillo is critical of the euro and happy to hobnob with Nigel Farage, leader of the UK Independence Party, which is trying to get Britain out of the EU. If it is to become a mainstream party of government, such differences will need to be settled.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21694574-anti-establishment-political-group-becomes-slightly-more-conventional-smartening-up/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Charlemagne

The necessity of culture

Europe’s shared history should be treasured, not ignored

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



THE Mausoleum of Augustus in Rome is a sad place: fenced off and closed to visitors. In most other countries this huge tomb in the city centre would be a treasured national monument. Yet for years the only use Romans made of it was to take their dogs to relieve themselves in the encircling weeds. The latest plans to restore it were approved in 2007. But it was only last month that some of the funding was set aside. With a new mayor due to be elected soon, the money might yet be diverted elsewhere.

The plight of the final resting place of Rome’s first emperor illustrates an irony. The European states with the greatest ancient cultural heritage, Italy and Greece, are those whose governments spend least on the preservation of that heritage and promotion of the arts. In 2013 spending on culture accounted for 0.2% of public expenditure in Greece, the lowest share of any EU country, and a measly 0.6% in Italy, the second-lowest, jointly with Portugal and Britain. Culture’s most avid patrons were the Renaissance men and women of the government of Latvia, who gave it 3.2% of their budget.

The parsimony of Italy and Greece is partly connected with their economic difficulties. They are the member states with the heaviest public debts (133% and 179% of GDP respectively). Some of the severest cuts prompted by the euro-zone crisis were made in their culture budgets. But even before the upheaval, Italy and Greece had a propensity for low official spending on culture, which was all the more damaging since private funding has traditionally been scorned in both countries.

Culture has special relevance at a moment when Europeans are questioning their common identity more intensely than at any time since the second world war. There are two arguments for the claim that Europeans have more in common than base economic self-interest. One, promoted by the former pope, Benedict XVI, emphasises the continent’s Christian heritage. But many Europeans are understandably wary of defining themselves in terms of religion when Europe is secularising rapidly, and when many of its enemies use religion as a badge of identity.

An alternative argument reaches back to classical times and finds in the Roman empire and Greek philosophy the continent’s earliest unification and common beliefs, most notably in democracy. Like other founding myths, this one contains a fair measure of wishful thinking: Plato was no fan of democracy. Even so, the classical narrative that weaves through history from ancient Athens by way of the Renaissance to the Enlightenment and beyond offers an identity for Europe rooted in cultural and intellectual, as well as religious, values. Culture is frequently cited by Greek and Italian officials as an implied reproach to uncouth northerners obsessed with rules: kicking either state out of the euro zone would be tantamount to Europe ripping out its heart.

Recently, however, the two countries’ approaches have diverged markedly. The most dramatic evidence was provided by Matteo Renzi, Italy’s prime minister. Soon after jihadists from Islamic State attacked Paris last year he declared that Italy would counter terrorism with €1 billion ($1.1 billion) to be spent on culture, to match €1 billion on extra security. As with many of Mr Renzi’s announcements, there was small print: his finance minister later explained the extra spending was dependent on the European Commission’s agreement to more budget flexibility.

Even so, it was still a touching act of defiance against the murderously irrational and faith in the role culture can play in resisting it. With or without the blessing of the commission, this year Mr Renzi has approved a 27% increase in the culture ministry’s budget, to €2 billion (though it falls thereafter).

Its energetic minister, Dario Franceschini, is trying to boost the involvement of the private sector and increase the interest of youngsters in their heritage. A tax break for cultural sponsorship is to be extended indefinitely. The government plans to give a card worth €500 to every 18-year-old for spending only at theatres, museums, bookshops and archaeological sites.

In Greece the situation is radically different. Over 800,000 refugees arrived there in 2015. Trying to deal with this crisis, as well as pushing through pension reforms and bringing down national debt, has absorbed much of the government’s time and energy.

But another reason why so little cash is available for culture is a view that Greece’s heritage is solely a matter of national concern. “Greece exists because of its heritage: other Europeans decided that, because of that heritage, it should be freed from Ottoman rule,” says Evangelos Kyriakidis of the Initiative for Heritage Conservation, a research organisation. The state lays claim to total ownership of the past: take a metal detector to hunt for ancient coins, as you can in many countries, and in Greece you could wind up in jail. Private cultural initiatives, even those funded by Greeks, are often met with disdain.

Wine-dark seas

Yet the state can no longer afford to protect all of the nation’s treasures. The archaeological service is overwhelmed. Of more than 10,000 formally recognised sites, fewer than 200 are open.

Just as greater European involvement is needed to resolve the migration crisis, so there could be a case for closer European co-operation in cultural matters. The inauguration in June of an excavated site on Crete will make the point well. The EU provided more than 90% of the funds for one of the few on-site museums in Greece. Nikos Stampolidis, a professor of archaeology at the University of Crete who has made the excavation his life’s work, says the museum at Eleftherna will “shine a light into what archaeologists have chosen to call the Greek Dark Ages, before the Classical period.” That encompasses the time when Homer wrote. As Europe appears to fall into its own, darker period, what better way to celebrate shared, but increasingly questioned values than a museum that illuminates the times of its first great writer?



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21694541-europes-shared-history-should-be-treasured-not-ignored-necessity-culture/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Britain




Britain and the European Union: Next stop: Brexit?

Illegal immigration: Channel hopping

Aston Martin and McLaren: Speed merchants

Brexit brief: The roots of Euroscepticism

Portsmouth’s shipyard: Pompey’s predicament

Higher education: Open universities

Young people and work: Jobs for the boys and girls

Sunday-trading laws: Scotched

Bagehot: Goggling at Britain





Articles Sections Next

Britain and the European Union

Next stop: Brexit?

The campaign to leave the European Union is still behind, but picking up speed

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS not meant to be like this. The plan had been that David Cameron would return in triumph from Brussels, having won reforms of Britain’s status in the EU, and throw his full weight behind the campaign to remain in. Most Tory MPs and voters would swing, albeit reluctantly, behind the prime minister. With strong backing from Labour and the Liberal Democrats, and from business and trade unions, the result would be a large majority in the referendum on June 23rd.

It could still happen. Most polls, and even more strongly the bookmakers, put the Remain camp in the lead, though there was little of the hoped-for bounce after Mr Cameron came back from Brussels. Remainers believe that, when the debate is about jobs, they have the edge: this week’s claim by Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, that Brexit was the biggest domestic risk to the economy reinforces that view. Yet the early weeks of the campaign have not gone smoothly.

There have been cock-ups: a pro-EU round-robin from leaders of FTSE-100 companies was signed by only 36; a letter from military bigwigs saying the EU mattered for national security went awry when one signatory said he had not seen it; the ousting of the pro-Brexit boss of the British Chambers of Commerce was blamed on Downing Street. Lord Rose, chairman of Britain Stronger In Europe, the pro-EU campaign, has often seemed ineffectual.

More troubling was the response to Mr Cameron’s deal. The government had hoped only 80 or so Tory MPs would vote Leave, and it was confident that Michael Gove, the justice secretary, and Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, would not be among them. In fact 140 Tory MPs have now declared for Leave, including Mr Gove and Mr Johnson, more than even the most optimistic in the Leave campaign expected. Local Conservative associations are still heavily Eurosceptic. The party’s squabbles over Brexit have also become inextricably linked to speculation about its next leader, since Mr Cameron has said he will not run again in 2020.

The newspapers have also been unexpectedly strident, with even pro-EU titles joining Eurosceptics in rubbishing Mr Cameron’s deal as not producing a fundamental change in Britain’s EU relationship. Most have presented the arguments of both sides as finely balanced. The Leave campaign has proved aggressive and well financed. It has skirted past a lack of clarity over alternatives to membership, instead playing up concerns over migration and sovereignty lost to Brussels. It has denounced critics as scaremongers engaged in “Project Fear” and portrayed those doubting if Britain would do better outside the EU as unpatriotic. The Sun newspaper has even claimed that the queen backs Brexit (untrue, says the palace).

Worse, Mr Cameron has received little help from other parties. The Scottish National Party is for Remain, but will not campaign with the Tories; it knows that a vote for Brexit could be an excuse for another independence referendum. Above all, Labour has been largely silent. Its leader, Jeremy Corbyn, claims to support Remain, but is a long-standing Eurosceptic. He has failed to raise Brexit, the most urgent issue of this parliament, in any recent session of questions to the prime minister.

Alan Johnson, a former cabinet minister who is chairman of Labour in Europe, insists that his group will turn out the voters on the day. But some in the party recall that Labour was badly burnt after it campaigned with the coalition government against Scottish independence in 2014. Like Mr Corbyn, Mr Johnson is unwilling to appear on platforms with Mr Cameron.

There is an underlying weakness in the prime minister’s position. Unlike Labour’s Harold Wilson before the in/out referendum in 1975, he has spent years attacking the EU and suggesting that, without substantial reforms, he would favour Brexit. Yet it is hard even for the prime minister to pretend that the deal he secured in Brussels, however worthwhile, makes a huge difference. Recent government statements have focused almost entirely on the benefits of membership and the dangers of Brexit, not on the terms of the new deal. If the benefits are so clear, some may ask, how could Mr Cameron have ever thought of arguing for leaving?



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

A final worry for the Remain campaign is the referendum’s timing. A date in June was favoured because it gave less time to the Leave campaign, was close to Mr Cameron’s unexpected election win last May and would come before the summer inrush of migrants to Europe. Yet June may now prove a bad choice. The global economy is stuttering. The euro zone is again weak, with growth slowing sharply in Italy and France, and a renewed dispute over Greece’s debts. And far from diminishing in the winter, the EU’s migrant and refugee crisis has only grown (see article).

The saving grace for Mr Cameron may lie within the Leave campaigns. Leavers are vulnerable not just to uncertainty over what alternative they would secure, but to their own disagreements. Grassroots Out and Vote Leave, the rivals to be designated as official campaigners, are bitterly divided. The first includes Nigel Farage, leader of the UK Independence Party, who has a little-Englander view and would make immigration the main issue. The second includes UKIP’s only MP, Douglas Carswell, who prefers a more libertarian, pro-globalisation message. The way the two groupings now pour more vitriol on each other than on their opponents is comically reminiscent of the rival popular fronts to liberate Judaea in the film “The Life of Brian”.

The odds are still that the vote will be to Remain. The weight of business and union opinion in favour of staying in is likely to tell in the end. A preference among don’t-knows for the status quo will help. In talking up Project Fear, the Leave camp may only draw more attention to the dangers of Brexit. But the risk of an opinion-shifting event—terrorist attack, euro crisis, migration meltdown—is high. Mr Cameron must sometimes regret the promise of a referendum he made three long years ago.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694549-campaign-leave-european-union-still-behind-picking-up-speed-next-stop-brexit/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Illegal immigration

Channel hopping

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



There has been a twelvefold increase in clandestine attempts to enter Britain via European ports and train tunnels since 2012, according to figures obtained by The Economist under freedom of information laws. Lorries are X-rayed for stowaways and sniffer dogs patrol regularly, making the obstacle course harder than ever. Yet this has done little to deter migrants—nor to soothe the fears of Eurosceptic voters ahead of the June 23rd referendum.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694407-twelvefold-increase-comes-awkward-time-european-referendum/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Aston Martin and McLaren

Speed merchants

How two similar carmakers evolved into a luxury-goods firm and a tech company

Mar 12th 2016 | GENEVA AND WOKING | From the print edition



FEW countries are as adept at making luxury cars as Britain. Plutocrats and footballers queue to buy Rolls-Royces and Bentleys. Speed freaks in want of a sports car are also well served. At the Geneva Motor Show, which opened on March 1st, two leading British supercar firms launched pricey new models to compete with the likes of Ferrari and Lamborghini: Aston Martin unveiled the DB11 (pictured) while McLaren showed off its 570GT. The two brands offer similarly expensive toys, yet under the bonnet are very different firms.

The pair are alike in some respects. Both make only a handful of vehicles. McLaren turned out just 1,650 last year; Aston around double that. An entry-level Aston costs nearly £100,000 ($140,000), whereas the cheapest McLaren costs another £30,000, but their flagship models cost around £150,000-200,000. Each firm has built hypercars that sold for around £1m. And both have recently announced expansion plans, to take advantage of a sales boom at the top end of the car market (IHS, a consulting firm, reckons that global sales of the priciest cars will triple between 2010 and 2020). Aston will open a new factory in Wales to make SUVs; McLaren plans to spend £1 billion over six years to widen its range to 15 models and 4,000 cars a year.

The two have taken different routes to this destination. Aston, 103 years old, is well known thanks to the James Bond films but has struggled of late. It was a “basket case” which limped from one car to the next, losing money, according to its boss, Andy Palmer. Since taking over in 2014 Mr Palmer has won backing from private-equity firms to launch four new models and struck a deal to use Mercedes engines.

By contrast, McLaren’s sports-car business took off only six years ago. Though it had made road cars in small numbers it was mostly known as a Formula 1 motor-racing team. McLaren diverted its British engineers, good at the speedy innovation and advanced manufacturing needed for racing, to making sports cars.

A glance at the cars gives a clue that they do things differently. McLarens are wild-looking mid-engined sports machines that harness the firm’s skills in engineering to adapt racetrack materials, such as carbon fibre, and high-tech gizmos to make a car as at home on the circuit as the open road. Aston’s DB11 is more conventional. An aluminium body and engine at the front are typical of a “grand tourer”, designed to whisk drivers in comfort over long distances on public roads.

Aston is first a “design company”, says Mr Palmer. Performance and handling are important but the aim is to make the “most beautiful car on the road”. To do so Aston has remodelled itself as a luxury-goods firm, emphasising design and craftsmanship that are a British speciality, while trying to extend the brand. The Welsh factory will make the DBX, an SUV that Aston hopes will broaden its appeal, especially among women, who buy few of its cars.

McLaren, meanwhile, strives to make its cars the most technically advanced. Last year the firm renamed itself the McLaren Technology Group to emphasise the importance of innovation. Although racing and supercars will remain important, Ron Dennis, the firm’s boss, is convinced that its tech business will be its biggest and most important part in years to come. It already serves oil-and-gas, health-care and financial-services firms. Using skills honed in analysing the vast quantities of data generated by motor racing, it is developing analytics software for the likes of GlaxoSmithKline and KPMG.

Both carmakers are in the business of hurtling drivers towards 200mph. Yet with their respective focus on luxury and advanced engineering, they are relying on contrasting British strengths.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694552-how-two-similar-carmakers-evolved-luxury-goods-firm-and-tech-company-speed-merchants/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brexit brief

The roots of Euroscepticism

Why Britons are warier than other Europeans of the EU

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



A COMMON (sometimes exasperated) question from abroad is: why is Britain having a referendum on its EU membership? The simple answer is that David Cameron promised one in the Conservative Party manifesto for last May’s election. But the deeper one is to be found in the rise and rise of British Euroscepticism.

The origins of today’s EU lie in the ashes of post-war Europe. Reconciliation between France and Germany, urged by Winston Churchill in 1946, led to the creation of the six-member European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 and the European Economic Community in 1957. But a wary Britain, keen to preserve links with the Commonwealth and America, stood aside from both. Only in the 1960s did the British, impressed by the continent’s stronger economy, try to join, eventually doing so in 1973.

What this history shows is that Britain has an essentially transactional relationship with the club. Membership has been evaluated in terms of costs and benefits, not as an emotional commitment. Moreover, as a latecomer, Britain has often found the EU’s organisation and policies uncongenial. This was reflected in Margaret Thatcher’s battles in the 1980s to cut the outsized British budget contribution.

Over the years the political base of British Euroscepticism has moved from left to right. In the early years Labour was the more suspicious party. In 1962 its leader, Hugh Gaitskell, warned that joining the common market would end 1,000 years of history. In 1975 Harold Wilson dealt with Labour splits over Europe by staging a renegotiation and putting the result to a referendum—a tactic remarkably similar to Mr Cameron’s today. In the early 1980s, Labour was once again set on withdrawal.

The pivotal moment came in 1988, when the European Commission’s president, Jacques Delors, promised the Trades Union Congress that Europe’s single market would be buttressed by tougher labour and social regulations. This reinforced Thatcher’s growing Euroscepticism, and led directly to her Bruges speech attacking excessive EU interference in the same year. Her political downfall two years later was triggered by her denunciation of Mr Delors’s plans for closer EU integration and a single currency. This marked the point when the Tories replaced Labour as the party of Euroscepticism.

Mr Cameron not only inherited this as party leader in 2005 but also, as prime minister after 2010, had to deal with a growing threat from the even more Eurosceptic UK Independence Party (UKIP). His response, in his Bloomberg speech in January 2013, was, like Wilson’s 40 years earlier, to promise a renegotiation and referendum.

Yet today’s shrill debate over Brexit reflects mainly internal Tory party politics. Most voters are less excited. Opinion polls suggest that they see Europe as a relatively unimportant issue. Moreover, in most elections since Britain joined the club in 1973, voters have delivered majorities to the more pro-EU of the two main parties.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

Even so, the roots of British Euroscepticism are deep. Matthew Goodwin of the University of Kent, who has studied the phenomenon and written a history of UKIP, reckons they are cultural as much as political. Britain, he says, forged its identity against perceived threats from across the Channel. He adds that, although the young and better educated tend to be less Eurosceptic, the popular notion that it is only older working-class voters who favour Brexit is not correct.

Nor is it right to argue that British-style Euroscepticism is oozing all over the continent. Certainly there is growing disillusion with the EU, especially over migration and the euro’s woes. This has fostered a form of soft Euroscepticism (see chart). Unlike in Britain, it is young people who are most susceptible, because they suffer the most from high unemployment. Yet there is no serious debate anywhere but Britain about leaving the EU. Only if a post-Brexit Britain were a big success might that change—which is one reason why the EU will not want to help bring that about.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694557-why-britons-are-warier-other-europeans-eu-roots-euroscepticism/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Portsmouth’s shipyard

Pompey’s predicament

Two years after losing its shipbuilding industry, the city depends on the navy

Mar 12th 2016 | PORTSMOUTH | From the print edition

Waving or drowning?

ONLY one city in Britain has its own central-government minister. Not London, the capital and economic engine; nor Manchester, the go-ahead centre of the “Northern Powerhouse”. Instead it is Portsmouth, a south-coast port which is neither wildly successful nor especially poor.

“Pompey” jumped up the political agenda in November 2013 when BAE Systems, a defence giant, announced that 940 jobs would go at its shipyard in the city. By mid-2014 the last of its shipbuilding operations in Portsmouth had closed, some to be relocated to Glasgow. Since most of BAE’s work in Britain is in public-procurement deals, the government took much of the flak for the job losses. It responded with a generous package for the shipyard and its workers, including £100m ($140m) of investment by the Ministry of Defence in the city’s naval base. Michael Fallon, a Conservative MP who is now the defence secretary, was appointed the first minister for the city, to “knock heads together” and get the shipyard moving.

This week, Portsmouth’s empty shipyard returned to life when BAE began a new contract to maintain anti-mining ships there. Magma Structures, which makes high-tech hulls, is also due to start work there. But its move to the ship hall has been delayed. “There’s been no re-emergence of shipbuilding,” says Gary Cook of the GMB union. “The PM raised expectations that were never going to be met.”

Others doubt the worth of the Portsmouth minister, a post now held by Mark Francois. “Why have MPs here if you need another minister to lobby on behalf of the city?” asks John Ferrett, a Labour councillor. Some see the post as a gesture designed to win Tory votes: Portsmouth South was won by the Conservatives in last year’s general election after 18 years in the hands of Liberal Democrats; the Tories had taken Portsmouth North from Labour in 2010. The council is Conservative-run, a rarity among Britain’s Labour-leaning cities.

Yet the government’s short-term response to the shipyard redundancies was fairly successful. Of the 940 BAE employees whose jobs disappeared, only 165 were made compulsorily redundant. A little less than one-third were re-employed in other parts of the company, nearly 80% staying in Portsmouth. A “maritime task-force” was swiftly set up to develop a recovery strategy for the industry.

Portsmouth Naval Base has remained busy. Ship maintenance and servicing, if not traditional shipbuilding, remains at the core of the local economy, since the docks are home to much of Britain’s surface fleet. From 2017 the city will be home to two aircraft carriers: HMS Queen Elizabeth and HMS Prince of Wales, the largest ships ever built for the Royal Navy. Smaller investments include £4m for a centre for research into unmanned vessels and £2m to move the Royal Marines Museum to the city’s dockyard.

A more nuanced criticism is that too little has been done to reduce Portsmouth’s dependence on the navy. “The dockyard has been part of the problem in Portsmouth almost for ever,” says Nicholas Phelps, an economic geographer at University College London. Port towns suffer from “a sort of resource curse”, agrees Andrew Carter of the Centre for Cities, a think-tank. The government has shored up the politically important maritime industries at the expense of diversification. Until that changes, Pompey’s prosperity will rise and fall in line with defence spending.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694561-two-years-after-losing-its-shipbuilding-industry-city-depends-navy-pompeys/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Higher education

Open universities

Dons have the power to admit as many students as they like. What will happen?

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition

Rowing against the current

THE University of Liverpool is growing fast. Since 2011 it has invested nearly £250m ($360m) in new student accommodation, across three different sites, to house 4,500 students. “We have seen a dramatic increase in interest over the past couple of years,” says Gavin Brown, a university official. That it has been able to respond to the increased demand is partly due to an unheralded reform of student admissions.

In 2012 restrictions on the number of students that universities were allowed to recruit (in place to control government spending) were relaxed in England to allow them to accept as many students with good grades at A-level, the exams taken at 18, as they wished. The following year George Osborne, the chancellor, surprised universities by going further, declaring that from 2015 the limit on the number of students they were allowed to recruit would be lifted entirely.

The government hoped the change would enable universities to expand, creating more skilled workers and widening access to higher education. Another effect would be to increase competition between universities for students—a process encouraged by the trebling of tuition fees to a maximum of £9,000 in 2012, which means more funding now follows students. “It was a much bigger shift than many people in higher education initially realised,” says Nick Hillman, a former government adviser who now runs the Higher Education Policy Institute, a think-tank.

A demographic dip in the number of 18- to 24-year-olds, an improving job market and a sluggish response from some universities mean that student numbers are yet to grow much, and are unlikely to do so for the next few years. Nevertheless, many universities are changing their approach to admissions. Early signs suggest that growth is concentrated in older, research-focused universities. In 2015 the English members of the prestigious Russell Group of universities accepted 6.7% more students than in the previous year. Meanwhile, acceptances by the English members of the Million+ group of newer, less fancy universities fell by 0.6%.

This cannot be explained solely by the lifting of the cap. Some low-ranked universities have chosen to focus on increasing the academic ability rather than the number of students they take in. Many high-ranked universities have benefited from being able to expand under the earlier, partial lifting of the cap; others, including Oxford and Cambridge, have chosen not to take on more students. But it may also show that stronger institutions—new as well as old—are growing at the expense of weaker ones, says Emran Mian, director of the Social Market Foundation, a think-tank. Indeed, many successful new universities, including Coventry and Manchester Metropolitan, are expanding faster than older establishments.

Although universities can compete on price, students have shown little sign of favouring institutions with lower fees (which partly explains why these days most charge the maximum). As a result, universities must now compete on quality, says Chris Husbands, vice-chancellor of Sheffield Hallam University. Some reckon that the higher-education market will diversify, with more institutions concentrating on niche or work-focused courses in order to attract students.

A few universities will suffer at first. The question is whether the pain will be worth it in the long term, says Andy Westwood of Manchester University. Critics of the uncapping policy argue that some low- and mid-ranked universities are being punished unfairly by students’ preference for institutions that look good on a CV, rather than those with the best lecturers. Others complain that uncertainty over student numbers makes long-term planning hard.

But much of the angst will be forgotten if student numbers begin to grow more quickly. When a similar cap was lifted in Australia in 2012, the proportion of youngsters going to university increased in every social group. Demographic trends mean the number of British 18- to 24-year-olds will pick up in the early 2020s. And all universities will benefit from more EU students: some 14% more were accepted this academic year than last.

But funding the extra places will not be cheap: the policy will require the support of future governments. Unfortunately for those universities that are hoping to expand, that is far from guaranteed.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694560-dons-have-power-admit-many-students-they-what-will-happen-open-universities/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Young people and work

Jobs for the boys and girls

Youth unemployment, the scourge of much of Europe, has plummeted

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



A FEW years ago Britain was in a panic about youth unemployment. As the economy sank, companies stopped hiring and let go of workers with the least bargaining power. The unemployment rate among 16- to 24-year-olds therefore soared (see chart). In many rich countries, the rise in youth unemployment has proved to be long-lasting: across the EU it has fallen by a mere 1.3 percentage points since 2011 and in countries like the Netherlands and Norway it has risen, raising fears that swathes of youngsters are structurally excluded from the labour market. Yet in Britain it has nosedived. The employment rate of young people not in full-time education is now at its highest since 2004. Why?

The government credits its “long-term economic plan”. True, it helpfully raised the age at which people leave education to 18 last year, thus moving youngsters off the dole and into the classroom. Yet many programmes have fallen flat. A £300m ($425m) scheme whereby employers received a payment of up to £2,275 for hiring an unemployed young person closed in 2014 after low take-up. A £30m “Innovation Fund”, announced in 2011, rewarded investors who funded programmes to improve youngsters’ skills. It too closed to new entrants in November; the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) has released no quantitative analysis of the scheme’s value for money.

The DWP has even gone in search of young people online, setting up a page on the BuzzFeed news site with articles such as “7 most obscure excuses given by benefit fraudsters”. The target audience seems unimpressed (“Why don’t you give the ten worst reasons for stopping a person’s benefit and leaving them destitute?” asks one).

Still, other welfare reforms have inadvertently helped the young. Since 2011 private providers of support for unemployed people have been paid according to how many of their clients move into work. In 2011-15 one-third of 18- to 24-year-olds in the programme moved into a job for a “sustained” period (meaning at least three or six months, depending on the person), compared with one-quarter of 25- to 49-year-olds. The difference may be partly down to this payment-by-results model, says Laura Gardiner of the Resolution Foundation, a think-tank: targeting youngsters, who may pick up skills quicker, has proved more lucrative to the contractors than focusing on harder-to-help claimants, particularly the over-50s and those with disabilities.

Other policies will make young workers more attractive still to employers. In April a “national living wage” comes into force, under which the minimum wage will rise from its current level of £6.70 an hour to around £9 an hour (equal to 60% of median earnings) by 2020. But it does not cover those under 25, and Len Shackleton of Buckingham University says that this may have already created a bias among employers towards hiring youngsters. So has a policy introduced last April under which employers do not pay certain types of national-insurance contributions for workers under 21.

Tech-literate youngsters are also well suited to the “gig” economy, in which short-term employment is arranged online or through apps. Gigs are proliferating: the number of “private hire” vehicles in London, a category that includes Uber taxis, has risen by 26% in the past two years. Uber claims that, in America, its drivers are twice as likely as conventional cabbies to be under 30.

With such a decline in youth unemployment, it is no wonder that wages are buoyant. In 2015 those aged 18-21 saw a 2.8% rise in median hourly pay, compared with a national average increase of 1.6%. Nonetheless, such was the turmoil experienced during the crisis that the inflation-adjusted hourly pay of those aged 22-29 is still 12% below what is was in 2008, a worse performance than any age group above it. Young Britons may be back in work, but they are not yet back in the money.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694558-youth-unemployment-scourge-much-europe-has-plummeted-jobs-boys-and-girls/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Sunday-trading laws

Scotched

Politics, not economics, explains the Scottish National Party’s veto

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



SINCE its return to power last May, Britain’s Conservative government has made clear its intention to loosen the laws on Sunday trading by devolving decisions over shops’ opening hours to local councils. Its attempt to do so on March 9th was defeated in the House of Commons by an unlikely alliance of churchgoing Tories, left-wing Labourites and opportunistic Scottish nationalists.

In England and Wales shops larger than 3,000 square feet (280 square metres) are allowed to open on Sundays for a maximum of six hours, between 10am and 6pm. The government says loosening the regulations would help stores that are struggling to compete with online retailers that trade seven days a week. Labour opposed the plan on the ground that employees could be forced to work when they do not want to. Tory traditionalists said Sunday should remain a day of rest.

If that is dubious, the opposition of the Scottish National Party (SNP) is odder still. First, the bill would have affected only England and Wales, making it doubtful whether Scottish MPs should have had a say. Second, in Scotland—where the SNP is in power—there are no such restrictions on Sunday trading.

The SNP says that if the law changed in England, retailers might reduce the weekend wages of Scots, some of whom by convention enjoy a “Sunday premium” worth roughly 150% of hourly pay. Scottish Labour claims that Scottish shopworkers could lose £1,400 ($2,000) per year if the premium were cut.

By some estimates about 60,000 retail employees get this premium. In reality there is little reason to believe that slightly longer Sunday hours in England would prompt shops in Scotland to reduce wages. Even if they did, there would be winners as well as losers: shops would hire more workers if wages were lower, something the £1,400 figure does not account for.

The SNP had a clearer motive for killing the bill. Outvoting the government in Westminster—its second Commons defeat so far this Parliament—was a coup, coming just before Scottish parliamentary elections in May. And it helped to distract from Scotland’s woeful fiscal performance, data for which were also released on March 9th. With the collapse in the oil price, tax revenues have dwindled; Scotland’s budget deficit is now almost 10% of GDP, twice Britain’s overall level. Whatever the merits of Sunday trading, it is being put on hold in England and Wales for the worst possible reasons.

Correction: A previous version of the headline said that the bill would allow shops in Britain to trade longer in Sunday. In fact, the bill applied only to England.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694503-politics-not-economics-explain-scottish-national-partys-veto-scotched/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Bagehot

Goggling at Britain

An unlikely television hit offers togetherness in a fragmenting country

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



AT FIRST “Gogglebox” did not look like a winner. TV executives responded to Tania Alexander, the programme’s creator, with bafflement: who would want to watch other people watching television? They got their answer: 700,000 viewers, rising to 5m. Today the format—featuring couples, friends and families commenting on and discussing clips from popular dramas, game shows, documentaries and the news—has been exported to 16 countries and counts David Cameron among its fans.

The secret is in the casting. Unlike reality shows predicated on conflict and the grotesque (all shouting and slicks of fake tan) Gogglebox mobilises the wit and warmth of recognisable tribes: the grandparents in Liverpool, the minority middle-class family from Derby, the woman vicar in Nottingham, the bohemians in Cambridge. Most facets of modern British life are there. The gay friends? That would be Stephen and Chris, a pair of catty Brighton hairdressers. The city-dwellers? Sandy and Sandra, Brixton loudmouths who roar with laughter and outrage, slurping pots of instant noodles. The poshos? Steph and Dom, who run a hotel in Kent and issue cut-glass sardonics when not guzzling oceans of booze and falling off their sofa.

The result is a compelling barometer of the national mood. During last year’s election campaign, the Goggleboxers had their political leaders sussed: accurately identifying Nigel Farage’s anxiously frenetic attention-seeking (“He thinks with his mouth”), Ed Miliband’s lurking self-doubt (“He doesn’t quite know what he is doing”) and Boris Johnson’s faux-bumbling opportunism (“Beware the fool, because in all Shakespeare plays, the fool is actually the clever one”). Long before commentators had stopped sagely musing about the Liberal Democrats’ hidden local strengths, two of the show’s best-loved families—the Michaels and the Siddiquis—predicted the party’s rout and its leader’s resignation. Occasionally the chatter offers glimpses of the roiling, evolving country beyond the net curtains: “I’d say about a third of my mates are migrants, or second-generation,” George, a 30-year-old from Essex, tells his surprised parents.

To be sure, the show is not meant as anthropology. Its subjects are selected for their spark and spontaneity (it only takes five seconds to tell whether a prospective family or pair is right, Ms Alexander says). Each 60-minute episode is a compilation of golden moments culled from 200 hours of footage. In a typical gem, one of the Siddiqui boys, watching a televised debate about immigration, wonders how he would evade border controls. “I’d swim the Channel,” replies his brother and, chortling, turns to his father: “How did we sneak in last time, Dad?” Reality-television gigs, newspaper profiles and even a chat show have duly rolled in. The programme-makers thus watch out for, and cut, anything that looks fake: the families must be relatable.

Psychiatrist’s-couch potatoes

Still, the show owes some of its success to the atypical nature of what it captures. For when historians write the story of British society in the first decades of the 21st century, their organising theme will surely be that of fragmentation. The gap between the booming, worldly cities and the declining, post-industrial towns increasingly shows up in Britain’s politics (witness its current divide on the EU). Intersecting this widening spectrum is the generational split between the liberal young and their conservative elders. As the spread of daily experiences and outlooks becomes broader, occasions on which the country comes together get rarer. Where once a handful of newspapers and television channels commanded the nation’s attention, the media’s fragmentation and the rise of more individualistic competitors (social media the prime example) mean ever fewer common reference points. The audience for the biggest programme shown on Christmas Day has fallen from 20.3m in 2001 to 6.6m in 2015.

As Britain’s nations, regions, classes and age groups drift apart, a similar pattern is evident within neighbourhoods. The country leads the rich world in indicators associated with solitary lifestyles: gym-going (as opposed to team sports), divorce, smartphone and tablet adoption (replacing the family television set), self-employment, online shopping, eating alone, meal-skipping and the declines of both the pub and the nuclear family. Clubs of all sorts, from churches and political parties to golf clubs and trade unions, are shrinking. The proportion of single-person households has doubled over the past four decades.

Nothing about this is inherently regrettable—indeed, Britons must be one of the most unstifled, diverse and emotionally self-sufficient peoples in Europe—but these trends have negative side-effects. The Office for National Statistics claims that Britain is the loneliest country in the EU (the sense of isolation especially acute among its young adults). Politicians seemingly discern in voters a yearning for connection, from Labour’s recent talk of “one nation” to Mr Cameron’s “big society” push for more volunteering and civic cohesion.

“Gogglebox” leans against these shifts in two ways. It conjures up a half-remembered Britain of universal experiences and references; of families of all stations sitting down together and watching the same shows. And every Friday night, it brings that nostalgic ideal to life by commanding an audience that spans the generations (about 10% of potential viewers in each age group from 16 to 64 tune in) and the classes (its viewership, like the population as a whole, splits into four roughly equal groups: upper-middle, lower-middle, skilled-working and unskilled-working). The programme’s contradictions—camp and sincere, profound and silly, slapstick and mundane—enable it to transcend differences of geography, income and generation like few others. To a country whose citizens, voluntarily or otherwise, appear to be going their separate ways, “Gogglebox” offers the fleeting tonic of togetherness. In retrospect, it was always going to be a hit.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21694562-unlikely-television-hit-offers-togetherness-fragmenting-country-goggling-britain/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





International




Civil servants: Mandarin lessons

Exam-cramming in India: Turn over your papers…now





Articles Sections Next

Civil servants

Mandarin lessons

Countries are trying harder to recruit the best bureaucrats. Not hard enough

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



“WANTED: people of promise”, proclaimed ads for America’s Federal Service Entrance Examination, introduced in 1955. Applicants faced posers on grammar and arithmetic—as well as the Battle of the Bulge and why presidential aides deserve anonymity (answer: “they relieve the president of many burdens and should not be subjected to a great deal of personal criticism”). But little more than two decades later, such exams had come under fire. Some said they tested knowledge rather than talent, thereby discriminating against black and Latino applicants. More broadly, their usefulness for picking tax-collectors and the like was questioned. In 1981 they were ditched.

Last year the tests were resurrected, tweaked to be fairer and more useful. Growth in the number of university graduates, together with the popularity of a safe job in difficult economic times, had left many branches of government struggling to cope with a flood of applications. Federal agencies are now assessing candidates with USA Hire, an online quiz more relevant to the work to be done.

America is not the only country where more young people have been going to university in recent years. And as governments and aid donors seek to cut graft, the original, meritocratic aim of civil-service exams seems increasingly relevant. Sure enough, says Vivek Srivastava of the World Bank, during the past quarter-century more countries have started using assessments to dole out government jobs.

Of the 62 countries tracked in 2010-11 by Global Integrity, an NGO, 55 had rules against “nepotism, cronyism and patronage”. Last year Cyprus and Pakistan, among others, announced reforms intended to ensure that applicants are chosen on the basis of what they know, not whom. Countries such as Germany, Portugal and Spain pledge in their constitutions to recruit government staff based on skills. Prodded by aid donors, Afghanistan and Sudan recently promised to do likewise.

Applicants can face daunting odds. The Fast Stream programme, a graduate scheme for British officials, admits about one in 20 after a series of tests, role-play exercises and interviews. Of the roughly 500,000 applicants for elite civil-service jobs in India each year, only about 1,000 make the grade. Last year there were 27,817 roles for the 930,000 takers of the Chinese civil-service exam (the picture above shows candidates at a test centre).

Beancounters v boondoggles

Hiring civil servants according to calibre has been rare throughout history. Most jobs have been inherited, bought or bestowed as patronage. Although China tested for grasp of classical texts as long ago as 134BC, officials in the West only began to be properly vetted in the 19th century. In Britain, the Northcote-Trevelyan report of 1854 called for exams to weed out hereditary incompetence. In the years following, anger at America’s “spoils system”, which saw jobs given to party hacks, also led to reform: an 1868 report to Congress found a sculptor and a washerwoman among the political allies on the Treasury’s staff.

The best-known proponent of a new-model, meritocratic civil service was Max Weber, a German sociologist who died in 1920. He envisioned a closed, rigid hierarchy staffed by bureaucrats who entered by examination and enjoyed protected careers. This, he argued, would foster esprit de corps and curb cronyism.

There is a fair bit of evidence in favour of the meritocracy Weber championed. Research published in 2011 by Victor Lapuente and Carl Dahlstrom of the University of Gothenburg, and Jan Teorell, of Lund University, looked at which features of a civil service cut jobbery. They found that corruption across 52 countries was correlated with neither civil-service pay levels nor whether jobs were for life. Merit-based hiring was the only aspect of bureaucracies that consistently reduced graft. The connection held in countries at different stages of development, and with different political systems.

Meritocracy, more broadly conceived, also saves money and seems to promote economic growth. A forthcoming paper co-authored by Mr Lapuente analyses 1.4m procurement contracts in 212 regions of the European Union, and finds that the regions whose own public employees rate them as meritocratic pay less for roads, bridges and the like. The researchers estimate that if every region were as meritocratic as Baden-Württemberg, in Germany, EU governments could save €13 billion-20 billion ($14 billion-22 billion) a year. Separate work by Peter Evans and James Rauch, of the universities of California Berkeley and San Diego respectively, finds that in poorer countries meritocratic hiring and promotion are associated with faster growth.

But some countries make the elementary mistake of setting a silly test. It is not obvious why applicants in Spain, for example, have to memorise swathes of the legal code; nor why Indian candidates must know which ancient kingdom was associated with the life of the Buddha. Others fail to maintain meritocratic principles through civil servants’ entire careers. Some of the most closed administrations, including those of Greece, Italy and Spain, are in reality highly politicised, since promotion often depends on being in favour with the government of the day.

There are even worrying hints that independent hiring and promotion systems that should shield civil servants from shifts in political fortunes are somehow being subverted. A gap between law and practice is opening in eastern European countries such as Hungary, says Gyorgy Gajduschek of the Institute for Legal Studies, in Budapest. Across the OECD club of mostly rich countries, the number of bureaucrats replaced after elections seems to have risen since the 1980s, notes Mr Dahlstrom.

Global Integrity, an NGO, says that though 43 of 54 African countries it follows have rules against cronyism, only Botswana tends to appoint bureaucrats based on “professional criteria”. Some development wonks naively promoted the Weberian model, without building up capacity to implement it. “We went into countries and said you need to be more like Denmark,” says Mr Srivastava. “So countries changed their laws to look like Denmark’s—but then nothing would happen.”

Past papers

The century-old notion that a bureaucracy should be a cadre of lifers is now facing more fundamental criticisms. The first is of the idea that civil servants should be unsackable. The intention was to ensure their independence and protect them from being fired by meddling politicians; in some places, though, it means that once they have made it through the entrance exam they need never do a tap of work. Some of Brazil’s most coveted jobs, for example, are in well-paid corners of the public sector, often mocked as places where applicants who make it through a stiff exam can hang their jackets over their chairs—and never show up again.

The second problem is that the tasks civil servants must perform are becoming ever more complicated. Closed-shop bureaucracies can be short of essential skills, such as the ability to analyse data, manage big projects or write contracts for outsourced public services. In poorly governed, graft-prone countries, this may be a price worth paying for keeping politicians’ grubby hands off government jobs. But better-governed ones may be able to open up hiring without returning to nepotism.

According to the Quality of Government Survey Report, an international assessment of bureaucracies by independent experts, some countries that frequently bring outsiders into their civil services without examination, such as New Zealand, are highly meritocratic. In a recent paper looking only at rich countries, where graft is less common, Anders Sundell of the University of Gothenburg finds no connection between entrance exams and levels of corruption.

In much of the rich world, says Agnès Audier of BCG, a consultancy, a civil-service recruitment crisis looms. A third of government workers in the OECD are aged over 50; in America about 60% of senior federal employees are eligible to retire. In normal times, it would therefore be an excellent moment to tweak hiring rules, since a flood of new talent would quickly stir up stagnant bureaucracies. But many governments are squeezing staffing budgets or imposing hiring freezes to get their budgets back in balance after the financial crisis. The smart ones will be rethinking the way they recruit in preparation for the thaw.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21694553-countries-are-trying-harder-recruit-best-bureaucrats-not-hard-enough-mandarin/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Exam-cramming in India

Turn over your papers…now

The town that promises all the right answers

Mar 12th 2016 | KOTA | From the print edition

Feeling the pressure

“WE TURN coal into diamonds,” says Pieush Agrawal, the head of Edge Academy, a coaching centre in Kota, Rajasthan. Since its opening six years ago Mr Agrawal has helped 106 students pass exams for the National Defence Academy (NDA) or other elite military schools. He has defied long odds: only one in 1,126 applicants makes it to the NDA. Students cram seven days a week, with CCTV cameras monitoring whether they (or their teachers) are slacking. “The backdrop of all learning is discipline,” Mr Agrawal says. “That’s what the army taught me.”

Every year 125,000 students come to Kota to study. Across the bustling city billboards portray stern professors promising test success. Most incomers are swotting for university-entrance exams. But an increasing number are preparing for government jobs—a sign of growing competition for secure and well-paid official posts.

Robin Singh Bamel, an 18-year-old who wants to follow his father and grandfather into the army, is one of Edge Academy’s hopefuls. He takes two coaching classes a day and reads three newspapers to brush up for general-knowledge questions. After failing the NDA exam last year, he has taken a year out from his normal school to prepare, and feels more confident. “To be an officer, you have to act like one,” he says.

Similar discipline is required to win a place in the Rajasthan Administrative Service. Amrita Soni, aged 29, dreams of the day she can drive in one of the service’s white cars with a blue light on top. She is not the only one: around 100,000 students apply each year for a handful of jobs. She has passed the preliminary stage but a harder second test looms.

To boost her chances she has signed up to Vidhi Classes, a self-proclaimed “result-generating machine”. Naveen Gehlot, its boss, spends up to 12 hours a day drilling students in history, politics, economics, sociology, maths and English. The questions can be detailed—and of little relevance to the job being sought. For example: “Explain the Rajput policy of Akbar, a Mughal emperor, during his reign from 1556 to 1605.” After the exams comes a notoriously tough interview.

Unsurprisingly, given the high stakes, cheating is a problem. Papers are often leaked and on exam day students are forbidden from wearing shirts with long sleeves or pockets. Rings and necklaces must stay outside the exam room in case answers are hidden on the jewellery.

Last year demand was so strong that Mr Gehlot had to book a cinema hall for his classes. Mr Agrawal is also expanding: next month he will move to bigger premises. Unlike other tutors around Kota, though, he has not yet sought to lure new students by plastering his face around town. “I don’t want my face on billboards, but in their hearts.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/international/21694563-town-promises-all-right-answers-turn-over-your-papersnow/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Technology Quarterly




After Moore's law: Double, double, toil and trouble

More Moore: The incredible shrinking transistor

New designs: Taking it to another dimension

Brain scan: Bruno Michel

Quantum computing: Harnessing weirdness

What comes next: Horses for courses





Articles Sections Next

After Moore's law

Double, double, toil and trouble

After a glorious 50 years, Moore’s law—which states that computer power doubles every two years at the same cost—is running out of steam. Tim Cross asks what might replace it

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



IN 1971 a small company called Intel released the 4004, its first ever microprocessor. The chip, measuring 12 square millimetres, contained 2,300 transistors—tiny electrical switches representing the 1s and 0s that are the basic language of computers. The gap between each transistor was 10,000 nanometres (billionths of a metre) in size, about as big as a red blood cell. The result was a miracle of miniaturisation, but still on something close to a human scale. A child with a decent microscope could have counted the individual transistors of the 4004.

The transistors on the Skylake chips Intel makes today would flummox any such inspection. The chips themselves are ten times the size of the 4004, but at a spacing of just 14 nanometres (nm) their transistors are invisible, for they are far smaller than the wavelengths of light human eyes and microscopes use. If the 4004’s transistors were blown up to the height of a person, the Skylake devices would be the size of an ant.

The difference between the 4004 and the Skylake is the difference between computer behemoths that occupy whole basements and stylish little slabs 100,000 times more powerful that slip into a pocket. It is the difference between telephone systems operated circuit by circuit with bulky electromechanical switches and an internet that ceaselessly shuttles data packets around the world in their countless trillions. It is a difference that has changed everything from metal-bashing to foreign policy, from the booking of holidays to the designing of H-bombs.

It is also a difference capable of easy mathematical quantification. In 1965 Gordon Moore, who would later become one of the founders of Intel, a chipmaker, wrote a paper noting that the number of electronic components which could be crammed into an integrated circuit was doubling every year. This exponential increase came to be known as Moore’s law.

In the 1970s the rate of doubling was reduced to once every two years. Even so, you would have had to be very brave to look at one of Intel’s 4004s in 1971 and believe that such a law would continue to hold for 44 years. After all, double something 22 times and you have 4m times more of it, or perhaps something 4m times better. But that is indeed what has happened. Intel does not publish transistor counts for its Skylake chips, but whereas the 4004 had 2,300 of them, the company’s Xeon Haswell E-5, launched in 2014, sports over 5 billion, just 22 nm apart.

Moore’s law is not a law in the sense of, say, Newton’s laws of motion. But Intel, which has for decades been the leading maker of microprocessors, and the rest of the industry turned it into a self-fulfilling prophecy. That fulfilment was made possible largely because transistors have the unusual quality of getting better as they get smaller; a small transistor can be turned on and off with less power and at greater speeds than a larger one. This meant that you could use more and faster transistors without needing more power or generating more waste heat, and thus that chips could get bigger as well as better.

Making chips bigger and transistors smaller was not easy; semiconductor companies have for decades spent heavily on R&D, and the facilities—“fabs”—in which the chips have been made have become much more expensive. But each time transistors shrank, and the chips made out of them became faster and more capable, the market for them grew, allowing the makers to recoup their R&D costs and reinvest in yet more research to make their products still tinier.

The demise of this virtuous circle has been predicted many times. “There’s a law about Moore’s law,” jokes Peter Lee, a vice-president at Microsoft Research: “The number of people predicting the death of Moore’s law doubles every two years.” But now the computer industry is increasingly aware that the jig will soon be up. For some time, making transistors smaller has no longer been making them more energy-efficient; as a result, the operating speed of high-end chips has been on a plateau since the mid-2000s (see chart). And while the benefits of making things smaller have been decreasing, the costs have been rising.



This is in large part because the components are approaching a fundamental limit of smallness: the atom. A Skylake transistor is around 100 atoms across, and the fewer atoms you have, the harder it becomes to store and manipulate electronic 1s and 0s. Smaller transistors now need trickier designs and extra materials. And as chips get harder to make, fabs get ever more expensive.

Handel Jones, the CEO of International Business Strategies, reckons that a fab for state-of-the-art microprocessors now costs around $7 billion. He thinks that by the time the industry produces 5nm chips (which at past rates of progress might be in the early 2020s), this could rise to over $16 billion, or nearly a third of Intel’s current annual revenue. In 2015 that revenue, at $55.4 billion, was only 2% more than in 2011. Such slow increases in revenue and big increases in cost seem to point to an obvious conclusion. “From an economic standpoint, Moore’s law is over,” says Linley Gwennap, who runs the Linley Group, a firm of Silicon Valley analysts.

The pace of advance has been slowing for a while. Marc Snir, a supercomputing expert at Argonne National Laboratory, Illinois, points out that the industry’s International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, a collaborative document that tries to forecast the near future of chipmaking, has been over-optimistic for a decade. Promised manufacturing innovations have proved more difficult than expected, arriving years late or not at all.

Brian Krzanich, Intel’s boss, has publicly admitted that the firm’s rate of progress has slowed. Intel has a biennial “tick-tock” strategy: in one year it will bring out a chip featuring smaller transistors (“tick”); the following year it tweaks that chip’s design (“tock”) and prepares to shrink the transistors again in the following year. But when its first 14nm chips, codenamed Broadwell, ticked their way to market in 2014 they were nearly a year behind schedule. The tick to 10nm that was meant to follow the tock of the Skylakes has slipped too; Intel has said such products will not now arrive until 2017. Analysts reckon that because of technological problems the company is now on a “tick-tock-tock” cycle. Other big chipmakers have had similar problems.

Moore’s law has not hit a brick wall. Chipmakers are spending billions on new designs and materials that may make transistors amenable to a bit more shrinkage and allow another few turns of the exponential crank. They are also exploring ways in which performance can be improved with customised designs and cleverer programming. In the past the relentless doubling and redoubling of computing power meant there was less of an incentive to experiment with other sorts of improvement.

Try a different route

More radically, some hope to redefine the computer itself. One idea is to harness quantum mechanics to perform certain calculations much faster than any classical computer could ever hope to do. Another is to emulate biological brains, which perform impressive feats using very little energy. Yet another is to diffuse computer power rather than concentrating it, spreading the ability to calculate and communicate across an ever greater range of everyday objects in the nascent internet of things.

One idea is to redefine the computer itself

Moore’s law provided an unprecedented combination of blistering progress and certainty about the near future. As that certainty wanes, the effects could be felt far beyond the chipmakers faced with new challenges and costs. In a world where so many things—from the cruising speed of airliners to the median wage—seem to change little from decade to decade, the exponential growth in computing power underlies the future plans of technology providers working on everything from augmented-reality headsets to self-driving cars. More important, it has come to stand in the imagination for progress itself. If something like it cannot be salvaged, the world would look a grimmer place.

At the same time, some see benefits in a less predictable world that gives all sorts of new computing technologies an opportunity to come into their own. “The end of Moore’s law could be an inflection point,” says Microsoft’s Dr Lee. “It’s full of challenges—but it’s also a chance to strike out in different directions, and to really shake things up.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21694351/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

More Moore

The incredible shrinking transistor

New sorts of transistors can eke out a few more iterations of Moore’s law, but they will get increasingly expensive

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



THANKS to the exponential power of Moore’s law, the electronic components that run modern computers vastly outnumber all the leaves on the Earth’s trees. Chris Mack, a chipmaking expert, working from a previous estimate by VLSI Research, an analysis firm, reckons that perhaps 400 billion billion (4x1020) transistors were churned out in 2015 alone. That works out at about 13 trillion a second. At the same time they have become unimaginably small: millions could fit on the full stop at the end of this sentence.

A transistor is a sort of switch. To turn it on, a voltage is applied to its gate, which allows the current to flow through the channel between the transistor’s source and drain (see first diagram). When no current flows, the transistor is off. The on-off states represent the 1s and 0s that are the fundamental language of computers.

The silicon from which these switches are made is a semiconductor, meaning that its electrical properties are halfway between those of a conductor (in which current can flow easily) and an insulator (in which it cannot). The electrical characteristics of a semiconductor can be tweaked, either by a process called “doping”, in which the material is spiced with atoms of other elements, such as arsenic or boron, or by the application of an electrical field.

In a silicon transistor, the channel will be doped with one material and the source and drain with another. Doping alters the amount of energy required for any charge to flow through a semiconductor, so where two differently doped materials abut each other, current cannot flow. But when the device is switched on, the electric field from the gate generates a thin, conductive bridge within the channel which completes the circuit, allowing current to flow through.

For a long time that basic design worked better and better as transistors became ever smaller. But at truly tiny scales it begins to break down. In modern transistors the source and drain are very close together, of the order of 20nm. That causes the channel to leak, with a residual current flowing even when the device is meant to be off, wasting power and generating unwanted heat.

Heat from this and other sources causes serious problems. Many modern chips must either run below their maximum speeds or even periodically switch parts of themselves off to avoid overheating, which limits their performance. Chipmakers are trying various methods to avoid this. One of them, called strained silicon, which was introduced by Intel in 2004, involves stretching the atoms of the silicon crystal further apart than normal, which lubricates the passage of charge carriers through the channel, reducing the heat generated.

In another technique, first adopted in 2007, metal oxides are used to combat the effects of tunnelling, a quantum phenomenon in which particles (such as electrons) on one side of a seemingly impermeable barrier turn up on the other side without ever passing through the intervening space. Developing more such esoteric techniques may allow chipmakers to go on shrinking transistors for a little longer, but not much.

The 3D effect

Beyond that, two broad changes will be needed. First, the design of the transistor will have to be changed radically. Second, the industry will have to find a replacement for silicon, the electrical properties of which have already been pushed to their limits.

One solution to the problem of leaking current is to redesign the channel and the gate. Conventionally, transistors have been flat, but in 2012 Intel added a third dimension to its products. To enable it to build chips with features just 22nm apart, it switched to transistors known as “finFET”, which feature a channel that sticks up from the surface of the chip. The gate is then wrapped around the channel’s three exposed sides (see second diagram), which gives it much better control over what takes place inside the channel. These new transistors are trickier to make, but they switch 37% faster than old ones of the same size and consume only half as much power.



The next logical step, says Mr Snir of Argonne National Laboratory, is “gate-all-around” transistors, in which the channel is surrounded by its gate on all four sides. That offers maximum control, but it adds extra steps to the manufacturing process, since the gate must now be built in multiple sections. Big chipmakers such as Samsung have said that it might take gate-all-around transistors to build chips with features 5nm apart, a stage that Samsung and other makers expect to be reached by the early 2020s.

Beyond that, more exotic solutions may be needed. One idea is to take advantage of the quantum tunnelling that is such an annoyance for conventional transistors, and that will only get worse as transistors shrink further. It is possible, by applying electrical fields, to control the rate at which tunnelling happens. A low rate of leakage would correspond to a 0; a high rate to a 1. The first experimental tunnelling transistor was demonstrated by a team at IBM in 2004. Since then researchers have been working to commercialise them.

Transistor design will have to be changed radically

In 2015 a team led by Kaustav Banerjee, of the University of California, reported in Nature that they had built a tunnelling transistor with a working voltage of just 0.1, far below the 0.7V of devices now in use, which means much less heat. But there is more work to be done before tunnelling transistors become viable, says Greg Yeric of ARM, a British designer of microchips: for now they do not yet switch on and off quickly enough to allow them to be used for fast chips.

Jim Greer and his colleagues at Ireland’s Tyndall Institute are working on another idea. Their device, called a junctionless nanowire transistor (JNT), aims to help with another problem of building at tiny scales: getting the doping right. “These days you’re talking about [doping] a very small amount of silicon indeed. You’ll soon be at the point where even one or two misplaced dopant atoms could drastically alter the behaviour of your transistor,” says Dr Greer.

Instead, he and his colleagues propose to build their JNTs, just 3nm across, out of one sort of uniformly doped silicon. Normally that would result in a wire rather than a switch: a device that is uniformly conductive and cannot be turned off. But at these tiny scales the electrical influence of the gate penetrates right through the wire, so the gate alone can prevent current flowing when the transistor is switched off.

Whereas a conventional transistor works by building an electrical bridge between a source and a drain that are otherwise insulated, Dr Greer’s device works the other way: more like a hose in which the gate acts to stop the current from flowing. “This is true nanotechnology,” he says. “Our device only works at these sorts of scales. The big advantage is you don’t have to worry about manufacturing these fiddly junctions.”

Material difference



Chipmakers are also experimenting with materials beyond silicon. Last year a research alliance including Samsung, GlobalFoundries, IBM and State University New York unveiled a microchip made with components 7nm apart, a technology that is not expected to be in consumers’ hands until 2018 at the earliest. It used the same finFET design as the present generation of chips, with slight modifications, but although most of the device was built from the usual silicon, around half of its transistors had channels made from a silicon-germanium (SiGe) alloy.

This was chosen because it is, in some ways, a better conductor than silicon. Once again, that means lower power usage and allows the transistor to switch on and off more quickly, boosting the speed of the chip. But it is not a panacea, says Heike Riel, the director of the physical-sciences department at IBM Research. Modern chips are built from two types of transistor. One is designed to conduct electrons, which carry a negative charge. The other sort is designed to conduct “holes”, which are places in a semiconductor that might contain electrons but happen not to; these, as it turns out, behave as if they were positively charged electrons. And although SiGe excels at transporting holes, it is rather less good at moving electrons than silicon is.

Future paths to higher performance along these lines will probably require both SiGe and another compound that moves electrons even better than silicon. The materials with the most favourable electrical properties are alloys of elements such as indium, gallium and arsenide, collectively known as III-V materials after their location in the periodic table.

The trouble is that these materials do not mix easily with silicon. The spacing between the atoms in their crystal lattices is different from that in silicon, so adding a layer of them to the silicon substrate from which all chips are made causes stress that can have the effect of cracking the chip.

The best-known alternative is graphene, a single-atom-thick (and hence two-dimensional) form of carbon. Graphene conducts electrons and holes very well. The difficulty is making it stop. Researchers have tried to get around this by doping, squashing or squeezing graphene, or applying electric fields to change its electrical properties. Some progress has been made: the University of Manchester reported a working graphene transistor in 2008; a team led by Guanxiong Liu at the University of California built devices using a property of the material called “negative resistance” in 2013. But the main impact of graphene, says Dr Yeric, has been to spur interest in other two-dimensional materials. “Graphene sort of unlocked the box,” he says. “Now we’re looking at things like sheets of molybdenum disulphide, or black phosphorous, or phosphorous-boron compounds.” Crucially, all of those, like silicon, can easily be switched on and off.

If everything goes according to plan, says Dr Yeric, novel transistor designs and new materials might keep things ticking along for another five or six years, by which time the transistors may be 5nm apart. But beyond that “we’re running out of ways to stave off the need for something really radical.”

His favoured candidate for that is something called “spintronics”. Whereas electronics uses the charge of an electron to represent information, spintronics uses “spin”, another intrinsic property of electrons that is related to the concept of rotational energy an object possesses. Usefully, spin comes in two varieties, up and down, which can be used to represent 1 and 0. And the computing industry has some experience with spintronics already: it is used in hard drives, for instance.

Research into spintronic transistors has been going on for more than 15 years, but none has yet made it into production. Appealingly, the voltage needed to drive them is tiny: 10-20 millivolts, hundreds of times lower than for a conventional transistor, which would solve the heat problem at a stroke. But that brings design problems of its own, says Dr Yeric. With such minute voltages, distinguishing a 1 or a 0 from electrical noise becomes tricky.

“It’s relatively easy to build a fancy new transistor in the lab,” says Linley Gwennap, the analyst. “But in order to replace what we’re doing today, you need to be able to put billions on a chip, at a reasonable cost, with high reliability and almost no defects. I hate to say never, but it is very difficult.” That makes it all the more important to pursue other ways of making better computers.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21694346/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

New designs

Taking it to another dimension

How to get more out of existing transistors

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



STRICTLY speaking, Moore’s law is about the ever greater number of electronic components that can be crammed onto a given device. More generally, though, it is used as shorthand for saying that computers are always getting better. As transistors become harder and harder to shrink, computing firms are starting to look at making better use of the transistors they already have. “Managers in the past wouldn’t want to invest a lot in intensive design,” says Greg Yeric at ARM. “I think that’s going to start shifting.”

One way is to make the existing chips work harder. Computer chips have a master clock; every time it ticks, the transistors within switch on or off. The faster the clock, the faster the chip can carry out instructions. Increasing clock rates has been the main way of making chips faster over the past 40 years. But since the middle of the past decade clock rates have barely budged.

Chipmakers have responded by using the extra transistors that came with shrinking to duplicate a chip’s existing circuitry. Such “multi-core” chips are, in effect, several processors in one, the idea being that lashing several slower chips together might give better results than relying on a single speedy one. Most modern desktop chips feature four, eight or even 16 cores.

But, as the industry has discovered, multi-core chips rapidly hit limits. “The consensus was that if we could keep doing that, if we could go to chips with 1,000 cores, everything would be fine,” says Doug Burger, an expert in chip design at Microsoft. But to get the best out of such chips, programmers have to break down tasks into smaller chunks that can be worked on simultaneously. “It turns out that’s really hard,” says Dr Burger. Indeed, for some mathematical tasks it is impossible.

Another approach is to specialise. The most widely used chips, such as Intel’s Core line or those based on ARM’s Cortex design (found in almost every smartphone on the planet) are generalists, which makes them flexible. That comes at a price: they can do a bit of everything but excel at nothing. Tweaking hardware to make it better at dealing with specific mathematical tasks “can get you something like a 100- to 1,000-fold performance improvement over some general solution”, says Bob Colwell, who helped design Intel’s Pentium chips. When Moore’s law was doubling performance every couple of years at no cost anyway, there was little incentive to customise processing this way. But now that transistors are not necessarily getting faster and cheaper all the time, those tradeoffs are changing.

Something special

That was Sean Mitchell’s thinking when, a decade ago, he co-founded a company called Movidius. The firm designs chips for use in computer vision, a booming field with applications in everything from robotics to self-driving cars to augmented reality. Movidius has since raised nearly $90m in funding.

“When we looked at the general-purpose chips out there,” says Dr Mitchell, “we found that they were very inefficient.” So Dr Mitchell and his co-founders set about designing their own specialised microprocessor.

“We’ve got to process high-resolution images, each containing millions of pixels, and coming in at 60, 90 or even 120 frames per second,” he says. By tweaking the hardware to the task at hand—by providing exactly the mix of computational resources necessary for the mathematics of visual processing while leaving out any of the extraneous logic that would allow a general-purpose chip to perform other tasks—Movidius’s Myriad 2 chip can crunch huge amounts of visual information but use less than a watt of power (which is about 20% of the consumption of the chips in smartphones and only about 1% of those in desktop computers). In January the firm announced a deal with Google.

Custom-built chips are already in use

Custom-built chips are already in use in other parts of the computing industry. The best-known examples are the graphics chips used to improve the visuals of video games, designed by firms such as Nvidia and AMD and first marketed to consumers in the mid-1990s. Intel’s newer Pentium chips also come with built-in specialised logic for tasks such as decoding video. But there are downsides. Designing new chips takes years and can cost tens or even hundreds of millions of dollars. Specialised chips are also harder to program than general-purpose ones. And, by their very nature, they improve performance only on certain tasks.

A better target for specialised logic, at least at first, might be data centres, the vast computing warehouses that power the servers running the internet. Because of the sheer volume of information they process, data centres will always be able to find a use for a chip that can do only one thing, but do it very well.

With that in mind, Microsoft, one of the world’s biggest software firms and providers of cloud-computing services, is venturing into the chip-design business. In 2014 it announced a new device called Catapult that uses a special kind of chip called a field-programmable gate array (FPGA), the configuration of which can be reshaped at will. FPGAs offer a useful compromise between specialisation and flexibility, says Dr Burger, who led the team that developed Catapult: “The idea is to have programmable hardware alongside programmable software.” When one task is finished, an FPGA can be reconfigured for another job in less than a second.

The chips are already in use with Bing, Microsoft’s search engine, and the company says this has doubled the number of queries a server can process in a given time. There are plenty of other potential applications, says Peter Lee, Dr Burger’s boss at Microsoft. FPGAs excel when one specific algorithm has to be applied over and over again to torrents of data. One idea is to use Catapult to encrypt data flowing between computers to keep them secure. Another possibility is to put it to work on voice- and image-recognition jobs for cloud-connected smartphones.

The technology is not new, but until now there was little reason to use it. What is new is that “the cloud is growing at an incredible rate,” says Dr Burger. “And now that Moore’s law is slowing down, that makes it much harder to add enough computing capacity to keep up. So these sorts of post-Moore projects start to make economic sense.”

At the IBM research lab on the shores of Lake Zurich, ambitions are set even higher. On a table in one of the labs sits a chip connected by thin hoses to a flask of purple-black liquid. Patrick Ruch, who works in IBM’s Advanced Thermal Packaging group, sees this liquid as the key to a fundamental redesign of data centres. He and his colleagues think they can shrink a modern supercomputer of the sort that occupies a warehouse into a volume about the size of a cardboard box—by making better use of the third dimension.

Leaving aside innovations like finned transistors (see article), modern chips are essentially flat. But a number of companies, including IBM, are now working on stacking chips on top of each other, like flats in a tower block, to allow designers to pack more transistors into a given area. Samsung already sells storage systems made from vertically stacked flash memory. Last year Intel and Micron, a big memory-manufacturer, announced a new memory technology called 3D Xpoint that also uses stacking.

IBM’s researchers are working on something slightly different: chip stacks in which slices of memory are sandwiched between slices of processing logic. That would allow engineers to pack a huge amount of computing into a tiny volume, as well as offering big performance benefits. A traditional computer’s main memory is housed several centimetres from its processor. At silicon speeds, a centimetre is a vast distance. Sending signals across such distances also wastes energy. Moving the memory inside the chip cuts those distances from centimetres to micrometres, allowing it to shuttle data around more quickly.

But there are two big problems with 3D chips. The first is heat. Flat chips are bad enough; in a conventional data centre thousands of fans blowing hot air out of the server racks emit a constant roar. As more layers are added, the volume inside the chip, where the heat is generated, grows faster than the outside area from which it can be removed.

The second problem is getting electricity in. Chips communicate with the outside world via hundreds of metal “pins” on their undersides. Modern chips are so power-hungry that up to 80% of these pins are reserved for transporting electricity, leaving only a few to get data in and out. In 3D those constraints multiply, as the same number of pins must serve a much more complicated chip.

Dr Michel has dubbed the liquid “electronic blood”

IBM hopes to kill two birds with one stone by fitting its 3D chips with miniscule internal plumbing. Microfluidic channels will carry cooling liquid into the heart of the chip, removing heat from its entire volume at once. The firm has already tested the liquid-cooling technology with conventional, flat chips. The microfluidic system could ultimately remove around a kilowatt of heat—about the same as the output of one bar of an electric heater—from a cubic centimetre of volume, says Bruno Michel, the head of the group (see article).

But the liquid will do more than cool the chips: it will deliver energy as well. Inspired by his background in biology, Dr Michel has dubbed the liquid “electronic blood”. If he can pull it off, it will do for computer chips what biological blood does for bodies: provide energy and regulate the temperature at the same time. Dr Michel’s idea is a variant of a flow battery, in which power is provided by two liquids that, meeting on either side of a membrane, produce electricity.

Flow batteries are fairly well understood. The electricity industry has been studying them as a way to store intermittent power from renewable energy sources. Dr Michel’s system is still many years away from commercial deployment, but the principle has been established: when Dr Ruch switches on the flow, the chip to which the hoses are connected flickers into life—without a plug or a wire in sight.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21694350/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Brain scan

Bruno Michel

IBM’s head of advanced micro-integration reckons biology holds the key to more energy-efficient chips

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



IN 2011 a supercomputer called Watson, built by IBM, beat two top-rank human champions at “Jeopardy!”, an American quiz show. This caused great excitement. Unlike chess, a game of abstract reason and logic, “Jeopardy!” is full of puns, double entendres and wordplay; just the sort of thing meant to stump computers. But Bruno Michel, who heads the advanced micro-integration group at IBM’s research lab in Zurich, says it was not a fair fight. “Do you know how much power [Watson] consumes? At the time it was something like 80kW. That’s thousands of times more than the humans it was playing against.”

Dr Michel argues that computers are extremely inefficient machines, both in terms of the electricity they consume and the space they take up. A typical desktop machine or a server in a data centre, he reckons, uses only about 0.0001% of its volume to crunch numbers, and perhaps 1% to shuttle the results around. The rest is mostly empty space. The laws of physics set a limit to how efficiently information can be processed, but modern computers perform at only about 0.00004% of that theoretical maximum, he calculates. So for now a big data centre consumes tens of megawatts of power, almost all of which is transformed, literally, into hot air.

Moore’s law used to keep a lid on electricity usage even as computing capacity raced ahead because smaller transistors needed less power. That is no longer true. “Nowadays the cost of buying a computer or a data centre is less than the cost of running it for a few years,” says Dr Michel. “That’s a paradigm shift.” Data centres already consume 2% of all the electricity produced in the world.

Dr Michel’s benchmark for efficiency is evolution; his original training was in mechanical engineering, but he fell in love with biology after reading a genetics textbook. After earning a PhD in biochemistry and biophysics from the University of Zurich, he joined IBM’s Zurich lab to work with the scanning tunnelling microscope developed there in 1981. It won its inventors a Nobel prize, allowing scientists to see and manipulate individual atoms. That job led to a project on manufacturing technology for flat-screen displays. “I get fascinated by new things, and then I want to start working on them,” he says. “But my advice is: if you want to work in a new field, don’t be driven by creativity—be driven by impact.”

That is how he got involved in his current work on more energy-efficient chips. “In the middle of the past decade there was a panic in the chip industry—soon we won’t be able to keep these things cool,” he notes. At the same time energy policy was becoming more important as climate change moved up the political agenda.

Biology’s secret weapon, he thinks, is the spidery, fractally branching network of blood vessels that supply energy to the brain, allowing most of its volume to be turned over to useful data-processing tasks. As near as neuroscientists can tell, a mammalian brain uses about 70% of its volume for moving information around, 20% for processing it and the remaining 10% to keep everything in the right place and supplied with nutrients. In doing all these things, a human brain consumes about 20 watts of power. That makes it roughly 10,000 times more efficient than the best silicon machines invented by those brains, Dr Michel reckons.

One of his favourite charts compares the density and efficiency of brains with a string of computing technologies going back to the second world war. All of them fall on a straight line, suggesting that to match the energy efficiency of the brain, scientists will have to emulate its density.

He is now working on a project to build an electronic version of the blood that channels energy to biological brains (see article). “It was something like 200 years after the invention of the steam engine before mechanical engineering began to catch up with biology in terms of efficiency,” he says. “It would be good if computing could accomplish the same thing in half the time.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21694348/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Quantum computing

Harnessing weirdness

Quantum computers could offer a giant leap in speed—but only for certain applications

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



THE D-Wave 2X is a black box, 3.3 metres to a side, that looks a bit like a shorter, squatter version of the enigmatic monoliths from the film “2001: A Space Odyssey”. Its insides, too, are intriguing. Most of the space, says Colin Williams, D-Wave’s director of business development, is given over to a liquid-helium refrigeration system designed to cool it to 0.015 Kelvin, only a shade above the lowest temperature that is physically possible. Magnetic shielding protects the chip at the machine’s heart from ripples and fluctuations in the Earth’s magnetic field.

Such high-tech coddling is necessary because the D-Wave 2X is no ordinary machine; it is one of the world’s first commercially available quantum computers. In fact, it is not a full-blown computer in the conventional sense of the word, for it is limited to one particular area of mathematics: finding the lowest value of complicated functions. But that specialism can be rather useful, especially in engineering. D-Wave’s client list so far includes Google, NASA and Lockheed Martin, a big American weapons-maker.

D-Wave’s machine has caused controversy, especially among other quantum-computing researchers. For a while academics in the field even questioned that the firm had built a true quantum machine. Those arguments were settled in 2014, in D-Wave’s favour. But it is still not clear whether the machine is indeed faster than its non-quantum rivals.

D-Wave, based in Canada, is only one of many firms in the quantum-computing business. And whereas its machine is highly specialised, academics have also been trying to build more general ones that could attack any problem. In recent years they have been joined by some of the computing industry’s biggest guns, such as Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft, IBM and Google.

Quantum computing is a fundamentally different way of manipulating information. It could offer a huge speed advantage for some mathematical problems that still stump ordinary machines—and would continue to stump them even if Moore’s law were to carry on indefinitely. It is also often misunderstood and sometimes overhyped. That is partly because the field itself is so new that its theoretical underpinnings are still a work in progress. There are some tasks at which quantum machines will be unambiguously faster than the best non-quantum sort. But for a lot of others the advantage is less clear. “In many cases we don’t know whether a given quantum algorithm will be faster than the best-known classical one,” says Scott Aaronson, a computer scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A working quantum computer would be a boon—but no one is sure how much of one.

The basic unit of classical computing is the bit, the smallest possible chunk of information. A bit can can take just two values: yes or no, on or off, 1 or 0. String enough bits together and you can represent numbers of any size and perform all sorts of mathematical manipulations upon them. But classical machines can deal with just a handful of those bit-strings at a time. And although some of them can now crunch through billions of strings every second, some problems are so complex that even the latest computers cannot keep pace. Finding the prime factors of a big number is one example: the difficulty of the problem increases exponentially as the number in question gets bigger. Each tick of Moore’s law, in other words, enables the factoring of only slightly larger numbers. And finding prime factors forms the mathematical backbone of much of the cryptography that protects data as they scoot around the internet, precisely because it is hard.

Quantum bits, or qubits, behave differently, thanks to two counterintuitive quantum phenomena. The first is “superposition”, a state of inherent uncertainty that allows particles to exist in a mixture of states at the same time. For instance, a quantum particle, rather than having a specific location, merely has a certain chance of appearing in any one place.

In computing terms, this means that a qubit, rather than being a certain 1 or a certain 0, exists as a mixture of both. The second quantum phenomenon, “entanglement”, binds together the destiny of a quantity of different particles, so that what happens to one of them will immediately affect the others. That allows a quantum computer to manipulate all of its qubits at the same time.

The upshot is a machine that can represent—and process—vast amounts of data at once. A 300-qubit machine, for instance, could represent 2300 different strings of 1s and 0s at the same time, a number roughly equivalent to the number of atoms in the visible universe. And because the qubits are entangled, it is possible to manipulate all those numbers simultaneously.

Yet building qubits is hard. Superpositions are delicate things: the slightest puff of heat, or a passing electromagnetic wave, can cause them to collapse (or “decohere”), ruining whatever calculation was being run. That is why D-Wave’s machine—and all other quantum computers—have to be so carefully isolated from outside influences. Still, progress has been quick: in 2012 the record for maintaining a quantum superposition without the use of silicon stood at two seconds; by last year it had risen to six hours.

Another problem is what to build the qubits out of. Academics at the universities of Oxford and Maryland, among others, favour tickling tightly confined ions with laser beams. Hewlett-Packard, building on its expertise in optics, thinks that photons—the fundamental particles of light—hold the key. Microsoft is pursuing a technology that is exotic even by the standards of quantum computing, involving quasi-particles called anyons. Like those “holes” in a semiconductor, anyons are not real particles, but a mathematically useful way of describing phenomena that behave as if they were. Microsoft is currently far behind any of its competitors, but hopes eventually to come up with more elegantly designed and much less error-prone machines than the rest.

Probably the leading approach, used by Google, D-Wave and IBM, is to represent qubits as currents flowing through superconducting wires (which offer no electrical resistance at all). The presence or absence of a current—or alternatively, whether it is circulating clockwise or anti-clockwise—stands for a 1 or a 0. What makes this attractive is that the required circuits are relatively easy to etch into silicon, using manufacturing techniques with which the industry is already familar. And superconducting circuits are becoming more robust, too. Last year a team led by John Martinis, a quantum physicist working at Google, published a paper describing a system of nine superconducting qubits in which four could be examined without collapsing the other five, allowing the researchers to check for, and correct, mistakes. “We’re finally getting to the stage now where we can start to build an entire system,” says Dr Martinis.

Using a quantum computer is hard, too. In order to get the computer to answer the question put to it, its operator must measure the state of its qubits. That causes them to collapse out of their superposed state so that the result of the calculation can be read. And if the measurement is done the wrong way, the computer will spit out just one of its zillions of possible states, and almost certainly the wrong one. “You will have built the world’s most expensive random-number generator,” says Dr Aaronson.

For a quantum algorithm to work, the machine must be manipulated in such a way that the probability of obtaining the right answer is continually reinforced while the chances of getting a wrong answer are suppressed. One of the first useful algorithms for this purpose was published in 1994 by Peter Shor, a mathematician; it is designed to solve the prime-factorising problem explained above. Dr Aaronson points out that alongside error correction of the sort that Dr Martinis has pioneered, Dr Shor’s algorithm was one of the crucial advances which persuaded researchers that quantum computers were more than just a theoretical curiosity. Since then more such algorithms have been discovered. Some are known to be faster than their best-known classical rivals; others have yet to prove their speed advantage.

A cryptographer’s dream

That leaves open the question of what, exactly, a quantum computer would be good for. Matthias Troyer, of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich, has spent the past four years conducting a rigorous search for a “killer app” for quantum computers. One commonly cited, and exciting, application is in codebreaking. Dr Shor’s algorithm would allow a quantum computer to make short work of most modern cryptographic codes. Documents leaked in early 2014 by Edward Snowden, a former American spy, proved what cryptographers had long suspected: that America’s National Security Agency (NSA) was working on quantum computers for exactly that reason. Last August the NSA recommended that the American government begin switching to new codes that are potentially less susceptible to quantum attack. The hope is that this will pre-empt any damage before a working quantum computer is built.

Another potential killer app is artificial intelligence (AI). Firms such as Google, Facebook and Baidu, China’s biggest search engine, are already putting significant sums into computers than can teach themselves to understand human voices, identify objects in images, interpret medical scans and so on. Such AI programs must be trained before they can be deployed. For a face-recognition algorithm, for instance, that means showing it thousands of images. The computer has to learn which of these are faces and which are not, and perhaps which picture shows a specific face and which not, and come up with a rule that efficiently transforms the input of an image into a correct identification.

Ordinary computers can already perform all these tasks, but D-Wave’s machine is meant to be much faster. In 2013 Google and NASA put one of them into their newly established Quantum AI Lab to see whether the machine could provide a speed boost. The practical value of this would be immense, but Dr Troyer says the answer is not yet clear.

In his view, the best use for quantum computers could be in simulating quantum mechanics itself, specifically the complicated dance of electrons that is chemistry. With conventional computers, that is fiendishly difficult. The 2013 Nobel prize for chemistry was awarded for the development of simplified models that can be run on classical computers. But, says Dr Troyer, “for complex molecules, the existing [models] are not good enough.” His team reckoned that a mixed approach, combining classical machines with the quantum sort, would do better. Their first efforts yielded algorithms with running times of hundreds of years. Over the past three years, though, the researchers have refined their algorithms to the point where a simulation could be run in hundreds of seconds instead.

It may not be as exciting as AI or code-breaking, but being able to simulate quantum processes accurately could revolutionise all sorts of industrial chemistry. The potential applications Dr Troyer lists include better catalysts, improved engine design, a better understanding of biological molecules and improving things like the Haber process, which produces the bulk of the world’s fertilisers. All of those are worthwhile goals that no amount of conventional computing power seems likely to achieve.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21694347/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

What comes next

Horses for courses

The end of Moore’s law will make the computer industry a much more complicated place

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN Moore’s law was in its pomp, life was simple. Computers got better in predictable ways and at a predictable rate. As the metronome begins to falter, the computer industry will become a more complicated place. Things like clever design and cunning programming are useful, says Bob Colwell, the Pentium chip designer, “but a collection of one-off ideas can’t make up for the lack of an underlying exponential.”

Progress will become less predictable, narrower and less rapid than the industry has been used to. “As Moore’s law slows down, we are being forced to make tough choices between the three key metrics of power, performance and cost,” says Greg Yeric, the chip designer at ARM. “Not all end uses will be best served by one particular answer.”

And as computers become ever more integrated into everyday life, the definition of progress will change. “Remember: computer firms are not, fundamentally, in it to make ever smaller transistors,” says Marc Snir, of Argonne National Laboratory. “They’re in it to produce useful products, and to make money.”

Moore’s law has moved computers from entire basements to desks to laps and hence to pockets. The industry is hoping that they will now carry on to everything from clothes to smart homes to self-driving cars. Many of those applications demand things other than raw performance. “I think we will see a lot of creativity unleashed over next decade,” says Linley Gwennap, the Silicon Valley analyst. “We’ll see performance improved in different ways, and existing tech used in new ways.”

Mr Gwennap points to the smartphone as an example of the kind of innovation that might serve as a model for the computing industry. Only four years after the iPhone first launched, in 2011, smartphone sales outstripped those of conventional PCs. Smartphones would never have been possible without Moore’s law. But although the small, powerful, frugal chips at their hearts are necessary, they are not sufficient. The appeal of smartphones lies not just in their performance but in their light, thin and rugged design and their modest power consumption. To achieve this, Apple has been heavily involved in the design of the iPhone’s chips.

And they do more than crunch numbers. Besides their microprocessors, smartphones contain tiny versions of other components such as accelerometers, GPS receivers, radios and cameras. That combination of computing power, portability and sensor capacity allows smartphones to interact with the world and with their users in ways that no desktop computer ever could.

Virtual reality (VR) is another example. This year the computer industry will make another attempt at getting this off the ground, after a previous effort in the 1990s. Firms such as Oculus, an American startup bought by Facebook, Sony, which manufactures the PlayStation console, and HTC, a Taiwanese electronics firm, all plan to launch virtual-reality headsets to revolutionise everything from films and video games to architecture and engineering.

A certain amount of computing power is necessary to produce convincing graphics for VR users, but users will settle for far less than photo-realism. The most important thing, say the manufacturers, is to build fast, accurate sensors that can keep track of where a user’s head is pointing, so that the picture shown by the goggles can be updated correctly. If the sensors are inaccurate, the user will feel “VR sickness”, an unpleasant sensation closely related to motion sickness. But good sensors do not require superfast chips.

The biggest market of all will be the “internet of things”

The biggest market of all is expected to be the “internet of things”—in which cheap chips and sensors will be attached to everything, from fridges that order food or washing machines that ask clothes for laundering instructions to paving slabs in cities to monitor traffic or pollution. Gartner, a computing consultancy, reckons that by 2020 the number of connected devices in the world could run to 21 billion.

Never mind the quality, feel the bulk

The processors needed to make the internet of things happen will need to be as cheap as possible, says Dr Yeric. They will have to be highly energy-efficient, and ideally able to dispense with batteries, harvesting energy from their surroundings, perhaps in the form of vibrations or ambient electromagnetic waves. They will need to be able to communicate, both with each other and with the internet at large, using tiny amounts of power and in an extremely crowded radio spectrum. What they will not need is the latest high-tech specification. “I suspect most of the chips that power the internet of things will be built on much older, cheaper production lines,” says Dr Yeric.

Churning out untold numbers of low-cost chips to turn dumb objects into smart ones will be a big, if unglamorous, business. At the same time, though, the vast amount of data thrown off by the internet of things will boost demand for the sort of cutting-edge chips that firms such as Intel specialise in. According to Dr Yeric, “if we really do get sensors everywhere, you could see a single engineering company—say Rolls Royce [a British manufacturer of turbines and jet engines]—having to deal with more data than the whole of YouTube does today.”

Increasingly, though, those chips will sit not in desktops but in the data centres that make up the rapidly growing computing “cloud”. The firms involved keep their financial cards very close to their chests, but making those high-spec processors is Intel’s most profitable business. Goldman Sachs, a big investment bank, reckons that cloud computing grew by 30% last year and will keep on expanding at that rate at least until 2018.

The scramble for that market could upend the industry’s familiar structure. Big companies that crunch a lot of numbers, such as Facebook and Amazon, already design their own data centres, but they buy most of their hardware off the shelf from firms such as Intel and Cisco, which makes routers and networking equipment. Microsoft, a software giant, has started designing chips of its own. Given the rapid growth in the size of the market for cloud computing, other software firms may soon follow.



The twilight of Moore’s law, then, will bring change, disorder and plenty of creative destruction. An industry that used to rely on steady improvements in a handful of devices will splinter. Software firms may begin to dabble in hardware; hardware makers will have to tailor their offerings more closely to their customers’ increasingly diverse needs. But, says Dr Colwell, remember that consumers do not care about Moore’s law per se: “Most of the people who buy computers don’t even know what a transistor does.” They simply want the products they buy to keep getting ever better and more useful. In the past, that meant mostly going for exponential growth in speed. That road is beginning to run out. But there will still be plenty of other ways to make better computers.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21694349/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Business




Health care: Things are looking app

Fracking companies: DUC and cover

Royal Enfield: Approved by mothers-in-law

The Wallenberg group: A Nordic pyramid

BMW at 100: Bavarian rhapsody

Retailing: Shops to showrooms

Schumpeter: Open for business





Articles Sections Next

Health care

Things are looking app

Mobile health apps are becoming more capable and potentially rather useful

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



SAVILE ROW in London is best known for producing some of the world’s finest bespoke suits. But tucked away in a quiet corner of the same street is a firm that gives tailored health advice through a smartphone app. Your.MD uses artificial intelligence to understand natural-language statements such as “I have a headache” and ask pertinent follow-up questions. The app typifies a new approach to mobile health (also known as m-health): it is intelligent, personalised and gets cleverer as it gleans data from its users.

There are now around 165,000 health-related apps which run on one or other of the two main smartphone operating systems, Apple’s iOS and Google’s Android. PwC, a consulting firm, forecasts that by 2017 such apps will have been downloaded 1.7 billion times. However, the app economy is highly fragmented. Many providers are still small, and most apps are rarely, if ever, used.

That said, the successful ones are highly popular. As apps and wearables become increasingly capable and useful, and smartphones continue their march of dominance, m-health has a promising future. BCC Research, which studies technology-based markets, forecasts that global revenues for m-health will reach $21.5 billion in 2018 (see chart 1), with Europe the largest m-health market.



So far, most smartphone health apps fall squarely into the category of “wellness”. Along with portable sensors such as the Fitbit wristband, such apps help people to manage and monitor their exercise, diet and stress levels (see chart 2). Other types of app, such as WebMD and iTriage, repackage medical information already found online, and offer information about symptoms and treatments. Some, such as ZocDoc, let users book consultations with doctors.

However, m-health increasingly promises to do more of the heavy lifting in medicine. First, there is a growing range of apps through which users can talk directly to doctors and therapists. These include Teladoc, DoctorOnDemand, HealthTap and Pingmd. Since late 2014 Walgreens, an American pharmacy chain, has been offering an app called MDLive, which provides 24-hour access to a doctor for $49 a consultation. Patients will soon be able to chat with artificial-intelligence health advisers rather like Your.MD, but through messaging apps. Second, and with potentially more far-reaching effects on the quality of care, there is an emerging breed of apps that monitor and diagnose patients with a variety of ailments, in some cases predicting and thus helping to avert health crises.



Cerora, a firm from Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, has created a headset, with an associated smartphone app, which monitors brain health. The headset measures brainwaves and tracks eye movement; the app uses the smartphone’s internal sensors to test patients’ balance and reaction times. Cerora plans to launch the product this year, subject to review by America’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA); it could help diagnose concussion and other neurodegenerative diseases. Cellscope, of San Francisco, offers a smartphone attachment that lets parents see inside a child’s ear, take photos or video, and send them to a doctor.

A small number of patients, mostly the chronically sick, are disproportionately costly in any health-care system. M-health offers a continuous, long-term means of monitoring them, with the potential to improve the way conditions such as cardiovascular disease, epilepsy, asthma and diabetes are managed.

Patients with diabetes constantly have to make decisions on medication, food and activity, says Hooman Hakami of Medtronic Diabetes, a maker of medical devices; and most will go for months between doctor’s appointments. Medtronic, allied with IBM’s Watson, an artificial-intelligence system, is creating an app to predict, three hours in advance, when a patient will experience high or low blood-sugar levels. It will gather data from Medtronic’s insulin pumps and glucose monitors, worn by the patient, and combine these with information on the user’s diet, and data from activity trackers. Among other providers of diabetes-related m-health services is Diabetes+Me, whose app is already showing that it can improve patient outcomes while reducing costs. Novartis, a Swiss drugs giant, is set to test a glucose-monitoring contact lens, developed by Google.

Apps on prescription

Constant, wireless-linked monitoring may spare patients much suffering, by spotting incipient signs of their condition deteriorating. It may also spare health providers and insurers many expensive hospital admissions. When Britain’s National Health Service tested the cost-effectiveness of remote support for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, it found that an electronic tablet paired with sensors measuring vital signs could result in better care and enormous savings, by enabling early intervention. Some m-health products may prove so effective that doctors begin to provide them on prescription.

So far, big drugmakers have been slow to join the m-health revolution, though there are some exceptions. HemMobile by Pfizer, and Beat Bleeds by Baxter, help patients to manage haemophilia. Bayer, the maker of Clarityn, an antihistamine drug, has a popular pollen-forecasting app. GSK, a drug firm with various asthma treatments, offers sufferers the MyAsthma app, to help them manage their condition.

GSK, along with Propeller Health, is developing custom sensors for GSK’s Ellipta asthma inhaler, so that the pharma company can gather information on how patients use it. GSK wants to know how well patients comply with instructions on when to take it, and to see how compliance relates to the safety, efficacy and economic benefits of the drug.

All pharmaceutical companies are under pressure from regulators and health insurers to do more to demonstrate the value of their medications, and m-health may be a big help with this. Clinical trials of a proposed new drug will be able to use apps to measure disease progression more accurately, and thus demonstrate the efficacy of the treatment. After a drug is approved and perhaps many thousands of patients are taking it, the use of apps to monitor their condition will constitute a huge trial of the product’s long-term benefits. However, it could spell disaster for drug firms if such post-approval testing shows that their medicines do not in practice deliver the expected benefits, or shows up undesirable side-effects.

As m-health apps take on more serious work, they will require more serious regulation. Inaccuracy is fairly harmless in a pedometer but less so in a heart-rate monitor. In August a popular product, Instant Blood Pressure, was removed from the Apple app store after serious concerns were raised over its accuracy. In 2011 a developer who claimed his AcneApp could treat pimples with light from an iPhone screen was fined.



The longevity gap: Does big health care spending pay off

Last year the FDA finished drawing up its regulatory regime for m-health, indicating that it will calibrate its approach, paying little attention to low-risk apps, such as ones that just promote a healthy lifestyle; and scrutinising those in areas where any misinformation could be dangerous. This sensible approach may be followed by regulators in other countries.

But other regulatory questions are harder to answer. As health apps become more popular, concerns about how patients’ data are stored, used and shared will become more pointed. A new study in the Journal of the American Medical Association finds that many health apps may be sharing patients’ health data without their knowledge. Four-fifths of 211 diabetes apps it examined did not have privacy policies.

America’s rules on the storage and transmission of personal-health data have not been changed since the advent of the iPhone. So doctors and hospitals may be reluctant to embrace health apps until the rules are updated to make it clear they can do so without breaching the stringent standards on data security. And conscientious providers and prescribers of m-health apps risk being tarred by association with any data-misusing rogues that emerge.

The fragmented, nascent m-health market seems likely to consolidate in time, with its most promising startups perhaps being bought by, or entering alliances with, trusted health brands. That would help it to realise its substantial potential to help patients, doctors, health insurers and researchers alike.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21694523-mobile-health-apps-are-becoming-more-capable-and-potentially-rather-useful-things-are-looking/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Fracking companies

DUC and cover

Rising oil prices will not quickly rescue the beleaguered shale industry

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



NO ONE can deny that America’s shale-oil industry is having a hard time. In recent weeks it has suffered the indictment and subsequent death in a car crash of one of its pioneers, Aubrey McClendon; a shellacking from Hillary Clinton, who could become America’s next president; and a warning from Ali al-Naimi, Saudi Arabia’s oil minister, to cut costs, borrow money or face liquidation.

The data illustrate the extent of its woes. The American government’s Energy Information Administration (EIA) says oil production in December, of 9.3m barrels a day (m b/d), was lower than a year earlier for the first time since early 2011 (see chart 1), weighed down by Texas and North Dakota, the heartlands of hydraulic fracturing (fracking). The EIA said on March 8th that it expects American crude production to fall to 8m b/d before it bottoms out in the latter part of next year.



Against that bleak backdrop, the mere hint this week that American oil prices were rebounding towards $40 a barrel, up from a low of less than $30 a barrel a month ago, must have felt like a get-out-of-jail-free card. With a chutzpah typical of the industry, some shale executives see $40 oil as the threshold above which they can resume drilling and make money again—even if America is still awash with record amounts of crude in storage. If they are right about that, it could change the entire dynamics of the oil market, quickly smoothing any upward or downward spike in prices. But it is not at all clear that they are.

In theory, it is not hard for the frackers to increase production rapidly, once it becomes economical. Rig and drilling costs have fallen so fast that some wells could make money with prices around $40-45 a barrel, according to Rystad Energy, a consulting firm (see chart 2). Firms have laid off many workers, but with well-paid jobs hard to find elsewhere, it could be relatively easy to attract them back.



In preparation for higher oil prices, producers from the Bakken field in North Dakota to the Permian and Eagle Ford in Texas have reported that they have hundreds of “drilled but uncompleted” ( DUC) wells. DUCs should be anathema to a self-respecting shaleman; they sink cash into the ground in the form of wells, but defer the all-important fracking that breaks open the shale rock and produces the oil. They could be a quick way to resume production, however. In late February Continental Resources and Whiting Petroleum, two big operators in the Bakken, said that above $40 a barrel they may begin fracking their rising inventory of DUCs.

For most of the industry, however, the problem is not finding oil but finding cash. “No one is sitting on any excess capital,” says Ron Hulme of Parallel Resource Partners, an energy-focused private-equity fund. For years the industry borrowed heavily to finance its expansion, because it was failing to generate enough cash to cover investment in new wells. The supply of credit, whether from banks or the high-yield debt markets, has either dried up or is much more expensive than it was.

Capital expenditure has fallen as a result, but not by enough to balance the books. In the fourth quarter of last year, American and Canadian oil firms spent $20 billion, while generating only $13 billion in cashflow, according to Bloomberg, an information provider.

Only the strongest firms can make up the shortfall by raising capital via the equity markets. (Even they may find this harder, as investors realise that shale companies are less profitable than they once seemed.) The weaker firms are unwilling to sell assets to raise cash because the proceeds would go directly to their creditors. “You’d have to prise those assets from their dying hands,” says Mr Hulme. He notes that even firms that are technically insolvent may have enough liquidity to keep them from such potential fire sales.



INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability

Not all of them, though. On March 8th Goodrich Petroleum, a shale oil-and-gas company, said it would postpone paying interest on its debt, as it puts pressure on creditors to exchange debt for equity in order to avoid a default. Three other oil firms, Chaparral Energy, Energy XXI and SandRidge Energy, have also recently missed debt payments. Brian Gibbons of CreditSights, a debt-research firm, says 26 oil-related bond issuers either filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy or had distressed-debt exchanges last year. He expects the number to rise to 73 by the end of 2017. Those firms still saddled with revolving bank loans are also bracing for the next twice-yearly reassessment of borrowing limits, due next month. These depend on valuations of shale firms’ reserves, and could lead to further strains on cashflow.

To provide a sufficient margin of comfort, prices may have to rally a lot higher than $40 a barrel to lure capital back in. Bobby Tudor of Tudor, Pickering, Holt, an energy-focused investment bank, believes that at $40 a barrel production will continue to decline, at $50 it would flatten out, and only at $60 would it increase. “Drilling wells at today’s commodity prices is still destructive of capital,” he argues. One further wrinkle: as oil prices increase, so can costs. Those, then, who hope that nimble shale producers will be able to move the global oil price up and down just by turning the taps on and off may be disappointed. Their financial backers will be the ones really calling the shots.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21694522-rising-oil-prices-will-not-quickly-rescue-beleaguered-shale-industry-duc-and-cover/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Royal Enfield

Approved by mothers-in-law

A popular motorbike-maker shows that winning is not always about being best

Mar 12th 2016 | MUMBAI | From the print edition

Gul Panag: biker chic

ITS motorbikes may not be the best that India produces, in terms of performance or reliability, and they are certainly not the cheapest, but no other brand comes close to matching Royal Enfield’s cult following. Gul Panag, a Bollywood star-turned-politician, is often seen, as pictured, riding her Enfield. When she got married in 2011, her groom swept her off to their honeymoon in a Royal Enfield with sidecar.

Indeed, it is said that owning one of the bikes can improve a young Indian man’s marriage prospects. They tend to be driven by sensible types, in contrast with those who get their kicks by showing off on flashy sports bikes, such as the KTM Duke 390. Owners of Enfields lavish care and attention on them, diligently polishing each spoke on their wheels. Prospective mothers-in-law find this reassuring.

Royal Enfield claims to be the world’s oldest motorbike-maker in continuous production. Its history goes back to colonial times, when it was the Indian offshoot of a British firm. Indian-owned since the 1950s, it has long outlived its parent.

In its early days of independence it was kept going with orders from the Indian army and police, which used it to patrol rough border terrain. Now consumers drive sales: in February more than 49,000 Enfields were sold, up by 63% on a year earlier. That month there was a frisson of excitement in India’s business press when the market capitalisation of the manufacturer’s parent company, Eicher Motors, briefly overtook that of Harley-Davidson, an equally admired American bike brand, having already surpassed it by sales volume. In Delhi, enthusiasts from across the world flock to rent Enfields for rides through the Himalayas. Other bikes may be speedier on the highways and sip less fuel, but only an Enfield can survive such rugged terrain, “not your Harley-Davidsons,” sniffs one fan.

Yet as recently as 2000 the parent company was planning to close Royal Enfield down. Frequent breakdowns, oil leaks, engine seizures, electrical failures and poor service had dented the bikes’ reputation and burned much of the company’s cash. Sales were down to just 2,000 a month. A third-generation member of the family that controls the group, Siddhartha Lal—who had ridden to his own wedding on an Enfield instead of the traditional horse—persuaded his father to give him a chance to revive the brand.

Over the years Mr Lal made a number of changes to the bike without compromising on what had made it so popular. The gold piping on their petrol tanks is still painted by hand. But mechanical carburettors have been replaced with electronic fuel-injection on most models, to improve mileage and prevent breakdowns, especially at high altitudes. The cast-iron engine was replaced by an aluminium one to reduce oil leaks. When this affected the sound of the bike’s legendary “thump”, foreign consultants were called in to fix things. The thump is one of the bikes’ biggest selling-points: some buyers pay workshops to tinker with their new bikes to make it even louder.

Investment in increasing production capacity, in the firm’s southern home city of Chennai, has helped it meet surging demand, though there is a waiting-list of up to four months on some models. When their bike finally arrives, buyers sometimes hand out sweets in their workplace, as if celebrating the arrival of their first-born. K. Krishnamani, a forty-something manager at a logistics firm in Mumbai, now on his second Enfield, describes how riding his bike makes him feel as royal as the maker’s name. “On the road, anybody will stop and give way to you. That is the liberty you have when you ride Enfield.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21694520-popular-motorbike-maker-shows-winning-not-always-about-being-best-approved/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Wallenberg group

A Nordic pyramid

The lessons from 100 years of a family’s industrial empire

Mar 12th 2016 | STOCKHOLM | From the print edition

Wallenbergs: the fifth generation

SWEDEN is a progressive place. Women participate fully in the workforce. Companies are transparent, generally uncorrupt and often globally minded. Enthusiasm for technology helps Stockholm flourish as a lively startup centre for gaming, music and fintech firms. Business leaders earnestly talk of the benefits of going green, caring for workers and being ethical. In politics, Sweden is egalitarian, redistributing wealth through high taxes. So it is a puzzle that Swedish capitalism appears so strikingly unequal, with a small number of individuals owning and running large chunks of the economy.

Credit Suisse, in its annual report on global wealth in October, pointed to findings that the richest 1% of Swedish households control 24% of the population’s total wealth, making it only a bit less unequal than India (25.7%). In contrast, Spain’s 1% control 16.5% of the wealth, and Japan’s only 4.3%. As in many countries, family-controlled businesses are the norm in Sweden. But as Randall Morck of the University of Alberta in Canada has noted, Sweden is an extreme case among rich countries in that one particular family, the Wallenbergs, holds such sway in business.

The foundations were laid for the dynasty’s fortunes 160 years ago when André Oscar Wallenberg, the globe-trotting son of a Lutheran bishop, returned from America with a book on how to set up a bank, and founded Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken (SEB). The bank flourished, and began buying chunks of distressed industrial firms, leading the family to set up a holding company, Investor, 100 years ago.

At the height of the Wallenbergs’ pre-eminence, in the 1970s, their various firms together employed 40% of Sweden’s industrial workforce and represented 40% of the total worth of the Stockholm stockmarket. Like most modern manufacturers, the industrial firms in their portfolio, including ABB and Atlas Copco (engineering), AstraZeneca (drugs) and Electrolux (appliances), are no longer huge employers. But Investor, plus SEB and the other listed firms in Investor’s portfolio, still account for about a third of the stockmarket’s value. And they generally do better than the rest: in the past decade, Investor’s shares have doubled, whereas the OMX Stockholm 30 Index rose by just 40%.

Swedes often talk about the collection of companies as Wallenbergsfaren, “the Wallenberg sphere”, and to its smaller local rivals as “systems”. One of the largest systems is Industrivarden, whose portfolio includes Handelsbanken and the maker of Volvo Trucks. It has passed through several hands down the years, including those of Ingvar Kamprad, the founder of the IKEA furniture stores; its leading investor nowadays is Fredrik Lundberg, the son of a construction magnate. The Wallenbergs and Industrivarden both have large stakes in Ericsson, a maker of telecoms equipment.

Many Wallenberg firms have roots in the 19th century, before Investor was founded. But they have generally flourished under the active ownership and close managerial oversight of the family. The sphere is now overseen by a genial triad of middle-aged men, two brothers and a cousin: Jacob, Peter and Marcus Wallenberg (pictured, next page). A transition to a sixth generation of the family is looming, with the next set of leaders to be drawn from a pool of around 30 relatives in their 30s or younger. A hitherto male-dominated empire is then likely to have some Wallenberg women right at the top. Already, Caroline Ankarcrona, younger sister to Marcus Wallenberg and in her late 40s, has been running the main family foundation, KAW, for four years.

“Sphere” is one way of describing the Wallenberg holdings. A more pointed term (literally as well as figuratively) is the one Mr Morck uses: a pyramid. The Wallenbergs are thought to have combined personal wealth of just $1 billion or so, but they control, or have strong influence over, businesses worth hundreds of times as much.

They do so through a number of foundations. KAW, the largest, is named after two ancestors who provided the largest endowment, 99 years ago. KAW has 50.1% of voting rights in Investor, chaired by Jacob Wallenberg. It in turn holds stakes—and often outsized voting rights—in their main, listed firms, at which family members often take leadership roles. (Through a division called Patricia Industries, Investor holds majority stakes in financial, telecoms and other firms, and is also a founder-investor in a private-equity fund, EQT.)

Fear of tunnelling

These successive layers let the Wallenbergs multiply their clout. Investor has beaten the Stockholm market handsomely, but its listed businesses often trade at a discount to their global peers, points out Thomas Zellweger, who directs a centre studying business families in St Gallen, Switzerland. Outside investors may be discounting the shares out of fear of “tunnelling”, in which a controlling family uses one firm to prop up another—though Mr Morck notes that there is scant evidence of this.

Shareholders may also fear a controlling family pursuing its private obsessions, while neglecting the business: an early Wallenberg, for instance, campaigned assiduously for a single global currency, based on gold and the French franc. They may also worry that the next generation of Wallenberg bosses are chosen for internal family reasons rather than on merit. The Wallenbergs have managed their successions well over the years, but there is no guarantee this will always be so.

The Wallenberg empire might in theory be threatened if, as in other countries, there were moves towards curbing the use of the dual-class shares that let the family exercise such sway over its firms. In Ericsson, for example, Investor has just 5.3% of total stock, but controls 21.5% of votes. In Electrolux, Investor has 15.5% of the stock, but 30% of voting rights. Family firms often use such dual shares (The Economist Group, largely owned by European business families, uses them too), but prevalence does not mean popularity. However, the family has long enjoyed good political connections: for all its support for free trade and open markets abroad, until the 1990s it had decades of help from protectionist policies that kept foreign predators at bay.

That the KAW and other foundations get the Wallenbergs’ share of profits helps shield them from Sweden’s top income-tax rate, of 62%. The foundations’ beneficence also helps shield them from criticism: the KAW, for instance, makes $250m of grants a year, notably to fund basic research and education.

Nordic, not Anglo-Saxon

Discuss their set-up with the Wallenbergs and they say “Anglo-Saxons”, schooled in British and American ideas that companies are best owned by masses of small investors (or pension funds), are wilfully blind to the benefits of family-dominated firms. The family argues that ownership models need not be “black and white”, that theirs has proved it can deliver a “nice track record” for more than a century-and-a-half. Well-run family firms can ensure modern virtues—transparency, professional management, clear communication, agility—as easily as those Anglo-Saxons.

Tour the headquarters of Ericsson, and its CEO, Hans Vestberg, offers a similar argument: a stolid company, founded in 1876 (and part-owned by the Wallenbergs since 1950), can be nimble, even ruthless. Ericsson frittered away the strong position it once had as a maker of mobile handsets. But Mr Vestberg talks optimistically of how it will prosper from the coming launch of fifth-generation (5G) wireless telecoms and the “internet of things”. Ericsson, with a $5 billion annual research-and-development budget, files 4,000 patents a year, he says. In less than two years it has hired 30,000 staff, but also let go 28,000, to make possible a shift from a company that sells products to one more focused on services.

Gunnar Wetterberg, author of a book on the Wallenberg family, argues that having most of its wealth locked up in the foundations best explains its long-term success: family feuds are discouraged when no relative can dream of running off to Bahamas with all the loot. “There are no family fights,” says one Wallenberg. “No one understands how it works, but it works well.”

Other observers prefer explanations that focus on the personality and skills of a mostly self-effacing, hard-working and polyglot clan. Their spells working in the companies make them better owners. Carina Beckerman, who has just written a book on culture and leadership in Wallenberg companies, lauds two qualities that help encourage success. One is doggedness: the Wallenbergs found few firms, but they stick with existing ones, seek new markets and try ways to make them flourish. She notes that Atlas Copco had to be rescued from near-bankruptcy three times in its first 27 years, but now flourishes.

The second quality, says Ms Beckerman, is a near-obsession with getting the right managers in place: it is often the top item on the agenda whenever the Wallenberg leaders gather. They typically favour loyal insiders, not show-offs who promise dramatic change.

Not everything the family touches turns to gold. Efforts to go digital, just over a decade ago, by investing in a pair of online firms, Spray Networks and Bredbandsbolaget, had disappointing outcomes. Scania, a lorry-maker that has flourished since being bought by Volkswagen in 2000, was sold too cheaply, says Ms Beckerman.

But the sphere’s more recent efforts to expand its medical interests have been more successful—witness its investments in Sobi, which specialises in treatments for haemophilia and other rare diseases, and in Mölnlycke Health Care, which makes products for use in surgery and treating wounds. Even if its dominance of the Swedish business scene has diminished in recent decades, the Wallenberg sphere looks set to go on prospering in the hands of its sixth generation.

That makes them mere parvenus compared with the Lovenskiold family across the border in Norway: now led by its 13th generation, it claims a 360-year history and runs successful timber and furniture firms. But there may be a shared recipe for such longevity. “The majority of the really successful, long-lasting families are, like the Wallenbergs, convivial, modest, see the hard work needed and do it quietly,” says a close observer. If they were a bunch of work-shy show-offs, Swedes would surely have noticed the inequality by now.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21694555-lessons-100-years-familys-industrial-empire-nordic-pyramid/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

BMW at 100

Bavarian rhapsody

Maintaining its recent run of growth will be the carmaker’s main challenge

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



THE ride, handling and all-round appeal of BMW’s 3 Series, a sporty saloon car, makes it a benchmark for other vehicles of its type. The German firm, which celebrated its centenary on March 7th, has also become a benchmark for success in the motor industry. The world’s biggest maker of premium-priced cars is well run, has grown steadily and made profits consistently for years. But as the beer flowed and the oompah bands parped at the huge party thrown at its headquarters in Munich, BMW’s bosses may have been wondering how to stay ahead of the pack.

BMW began life in 1916 assembling aircraft engines. Restrictions on Germany’s planemaking after the first world war encouraged it to diversify, first into motorbikes, and then in 1928 into making its first car. In 1933 it launched the 303, ancestor to today’s 3 Series, and the first BMW to feature the distinctive double kidney-shaped front grille. Though stylish and technically advanced, BMW’s pricey models at first sold in small quantities. At the end of the 1950s sales of motorbikes, on which the company still relied, faltered as cars from mass-market firms hit the roads. Only an investment by the Quandt family, which controls BMW to this day, saved it from a humiliating takeover by Daimler.

Rather than joining the mass market, BMW, along with its German counterparts, Daimler’s Mercedes marque and VW’s Audi, all but cornered the worldwide market in expensive, high-performance saloons. By 1990 global sales of the “Ultimate Driving Machine”, as the company’s advertising slogan has it, hit half a million cars a year. However, in 1994 BMW took a wrong turn. Its purchase of Rover Group, an ailing British maker of both premium and mass-market cars, was a disaster. In 2000, having failed to turn Rover around, it decided to sell most of the group.



Since then it has been upwards pretty much all the way, with sales now at more than 2m cars a year. BMW has confounded its rivals by maintaining an image of luxury and exclusivity even as it has introduced an ever-broader range of entry-level cars at prices comparable with the top of the mass-market firms’ ranges.

For example, a clever reinvention of the Mini brand, retained from Rover, gives it a vehicle for drivers without the means to buy a BMW 1 Series, which in turn fits the budgets of those who cannot afford a 3 Series. BMW (unlike Volkswagen) was also early in spotting the craze for SUVs, and now makes them in all sorts of shapes and sizes. It even offers a people-carrier, the 2 Series Active Tourer.

Having filled every imaginable niche, however, its growth seems to be slowing as it struggles to imagine new ones. Mercedes may overtake BMW by unit sales this year, as a slick restyling of its models wins over buyers seeking an alternative to BMW’s more staid designs. Jaguar Land Rover, Volvo and other premium carmakers are also competing harder than they used to. Mass-market brands such as Ford and Citroën are pouring resources into “premiumising” some of their models, in a drive for bigger margins. And the slowdown in China, hitherto a hugely profitable market, has hurt BMW disproportionately hard.

Even so, BMW’s bosses were entitled to clunk their steins together and slap each other heartily on the back at this week’s celebrations. The firm has got where it is mainly through an unswerving commitment to producing excellent cars. Down the years a few of its model launches—such as a recent GT version of its 5 Series executive saloon—have underwhelmed somewhat. But so far at least, there have been no stinkers. Not bad for a centenarian.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21694353-premium-carmakers-BMW-100-years/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Retailing

Shops to showrooms

Why some firms are opening shops with no stock

Mar 12th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



THE Bonobos shop on lower Fifth Avenue, in Manhattan, sits in a row of familiar fashion brands, including J.Crew, Zara and Gap. As at those stores, shoppers at Bonobos can survey racks of clothes, try on this shirt and those trousers, then decide which items to purchase. Unlike in those stores, shoppers at Bonobos may not buy any clothes to take home. When Bonobos first tried this idea, in 2011, it seemed like a lark. The company now has 20 such shops, from Texas to California, and plans to open at least seven more this year.

Bricks-and-mortar stores are in the throes of an identity crisis. The growing threat from online shopping has spurred some physical retailers to do more than just sell goods. Lululemon lures shoppers with both yoga clothes and yoga classes; Louis Vuitton displays fine art beside its frocks. Among the most interesting models to emerge, however, are chains such as Bonobos, whose outlets have no stock to sell.

The idea is to divorce the purchase of a product from its distribution. Until recently, this business model was largely restricted to sellers of big, non-portable things like furniture: people like to examine sofas before they buy them, but they do not fit neatly into shopping bags. Now, clothing retailers are seeing the downsides of conventional shops, too.

If a retailer stores and sells goods in the same place, it must lease space, often in an expensive central location, for the store room as well as the shop floor. Staff may be needed to unpack deliveries overnight, which raises costs further. Employees spend much of the day restocking shelves, which means less attention paid to customers. Companies can never predict perfectly which items will sell in which shops. Inevitably some clothes linger unsold for too long, and must be marked down, which squeezes margins.

Online-only shops have less of a problem with this sort of thing, but there are still many consumers who like to check the fit and the feel of a garment before buying. So Paul Evans and Jack Erwin, two young shoe companies, have showrooms in New York where shoppers can inspect loafers and brogues, then order them online. Warby Parker does the same for glasses.

The most prominent American example is Bonobos, which began as an online-only men’s retailer before realising customers wanted shops, too. Its outlets house many styles and many sizes, but not every style in every size. Salesmen have the sole job of helping each shopper find clothes he likes, identify the proper fit and order the clothes online. “We do a better job of selling clothes because we don’t stock the clothes,” boasts Andy Dunn, the firm’s founder. Bonobos need not guess which trousers will sell at which store. All its stock is at one central warehouse.

In Asia, Zalora offers a variation on this theme. The four-year-old online retailer displays its clothes in pop-up showrooms in Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Indonesia and the Philippines. Such temporary installations, explains Tito Costa, Zalora’s marketing chief, are “a way to build confidence either in a new way of shopping or in a young brand.” Shoppers can try on Zalora’s clothes, chat with its stylists and order items online, either from computer stations or by scanning a QR code with their phones, using Zalora’s app.

It is no coincidence that the companies that are testing out such showrooms began online. Big, established retailers are unlikely to convert stores to showrooms, at least in the foreseeable future. They have trained millions of customers to expect immediate gratification—buy a Zara dress in the afternoon, for example, and go dancing in it that same evening. Delivering to individuals rather than shipping in bulk to stores would also require established retailers to upend their distribution networks, says Neil Saunders of Conlumino, a consulting firm. But for many younger retailers, selling online and in showrooms may be the future, not least because showrooms are cheaper to run than conventional shops. That means they can open more of them, more quickly.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21694545-why-some-firms-are-opening-shops-no-stock-shops-showrooms/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Schumpeter

Open for business

In difficult times Mexico and its firms retain their faith in globalisation

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



THESE are dark days for globalisation. In America, presidential candidates are talking about building walls and unpicking trade deals. Brazil, another giant of the Americas, seems as protectionist as ever. Britain is preparing to hold a referendum on withdrawing from the European Union. The EU as a whole is bickering over what to do about a swelling tide of refugees.

Yet there is at least some light in the darkness. Mexico, for instance, continues to carry a torch for globalisation. President Enrique Peña Nieto’s administration boasts about the country’s 44 trade deals, more than any other country, and its 11 reform initiatives. The World Bank calculates that Mexico is one of the most open large economies in the world: exports plus imports are equivalent to 66% of GDP, compared with 26% for Brazil and 42% for China. The Boston Consulting Group finds in a survey that its people take a positive view of the future: 77% of Mexicans say they are optimistic, and only 6% that they are very pessimistic. Mexicans see the likes of Donald Trump as being cut from the same cloth as the old-fashioned Latin American strongmen who ruined the region through protectionism and gesture politics.

When the North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA) was created in 1994 it was as controversial in Mexico as it was in the United States: a Yanqui conspiracy, according to those on the left, designed to turn their country into a colony of El Norte. Today the Mexican elite speaks with one voice on the subject. Mexico is now one of the world’s top 15 manufacturing economies and one of its top five car producers. The output of the ten largest car plants rose from 1.1m vehicles in 1994 to 2.9m in 2012. Mexican consumers now have access to a huge range of multinational brands: marketers refer to young, middle-class Mexicans as the “children of NAFTA”, because their taste is so cosmopolitan.

Free trade has helped to produce a corps of elite Mexican companies that are capable of going head-to-head with the best in the world. Bimbo is the world’s largest baker, thanks in part to its ambitious expansion into America with the purchase of Sara Lee’s bakery business. Gruma is the world’s biggest maker of tortillas, with more than 100 plants in 20 countries. Free trade has been a double blessing for such companies. First, it has encouraged those that have reached the limit of the Mexican market to go global. They have the huge advantages of speaking one of the world’s most popular languages, and sharing a 1,900-mile (3,100km) border with America. Second, now that they are more vulnerable to competition and takeovers, they have been forced to shake off a long-standing tendency for successful Mexican companies to become flabby. When AB InBev, a global brewer, bought Grupo Modelo, a Mexican beer firm, in 2013, it quickly eliminated around $1 billion in annual costs.

Schumpeter noted in a previous column on Mexico that it is unusual in having both a global upper class (thanks to American education) and a global peasantry (thanks to emigration to America). Free trade is now rapidly globalising the middle class, which by some estimates makes up 30-40% of the population. Scot Rank, the boss of the Lala Group, a dairy firm, points out that better-off Mexicans are becoming more like Americans in their tastes. They want “lite” products that will help them fight the flab (obesity is a big problem in a country addicted to a “vitamin T” diet of tacos and tortillas) and “drinkables”, nutrition that can be consumed on the go (partly in response to the rise of two-income families).

Mexico is now freeing up two hitherto protected areas, telecoms and energy. Telmex has been forced to surrender its telecoms monopoly, and is now in a vigorous battle with the Yanqui AT&T, in which average tariffs have fallen by half in the past year. Pemex, the state oil monolith, is being forced to auction off some fields to foreign bidders, and to form joint ventures with foreign firms. A visit to Pemex’s headquarters illustrates just how radical the latter policy is. A collection of giant slabs surrounded by thick iron railings, protected by a phalanx of armed guards, it looks more like an arm of government than a commercial organisation. Which is exactly what it is: Pemex provides a third of government revenues and thousands of coveted jobs—and until recently its monopoly status was guaranteed in the constitution. Last month the government underlined its seriousness by sacking the company’s boss, Emilio Lozoya, despite his close relationship with the president. The new boss, José Antonio González, argues that the steep fall in the oil price is also a “golden opportunity”: Pemex now has no choice but to reform if it is to thrive in the face of greater competition.

The other Mexico that still needs fixing

Even if the government can successfully re-engineer Pemex, it still has an enormous amount to do. Mexico is one of the world’s most unequal societies. Perhaps half of Mexicans are still poor and parochial, beset by crime and corruption, and poorly served by schools and banks. The economy is hobbled by a long tail of inefficient firms: the McKinsey Global Institute, a think-tank, points out that, though the productivity of Mexico’s globalised companies has risen by 5.8% a year since 1999, the productivity of small, traditional firms has fallen by 6.5% a year. Poorer regions, especially in the south, are mired in the past, too far from the American border to benefit from the manufacturing boom. These problems have held back the economy’s growth rate to a disappointing 2-3% over the past 30 years. They have also supplied the drugs cartels (which benefit from globalisation in their own, malign way) with an endless supply of young recruits.

Mr Peña Nieto’s administration has done something to extend the benefits of globalisation to this other Mexico by deregulating telecoms and taking on the teachers’ unions. However, this is just the start of what is needed. Successful Mexicans are right to mock Mr Trump’s talk of building walls. But they need to focus their energies on some construction projects of their own: building ladders of opportunity for the poor, and bridges of commerce between the two Mexicos.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business/21694488-difficult-times-mexico-and-its-firms-retain-their-faith-globalisation-open-business/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Finance and economics




Chinese property: For whom the bubble blows

Buttonwood: High tech meets low finance

America’s economy: On the one hand

Commodities: Steel chrysanthemums

Greek banks: On the front line

Financing divorce: Till debt us do part

Discount brokerages: Free trade

Free exchange: A proper reckoning





Articles Sections Next

Chinese property

For whom the bubble blows

House prices are soaring in big cities, but oversupply plagues much of the country

Mar 12th 2016 | SHANGHAI | From the print edition



SHANGHAI, China’s financial centre, does not make it easy on outsiders wishing to buy homes. Non-residents who are single are banned from buying property. The married are welcome but only so long as they have paid local taxes for two years and make nearly a third of the purchase in cash. Shenyang, China’s biggest northern city, is far more welcoming. Anyone can buy a home there. All to little effect: housing prices in Shanghai, five times more expensive than those in Shenyang, have risen by 20% over the past year; those in the northern city have edged down.

This bifurcation is a worry for the government, which wants to spur growth without inflating bubbles. A divergence in housing prices between wealthy cities and the hinterland is a familiar problem in other countries—just look at London and Lincolnshire, say, or New York and Nebraska. But the divisions are starker in China. In its most prosperous cities, already giddy prices continue to shoot up, while unsold flats pile up in markets where valuations were low to begin with. Moreover, construction has long been one of the economy’s main engines, accounting for as much as a quarter of GDP growth until recently. This makes it especially important that the government get the balance right. Doing so is proving hard.

Over the past half-year, the government has unveiled a series of measures to support the housing market that specifically exclude China’s five hottest markets (Beijing, Guangzhou, Sanya, Shanghai and Shenzhen). People buying homes need only make a 20% down-payment to obtain a mortgage, except in the five conurbations, where they must put down 30%. By the same token, in most of the country transaction taxes have been cut by as much as two-thirds for people buying second homes; in the five outliers they have been left unchanged. In Shenzhen, a southern tech hub that is the frothiest market, with prices up by 53% in the past year alone, local officials have vowed to crack down on speculators and expand the supply of affordable housing.

The results of this two-tier system have been meagre so far. The frenzy in the biggest cities stems from the central bank’s steady loosening of monetary policy over the past 18 months. Although warranted from an economic perspective, it was inevitable that low interest rates would drive asset prices higher. Initially, much of the credit pumped out by banks ended up in the stockmarket, but following its crash last summer, property beckoned as one of the few decent investment options in China (capital controls, which have been further tightened recently, make it hard for Chinese savers to invest their money abroad).

For speculators looking at property, the excess supply in smaller cities was all too evident, so they turned instead to the megalopolises. Du Jinsong of Credit Suisse describes it as a form of groupthink. “Everybody—investors, developers, policymakers and bankers—thinks that first-tier cities are safe,” he says.

Even as the government tries to restrain the excesses, however, it does not want to snuff out the rally in the big cities altogether, for they tend to influence sentiment elsewhere. There are signs that this is beginning to happen. Housing prices started rising month on month in the biggest cities a year ago. In midsized cities (in China, those with populations of 5m-10m), prices have been rising for the past four months. In smaller cities (mere hamlets of 1m-5m), gains have been evident only for the past two months (see chart).



If this upturn lasts, some investors reckon it will spur construction. Commodities used to build apartment blocks, such as iron (girders) and copper (wires), have recovered slightly from their recent swoon, partly in the hope that China’s property market is also stirring (see article). Indeed, a series of mini-cycles in the Chinese housing sector over the past decade followed this sort of pattern: rising housing sales led to new building starts, which in turn pushed commodity prices higher.

Figures from the China Index Academy, a data provider, show that the stock of unsold homes has decreased recently, from nearly 30 months’ worth of sales early last year to 15 now. “A housing market with rising volume and prices clearly does not support the view that, on a macro level, China’s housing market is oversupplied,” notes Liang Hong of China International Capital Corp, an investment bank.

But there is a further vast increment of supply on the verge of coming to market, because developers slowed the pace of construction in recent years and in some cases halted it altogether. There were 4.7 trillion square metres of housing under construction but not yet available for sale at the end of last year, up by 25% from the end of 2011; 452 billion square metres of housing were on sale, nearly three times as much as at the end of 2011. Some provinces and cities are drafting plans to convert unsold homes into subsidised housing for poorer residents. Xi Jinping, China’s president, has said that reducing property inventory is a “battle of annihilation” that must be won to revitalise the economy. Revived demand for new construction, in short, is a long way off.

The exception is sure to be China’s biggest cities, where there clearly is an imbalance between supply and demand. Shenzhen and Shanghai, in particular, are popular with the young and the highly educated, just the kinds of people that push up housing prices. They are two of China’s best-run cities, offering good transport links, good jobs and, by Chinese standards, good air. Unsold housing inventories cover just about five months of demand at the current pace of sales, indicating that more construction is needed.

Even with these strong fundamentals, it is hard to justify a 50% surge in housing prices over the past year. Regulators suspect that there has been some foul play. This week they said they would target online lenders that have made loans to homebuyers to cover their down-payments; these loans have, in theory, allowed speculators to buy homes entirely with borrowed cash, in contravention of the minimum down-payment requirements.

But reining in animal spirits is a hard task. At the Baoshan Property Trading Centre, where people buying homes in a district of northern Shanghai must go to register their purchases, crowds have swelled to such a size that the local government has deployed police to keep the peace. On one recent day a phalanx of security officers in white helmets stood guard alongside barricades as people lined up to submit their documentation. One of those queuing, Wang Jie, bought a new apartment for 2m yuan ($307,000) in October, and has watched its value soar by another 1m since then. “No one seems to buy when prices are falling,” he chuckled. “But everyone does when they start rising.”



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21694530-house-prices-are-soaring-big-cities-oversupply-plagues-much/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Buttonwood

High tech meets low finance

For all the money spent on technology, banking is not efficient

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



TECHNOLOGY ought to have revolutionised finance more than any other industry. After all, modern money is mostly an entry on a computer—capable of being transmitted instantly and virtually costlessly around the world. Stockmarket activity is now dominated by high-frequency traders, who make deals faster than they can blink.

The finance sector spends more on technology, as a proportion of its revenues, than any other industry. Nevertheless, compared with the world of e-commerce, banking still sometimes gives the impression of a Volkswagen Beetle instead of a Formula 1 racing car. It took many years of effort to get to a world of “T+2”, where securities are settled two days after the trade is made, rather than the “T+3” system that preceded it.

The international payments system still looks like a “spaghetti junction”, in the words of Andrew Haldane, the Bank of England’s chief economist, with money passing through several hands on the way from payer to recipient. The annual revenues earned by the banking system for processing payments are huge, at $1.7 trillion, and rising (see chart).

One reason for this inefficiency is that technology has been tacked on to a centuries-old banking model. Much bank spending on technology is devoted to maintaining existing systems, a desperate effort to keep the show on the road.

Hence the hype around “fintech”—the hope that the whole system can be overhauled by disruptive innovators, much as Uber is revolutionising the taxi business and Airbnb is taking on hotels. Fintech firms operate in many areas, from digital payments to automated wealth management. But at a London Business School conference this week, the greatest excitement was reserved for blockchain technology. A blockchain is a “distributed ledger” under which transaction records are held by a wide number of participants in a network; it is the technology behind Bitcoin, a digital currency.

Technology experts seem to think a distributed ledger is more secure. A hacker would be required to break into a wide range of sites rather than a single, central register. But there are doubts over whether such a system could handle the sheer volume of payments in the financial system—hundreds of thousands of transactions every second.

Even if those technological hurdles could be overcome, a register could develop in two different ways. An open system would be good for customers, allowing them to exchange money quickly, cheaply and anonymously. But it would be a nightmare for regulators trying to crack down on tax evasion and money-laundering. No longer would the unscrupulous need to keep high-value notes under the mattress. A supervised system would get round this problem, but it would also give the authorities much more power to pry into people’s financial lives. Customers would understandably be far less keen.

A largely unregulated technology sector is bumping up against a heavily regulated finance industry. The result may be that advances in this area will be slow as regulators clamp down on anything that seems too anarchic. The big banks, conscious of the ability of regulators to fine them for aiding and abetting money-laundering, will proceed with caution.

Susan Athey, an economist with links to Silicon Valley, argues that blockchain technology might be most useful for other purposes—to register asset ownership, for example. People in developing countries find it difficult to establish their ownership of land; a reliable digital register could reduce that problem. And a digital land registry in America would eliminate the need for homeowners to pay for expensive title insurance.

Forecasting how new technology will change an industry is never easy. As Bill Gates once said, and tech types constantly repeat: “We always overestimate the change that will occur in the next two years and underestimate the change that will occur in the next ten.”

But monetary policy may be giving new financial models a lift. Very low interest rates encourage investors to search for yield. One beneficiary is peer-to-peer lending, in which investors extend credit to people and businesses directly. And imagine what would happen if negative interest rates became semi-permanent and were passed on to retail depositors—a tax on bank accounts. The appeal of digital currencies that were out of the reach of central bankers would increase exponentially. Never mind disrupting commercial banks. What about doing the same thing to central banks?

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21694531-all-money-spent-technology-banking-not-efficient-high-tech-meets-low/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

America’s economy

On the one hand

Inflation is rising, but households have yet to notice

Mar 12th 2016 | WASHINGTON, DC | From the print edition



IT IS a tough time to be a central banker. On March 8th the IMF called for more stimulus globally to see off a lack of demand in the world economy. On the same day economists at the Peterson Institute, a think-tank, issued a report that was labelled a “reality check”, arguing that fears for the world economy were overblown. (One of the report’s authors, Olivier Blanchard, was until last year the IMF’s chief economist.) The disagreement reflects conflicting signals that the Federal Reserve must untangle at its next meeting, which begins on March 15th.

When the Fed raised interest rates by a quarter-point in December, after seven years without a change, inflation was still in the doldrums. According to the central bank’s preferred measure, prices were rising by just 0.5% a year. The Fed raised rates anyway: Janet Yellen, its chair, argued that the fizzing labour market meant inflation must be on the way. Waiting for it to arrive before raising rates might force the Fed to yank them up abruptly later, potentially triggering a recession. Crucially, households’ inflation expectations had not fallen much, so the Fed could argue that its 2% inflation target remained credible even as it tightened policy.

Since “lift-off” in December, worries about the global economy have sent stockmarkets sliding. The S&P 500 has fallen by about 5% since then; in the gloomiest moment in February, it was 12% down. But America’s labour market has not been gyrating in the same way. In February the economy created 242,000 jobs, many more than the roughly 100,000 thought to be needed to stop unemployment rising.

What is more, Ms Yellen’s prediction is beginning to come true. Core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, was 1.7% in January, its highest level since 2013. The headline measure has risen too, to 1.3%—still well below target, but a marked increase nonetheless. Rate-setters are likely to raise their forecasts for core inflation at their meeting this month, according to Zach Pandl of Goldman Sachs.

But not every measure is following Ms Yellen’s script. According to the University of Michigan’s survey of consumers, Americans’ inflation expectations have dipped to 2.5%. Although that is above the Fed’s target, consumers usually predict inflation that is higher still. Their expectations today are 0.5 percentage points below their long-term average, and as low as they have been since 2010.

Consumers may have only now adapted to a world of cheap fuel and a strong dollar. If so, rising inflation should gradually turn their forecasts around. But measures of inflation expectations in financial markets—usually thought of as more forward-looking than consumers—have been depressed for some time. The difference between yields on inflation-protected government bonds and the normal kind points to inflation of just 1.4% over the next five years. (This measure also rallied in the second half of February, having previously dipped below 1%, its lowest level since the crisis.)

Ms Yellen is sceptical of these barometers. The market for inflation-protected bonds is less liquid than before the financial crisis. That means investors might demand a higher return to hold these bonds rather than regular ones, compressing the spread between the two. The “inflation-risk premium”, which investors demand to insure themselves against very high levels of inflation, may also have come down (this can happen without the mean forecast for inflation changing). It is unlikely, though, that such factors fully account for investors’ apparent nonchalance about inflation. The swaps market, which suffers less from such problems, points to medium-term inflation of around 1.7%. Markets, it seems, think the likely path of monetary policy is too tight.

Yet Americans continue to spend strongly, as Mr Blanchard and his colleagues point out. Incomes and spending both rose by a robust 0.5% in January. Retail sales are strong.

In December most rate-setters forecast another interest-rate rise at the coming meeting. That now looks very unlikely, thanks to the gloomy global picture. But the Fed may be in the curious position of marking up its inflation forecasts even as it postpones rate rises. The recent financial volatility, which could be a sign of problems to come, justifies the change of heart. But with the domestic economy purring, it would not take much of a climb in the oil price, or a fall in the dollar, to push inflation higher still. Markets expect only one interest-rate rise this year, and only three more rises by the end of 2018. They are probably underestimating.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21694527-inflation-rising-households-have-yet-notice-one-hand/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Commodities

Steel chrysanthemums

A China-driven rally in metals prices may be as fleeting as spring

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



THE spectacular leap of almost 20% in the price of iron ore on March 7th reveals a lot about the idiosyncrasies of commodities markets. Coming on the first trading day after the opening of China’s National People’s Congress, at which the government pledged to maintain GDP growth of at least 6.5% a year for the next five years, the jump may well have reflected renewed optimism about the appetite of the world’s biggest steel consumer. But the price of physical commodities tends to depend more on supply, demand and inventories than on the expectations of financial markets. So a giant flower show in Tangshan, China’s biggest steel-producing city, may be an equally good—and more fragrant—explanation for the sudden rally.

Tangshan’s authorities want their flowers to bloom under clean air during the show, from April to October, so they are curbing output at the city’s steel mills. Low inventories and the prospect of reduced supply over the summer have pushed up local prices, making mills even keener to operate at full tilt until the stoppage begins. That led to a scramble for ore, according to Tomás Gutiérrez of Kallanish Commodities, a steel-industry watcher. “People really panicked.”

In China as a whole, it is typical to build stocks of metals before construction picks up in spring. That may explain why many of them have rallied this year—albeit from very low bases. David Wilson of Citigroup notes that the depreciation of the yuan has also encouraged traders to import extra ore in case the currency falls further. And Capital Economics, a consultancy, says one of the main drivers of the recovery in iron-ore prices may have been speculative short-covering—or the unwinding of bets that prices would fall further.

The new target for growth may also have played a part—even if China’s ability to meet it is hotly debated. Goldman Sachs, for example, says China’s main avenue for stoking metals demand would be the property market, but it argues that though there are more home sales and higher prices, there is no sign of this yet spreading into new construction.

Others argue that the strength of physical demand is not mirrored in China’s weak import data, or in low freight rates at sea. The downward pressure on metals prices is due as much to an avalanche of oversupply as a shortage of demand. In iron ore, in particular, there are no signs the glut in production in Australia’s Pilbara region is ebbing. By the time Tangshan’s peonies and chrysanthemums are in full bloom, the iron-ore rally may be long gone.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21694532-china-driven-rally-metals-prices-may-be-fleeting-spring-steel/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Greek banks

On the front line

Greece’s biggest banks may appear to be out of danger, but they are not

Mar 12th 2016 | ATHENS | From the print edition



ON THE face of things, Greece’s four big banks are in their best shape in years. In November they received their third bail-out in as many years. The extra €14.4 billion ($15.9 billion) they got then (some of it from private investors) raised their capital ratios to 18%, well above the European average of 13%. Recent legal changes make it easier for them to repossess collateral and to sell loans to third parties. Better yet, recent data suggest the economy shrank by only 0.2% last year, much less than initially feared. The Bank of Greece predicts that growth could return as early as this summer. After eight years of crisis and recession, normality at last seems within reach.

But beneath the cushion of fresh capital, cracks remain. Greek banks are still losing money. Piraeus Bank, the country’s second-largest lender, this week reported a net loss of €1.9 billion in 2015. Deposits have barely begun to grow again after last year’s run; the capital controls it prompted remain in place. Fully 40% of loans and 55% of mortgages are not being paid down, compared with a European average of 5%. Big losses on non-performing loans (NPLs) and debt securities could erode the banks’ capital once again. Greece is rowing with the other members of the euro zone about the conditions of its bail-out, raising the spectre of another crisis. A fourth recapitalisation is not out of the question, says Josu Fabo of Fitch, a rating agency. The markets remain nervous: bank shares are down by 36% since the start of the year.

The banks are largely innocent bystanders in the endless back and forth between the Greek government and its creditors, but they are guilty of procrastination when it comes to their NPLs. Instead of restructuring the loans worth saving, calling the bluff of defaulters that could probably pay, and reclaiming and selling the collateral of the hopeless cases, they are counting on a return to growth to rescue delinquent borrowers. That, in turn, is impeding the flow of capital to ventures that might help revive the economy. Yannis Stournaras, the head of the central bank, recently demanded “bold and innovative initiatives” to clean up bad loans. “This cannot be ensured by the current ‘business as usual’ approach,” he added.

The banks could also cut costs, by closing branches and shedding assets, such as National Bank of Greece’s Turkish subsidiary, Finansbank. Governance, too, is ripe for scrutiny. Many of those in charge of Greece’s banks when things went horribly wrong remain at the helm. As a condition of their latest loans, Greece’s creditors demanded a review of bank board members’ qualifications.

As ever, however, the banks’ fate is largely out of their hands. An escalation of the government’s ongoing row with its creditors, a global economic downturn or a deepening of Europe’s migration crisis could all prolong and deepen Greece’s recession. The most immediate risk is that euro-zone governments and the IMF will withhold the next instalment of Greece’s bail-out, leaving the government unable to pay its bills this summer.

Even if a crisis is averted, Greek banks are in no shape to make lots of new loans. NPLs may be on the verge of peaking (“If you haven’t defaulted after eight years of recession”, notes one banker wryly, “you probably never will”), but they still tie up the banks’ capital. Liquidity is another problem, points out Miranda Xafa of the Centre for International Governance Innovation, a research institute. Greek banks have around €202 billion in outstanding loans yet only €122 billion in deposits (down from €237 billion in 2009). Deposit-holders pulled out over €40 billion in the first half of last year alone. Emergency loans from the European and Greek central banks make up the difference. Cash machines in Athens still greet customers with a reminder that they can withdraw no more than €420 a week. As long as they have to deliver such messages, Greek banks cannot be expected to prosper.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21694534-greeces-biggest-banks-may-appear-be-out-danger-they-are-not-front/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Financing divorce

Till debt us do part

Lending to people seeking to end a marriage is a growing business

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



IN MANY Western countries, including America and Britain, divorce lawyers are not allowed to represent a client in exchange for a share of whatever settlement they secure (as opposed to charging a fixed fee). Such arrangements, it is feared, would beget more and nastier divorces. Yet the same rules do not apply to financiers: they are free to fund legal battles over marital assets—and a growing number do.

Novitas Loans, a British firm, is currently lending to 1,500 would-be divorcées (most are women) or divorcés, at 18% annual interest. The loans are intended to cover legal fees; applicants typically expect to win assets worth three times their borrowing. Without the loans, many would have to give up and settle for much less, says Jason Reeve, the firm’s managing director. It gets lots of thank-you letters from borrowers, he claims. Demand for loans of this kind has jumped since the British government restricted legal aid for divorces in 2013, notes Nigel Shepherd of Resolution, an association of family lawyers.

Brendan Lyle of BBL Churchill Group, an American firm with cases in 27 states, says his role is “part financier and part therapist”. Vengeful clients, determined to fight over every last teaspoon, must be restrained. The firm’s average loan is $306,000 in New York state and somewhat less elsewhere. The typical interest rate is around 16%. The default rate is a modest 2%, although there is some forbearance for struggling customers.

The big risk for divorce funders is that a couple might get back together. When that happens, assets are not sold and a borrower may not be able to pay back the lender. Novitas therefore prefers to fund cases that have been grinding through court long enough to make reconciliation unlikely. The Iceberg Partnership, Novitas’s biggest competitor in Britain, transfers this risk to the 374 law firms that refer clients for funding. They must agree to guarantee their clients’ loans, repaying Iceberg themselves if the client defaults.

Rather than lend money, some firms “invest” in divorce cases, asking for repayment only if a settlement is reached. A year ago Novitas bought an American firm, National Divorce Capital, that offers such “non-recourse cash advances”. Since then, applications for advances have doubled. It plans to open branches in Australia and Canada later this year.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21694473-firms-who-lend-people-seeking-end-marriage-are-attracting-interest-inside/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Discount brokerages

Free trade

Share-trading joins the list of ostensibly free online services

Mar 12th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



BACK in the 1970s, after American regulators abolished fixed commissions for brokers who helped their clients trade shares, the likes of Charles Schwab and Fidelity were the insurgents. They dispensed with the expensive frills that most rivals offered, such as research and investment advice. That, in turn, allowed them to offer share trading to the masses at bargain prices. Twenty years later, the internet spurred the growth of a new wave of discount brokers, including E*Trade and TD Ameritrade. Now for the next challenger.

Whereas full-service brokers demand a percentage of the value of the assets in their clients’ accounts (typically 1-1.75% a year), the discount firms charge around $9 a trade. That is highway robbery, however, by the standards of a new online brokerage, Robinhood, which enables clients to trade shares free of charge, via a new mobile app.

Instead of taking commissions from customers, Robinhood receives them from the trading venues to which it steers their orders, a controversial but common practice. It also earns returns from the cash clients leave in their accounts, and plans soon to offer margin trading—the buying of stock with borrowed money—for which it will charge a fee.

Whether this is enough to cover Robinhood’s costs is unclear (the firm does not disclose its financial results). But it provides an even leaner service than its rivals. It does not yet offer trading on its website, for example, catering to clients, whose average age is 28, exclusively via its app.

Robinhood is also easy to use. Setting up an account can take as little as four minutes. To confirm customers’ identity, the firm asks them to take a picture of an ID with a smartphone. That has helped it to attract almost 1m customers since it started operations a year ago. It says it continued to recruit new clients during the recent market turmoil, even as activity declined at other firms. To bring in even more custom, it has begun integrating its service with apps such as Stocktwits, a social-media platform for retail investors. Increased turnover should boost its income more than its costs. In time, it may make life difficult for the disruptors of yore.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21694537-share-trading-joins-list-ostensibly-free-online-services-free-trade/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Free exchange

A proper reckoning

Feminist economics deserves recognition as a distinct branch of the discipline

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



HAD he lived to see it, Alfred Marshall, a 19th-century giant of economics, probably would not have celebrated International Women’s Day, which takes place on March 8th. “If you compete with us, we shan’t marry you,” he once gallantly warned the fairer sex. In his book, Principles of Economics, he described the field as “the study of men as they live and move and think in the ordinary business of life”.

Economics still has its problems with women. In 2014 only 12% of American economics professors were female, and only one woman (Elinor Ostrom) has won the Nobel prize for economics. But in terms of focus, economists have embraced some feminist causes. Papers abound on the “pay gap” (American women earned 21% less than men for full-time work in 2014), and the extra growth that could be unlocked if only women worked and earned more. A recent paper*, for instance, claimed that eliminating gender discrimination in Saudi Arabia could bring its GDP per person almost level with America’s. (Feminists, of course, consider gender equality a worthy goal irrespective of its impact on GDP.) That raises a question. Does “Feminist economics”, which has its own journal, really bring anything distinctive?

Defining it as a look at the economy from a female perspective provides one straightforward answer. Feminist analyses of public policy note, for example, that men gain most from income-tax cuts, whereas women are most likely to plug the gap left by the state as care for the elderly is cut. Even if such a combination spurs economic growth, if it worsens inequality between sexes, then perhaps policymakers should think twice.

Some feminists argue, moreover, that the very framework of economics is imbued with subtler forms of sexism. They point, for instance, to many economists’ blindness towards social norms that are unfair to women. Textbook models of the labour market, for example, assume that people choose between work and leisure based on how much spare time they have, how much they might earn and fixed personal preferences. By that logic, a woman’s decision about whether or not to take a break from work to have children is a function of how much she earns and how highly she values mothering.

But as Sheryl Sandberg, a senior executive at Facebook, notes in a recent book, when men announce they are about to have a child, they are simply congratulated; when women do, they are congratulated and then asked what they plan to do about work. Given the strength and persistence of societal expectations about women’s role in parenting, presenting their choices in that regard as purely personal preferences is misleading at best, and a sop to sexism at worst.

Economics as commonly practised often misses out another important element of inequality between the sexes: unpaid work. The main measure of economic activity, GDP, counts housework when it is paid, but excludes it when it is done free of charge. This is an arbitrary distinction, and leads to perverse outcomes. As Paul Samuelson, an economist, pointed out, a country’s GDP falls when a man marries his maid.

The usual defence is that measuring unpaid work is hard. But Norway, for one, used to do it; it only stopped so that its figures could be compared with other, less progressive countries. Diane Coyle, an economist and author of “GDP: A Brief but Affectionate History”, asks whether statistical agencies have not bothered to collect data on unpaid housework precisely because women do most of it. Marilyn Waring, a feminist economist, has suggested that the system of measuring GDP was designed by men to keep women “in their place”.

Women in the OECD, a club of rich countries, spend roughly 5% more time working than men. But they spend roughly twice as much time on unpaid work, and only two-thirds the time men do in paid work. By leaving unpaid work out of the national accounts, the feminist argument goes, economists not only diminish women’s contribution, but also gloss over the staggering inequality in who does it.

Ignoring unpaid work also misrepresents the significance of particular kinds of economic activity. Ms Waring thinks that raising well-cared-for children is just as important to society as making buildings or cars. Yet as long as the former is excluded from official measures of output, investing resources in it seems like less of a priority. Of course, in a perfectly equal world, men would do much more child-rearing than they do now. In the meantime, it is women who are disadvantaged by economists’ failure to measure the value of parenting properly.

How much of the sky?

The impact of measuring things differently can be very significant. A recent paper from the Bureau of Economic Analysis attempted to calculate an augmented version of GDP that included unpaid work. Doing so boosted GDP overall, but lowered the growth rate: as women have moved into paid work, they have been doing less unpaid work at home, so total production has not been rising quite as quickly as official figures suggest. By their estimates, including unpaid work boosted GDP in 1965 by 39%, but by only 26% in 2010. Over the 45 years between those two dates, they put the average annual nominal growth rate at 6.7% if unpaid work is included, lower than the official 6.9%.

Ignoring the feminist perspective is bad economics. The discipline aims to explain the allocation of scarce resources; it is bound to go wrong if it ignores the role that deep imbalances between men and women play in this allocation. As long as this inequality exists, there is space for feminist economics.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21694529-feminist-economics-deserves-recognition-distinct-branch-discipline/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Science and technology




Artificial intelligence and Go: Showdown

Early human diets: Without fire?

African science: Crucible

Crop storage and the internet of things: Cool beans





Articles Sections Next

Artificial intelligence and Go

Showdown

Win or lose, a computer program’s contest against a professional Go player is another milestone in AI

Mar 12th 2016 | Seoul | From the print edition



TWO : NIL to the computer. That was the score, as The Economist went to press, in the latest round of the battle between artificial intelligence (AI) and the naturally evolved sort. The field of honour is a Go board in Seoul, South Korea—a country that cedes to no one, least of all its neighbour Japan, the title of most Go-crazy place on the planet. To the chagrin of many Japanese, who think of Go as theirs in the same way that the English think of cricket, the game’s best player is generally reckoned to be Lee Sedol, a South Korean. But not, perhaps, for much longer. Mr Lee is in the middle of a five-game series with AlphaGo, a computer program written by researchers at DeepMind, an AI software house in London that was bought by Google in 2014. And, though this is not an official championship series, as the scoreline shows, Mr Lee is losing.

Go is an ancient game—invented, legend has it, by the mythical First Emperor of China, for the instruction of his son. It is played all over East Asia, where it occupies roughly the same position as chess does in the West. It is popular with computer scientists, too. For AI researchers in particular, the idea of cracking Go has become an obsession. Other games have fallen over the years—most notably when, in 1997, one of the best chess players in history, Garry Kasparov, lost to a machine called Deep Blue. Modern chess programs are better than any human. But compared with Go, teaching chess to computers is a doddle.

At first sight, this is odd. The rules of Go are simple and minimal. The players are Black and White, each provided with a bowl of stones of the appropriate colour. Black starts. Players take turns to place a stone on any unoccupied intersection of a 19x19 grid of vertical and horizontal lines. The aim is to use the stones to claim territory. In the version being played by Mr Lee and AlphaGo each stone, and each surrounded intersection, is a point towards the final score. Stones surrounded by enemy stones are captured and removed. If an infinite loop of capture and recapture, known as Ko, becomes possible, a player is not allowed to recapture immediately, but must first play elsewhere. Play carries on until neither player wishes to continue.

Go forth and multiply

This simplicity, though, is deceptive. In a truly simple game, like noughts and crosses, every possible outcome, all the way to the end of a game, can be calculated. This brute-force approach means a computer can always work out which move is the best in a given situation. The most complex game to be “solved” this way is draughts, in which around 1020 (a hundred billion billion) different matches are possible. In 2007, after 18 years of effort, researchers announced that they had come up with a provably optimum strategy.

But a draughts board is only 8x8. A Go board’s size means that the number of games that can be played on it is enormous: a rough-and-ready guess gives around 10170. Analogies fail when trying to describe such a number. It is nearly a hundred of orders of magnitude more than the number of atoms in the observable universe, which is somewhere in the region of 1080. Any one of Go’s hundreds of turns has about 250 possible legal moves, a number called the branching factor. Choosing any of those will throw up another 250 possible moves, and so on until the game ends. As Demis Hassabis, one of DeepMind’s founders, observes, all this means that Go is impervious to attack by mathematical brute force.

But there is more to the game’s difficulty than that. Though the small board and comparatively restrictive rules of chess mean there are only around 1047 different possible games, and its branching factor is only 35, that does, in practice, mean chess is also unsolvable in the way that draughts has been solved. Instead, chess programs filter their options as they go along, selecting promising-looking moves and reserving their number-crunching prowess for the simulation of the thousands of outcomes that flow from those chosen few. This is possible because chess has some built-in structure that helps a program understand whether or not a given position is a good one. A knight is generally worth more than a pawn, for instance; a queen is worth more than either. (The standard values are three, one and nine respectively.)

Working out who is winning in Go is much harder, says Dr Hassabis. A stone’s value comes only from its location relative to the other stones on the board, which changes with every move. At the same time, small tactical decisions can have, as every Go player knows, huge strategic consequences later on. There is plenty of structure—Go players talk of features such as ladders, walls and false eyes—but these emerge organically from the rules, rather than being prescribed by them.

Since good players routinely beat bad ones, there are plainly strategies for doing well. But even the best players struggle to describe exactly what they are doing, says Miles Brundage, an AI researcher at Arizona State University. “Professional Go players talk a lot about general principles, or even intuition,” he says, “whereas if you talk to professional chess players they can often do a much better job of explaining exactly why they made a specific move.” Intuition is all very well. But it is not much use when it comes to the hyper-literal job of programming a computer. Before AlphaGo came along, the best programs played at the level of a skilled amateur.

Go figure

AlphaGo uses some of the same technologies as those older programs. But its big idea is to combine them with new approaches that try to get the computer to develop its own intuition about how to play—to discover for itself the rules that human players understand but cannot explain. It does that using a technique called deep learning, which lets computers work out, by repeatedly applying complicated statistics, how to extract general rules from masses of noisy data.

Deep learning requires two things: plenty of processing grunt and plenty of data to learn from. DeepMind trained its machine on a sample of 30m Go positions culled from online servers where amateurs and professionals gather to play. And by having AlphaGo play against another, slightly tweaked version of itself, more training data can be generated quickly.

Those data are fed into two deep-learning algorithms. One, called the policy network, is trained to imitate human play. After watching millions of games, it has learned to extract features, principles and rules of thumb. Its job during a game is to look at the board’s state and generate a handful of promising-looking moves for the second algorithm to consider.

This algorithm, called the value network, evaluates how strong a move is. The machine plays out the suggestions of the policy network, making moves and countermoves for the thousands of possible daughter games those suggestions could give rise to. Because Go is so complex, playing all conceivable games through to the end is impossible. Instead, the value network looks at the likely state of the board several moves ahead and compares those states with examples it has seen before. The idea is to find the board state that looks, statistically speaking, most like the sorts of board states that have led to wins in the past. Together, the policy and value networks embody the Go-playing wisdom that human players accumulate over years of practice.



As Mr Brundage points out, brute force has not been banished entirely from DeepMind’s approach. Like many deep-learning systems, AlphaGo’s performance improves, at least up to a point, as more processing power is thrown at it. The version playing against Mr Lee uses 1,920 standard processor chips and 280 special ones developed originally to produce graphics for video games—a particularly demanding task. At least part of the reason AlphaGo is so far ahead of the competition, says Mr Brundage, is that it runs on this more potent hardware. He also points out that there are still one or two hand-crafted features lurking in the code. These give the machine direct hints about what to do, rather than letting it work things out for itself. Nevertheless, he says, AlphaGo’s self-taught approach is much closer to the way people play Go than Deep Blue’s is to the way they play chess.

One reason for the commercial and academic excitement around deep learning is that it has broad applications. The techniques employed in AlphaGo can be used to teach computers to recognise faces, translate between languages, show relevant advertisements to internet users or hunt for subatomic particles in data from atom-smashers. Deep learning is thus a booming business. It powers the increasingly effective image- and voice-recognition abilities of computers, and firms such as Google, Facebook and Baidu are throwing money at it.

Deep learning is also, in Dr Hassabis’s view, essential to the quest to build a general artificial intelligence—in other words, one that displays the same sort of broad, fluid intelligence as a human being. A previous DeepMind paper, published in 2015, described how a computer had taught itself to play 49 classic Atari videogames—from “Space Invaders” to “Breakout”—simply by watching the screen, with no helpful hints (or even basic instructions) from its human overlords. It ended up doing much better than any human player can. (In a nice coincidence, atari is also the name in Go for a stone or group of stones that is in peril of being captured.)

Games offer a convenient way to measure progress towards this general intelligence. Board games such as Go can be ranked in order of mathematical complexity. Video games span a range of difficulties, too. Space Invaders is a simple game, played on a low-resolution screen; for a computer to learn to play a modern video game would require it to interpret a picture much more subtle and complicated than some ugly-looking monsters descending a screen, and in pursuit of much less obvious goals than merely zapping them. One of DeepMind’s next objectives, Dr Hassabis says, is to build a machine that can learn to play any game of cards simply by watching videos of humans doing so.

Go tell the Spartans

For now, he reckons, general-purpose machine intelligence remains a long way off. The pattern-recognising abilities of deep-learning algorithms are impressive, but computers still lack many of the mental tools that humans take for granted. A big one is “transfer learning”, which is what AI researchers call reasoning by analogy. This is the ability to take lessons learned in one domain and apply them to another. And machines like AlphaGo have no goals, and no more awareness of their own existence than does a word processor or a piece of accounting software.

In the short term, though, Dr Hassabis is optimistic. At a kiwon, or Go parlour, in Seoul, the day before the match, the 30 or so players present were almost unanimous in believing that the machine would fall short. “Lee is a genius who is constantly creating new moves; what machine can replicate that?” asked one. At a pre-match press conference Mr Lee said he was confident he would win 5-0, or perhaps 4-1.

He was, plainly, wrong about that, although it is not over yet. “He’s a very good player,” said a diplomatic Dr Hassabis before the match. “But our internal tests say something different.” Even if Mr Lee does manage to pull off an improbable victory, though, humans are unlikely to stay on top for long. As AlphaGo’s algorithms are tweaked, and as it gathers more data from which to learn, it is only going to get better. Asked whether there was a ceiling to its abilities, Dr Hassabis said he did not know: “If there is, we haven’t found it yet.”

Correction: An earlier version of this story suggested that 10170 was the number of possible positions of stones on a Go board; in fact it is an estimate of the number of possible Go games. Sorry



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21694540-win-or-lose-best-five-battle-contest-another-milestone/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Early human diets

Without fire?

Food processing affected human evolution, even before the invention of cooking

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition

Something to chew on

IN 2009 Richard Wrangham, an anthropologist at Harvard, published an intriguing thesis. He was trying to answer a question that had long puzzled workers in his field: how could the evolution of an organ as energetically expensive to sustain as the human brain have happened?

Before Dr Wrangham’s work the conventional answer was: “meat-eating”. Archaeological evidence such as a lack of tool marks on animal bones suggests humanity’s ancestors, the Australopithecines, were largely vegetarian. By contrast Homo erectus, the first widespread human being (pictured below), also ate meat, which is a more compact source of calories than most plant matter, and might thus have provided the extra brain-food needed.

Dr Wrangham, however, had a different answer: “cooking”. He showed that the ease of digestion and additional nutritional value made available by treating food with fire (which alters starch and protein molecules in ways that make them easier to digest) boosts its calorific value enough for a reasonable daily intake to power both brain and body—so much so that modern humans who attempt to live only on raw foodstuffs (there are a few who try) have great difficulty remaining well-nourished. On top of this, the softening brought about by cooking could explain a second evolutionary trend, that toward smaller teeth and less-powerful jaws.

Just when Homo erectus did start cooking is controversial. The oldest definitive evidence dates back only 500,000 years, though the species evolved 1.9m years ago. But the Wrangham thesis does not depend only on the beginning of heat-treating food. It also includes food preparation using tools to chop or pound meat and vegetables. This presumably makes them easier to digest. It also makes them easier to chew, which might account for the reduction in jaw and tooth size.

A paper published in this week’s Nature by Katherine Zink and Daniel Lieberman, two of Dr Wrangham’s colleagues at Harvard, brings some evidence to bear on these questions, particularly that of chewing. Dr Zink and Dr Lieberman used replicas of the stone tools available to Homo erectus to process food, and looked at the consequences for those who attempted to masticate the result.

The pseudo-Palaeolithic diet the two researchers chose comprised beets, carrots and yams as root vegetables, and goat as meat. They prepared the vegetables four ways: raw and unprocessed; raw and hit six times with a copy of a Palaeolithic hammerstone; raw and cut into small slices; and roasted for 15 minutes. The goat was also served four ways: raw and unprocessed; raw and pounded 50 times by a hammerstone; raw and cut into small slices; and cooked on a grill for 25 minutes. Dr Zink and Dr Lieberman then fed each preparation to a group of volunteers, to see how easy it was to chew.

To measure this, they wired up the skin of their volunteers’ jaws using electrodes which recorded the force a volunteer exerted chewing. Once wired, volunteers were given samples to chew and asked to do so until they felt what they were chewing was ready to swallow. Sometimes the volunteers were then allowed to swallow. On other occasions, though, they were asked to spit the sample out, so that the bits could be analysed. (The raw meat was always spat out, to prevent foodborne illness.)

Dr Zink and Dr Lieberman found, in line with Dr Wrangham’s original thesis, that chewing cooked root vegetables required a third less force than was needed to chew an equivalent amount of raw and unprocessed root. Slicing the vegetables did not provide any benefit, but pounding them reduced the force required to chew by about 9%. Pounding meat, by contrast, brought no benefit, whereas slicing it did. As with cooking the vegetables, it reduced the chewing force needed by around a third. Intriguingly, roasting meat actually increased the masticatory force required.

On top of this, when Dr Zink and Dr Lieberman examined food spat out by their volunteers at the point it was deemed ready to swallow, they found that the unprocessed and the pounded meat usually came back as a single large lump that would be hard for the gut to break down. In contrast, when the meat was sliced or cooked before being chewed, participants were consistently able to chew it into tiny, digestible particles.

Putting all their results together, Dr Zink and Dr Lieberman conclude that a diet of one-third sliced meat and two-thirds pounded vegetables, such as Homo erectus might reasonably have been expected to consume even in the absence of fire, would need 27% less effort to chew than an unpounded all-vegetable diet. Specifically, the inclusion of meat contributed a 15% reduction and the slicing and pounding a 12% reduction, which Dr Lieberman calculates equates to 2.5m fewer chews a year.

That could certainly account for the shrinkage of jaws and teeth undergone by Homo erectus. As to its consequences farther down the digestive tract, those remain the province of further research.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21694489-early-humans-may-have-pounded-and-sliced-their-food-make-it-easier/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

African science

Crucible

A new forum hopes to bring Africa’s scientific researchers together

Mar 12th 2016 | Dakar | From the print edition



ASSANE GUEYE, a Senegalese-born postdoctoral researcher at America’s National Institute of Standards and Technology, is a student of systems. He studies the multiple networks of communications that hold cities together, and feels that a new scientific discipline is needed to describe these systems of systems. He hopes to create one.

Amanda Weltman, a physicist at the University of Cape Town, seeks nuance in the laws of gravity. She suspects there is an undiscovered particle that links gravitational attraction with nature’s other forces, and is planning an experiment that uses a special satellite to try to track it down.

Tolu Oni, an epidemiologist also at Cape Town, and Evelyn Gitau, an immunologist at the Kenya Medical Research Institute, both know that the seriousness of the illnesses they are trying to beat—AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis—can be amplified or diminished by patients’ circumstances, but they do not understand the details. Both have the same problem, managing large data sets. But until this week, they had never met.

These four scientists are among 15 fellows who, together with 800 other academics, business folk and politicians (including the presidents of Senegal and Rwanda), are gathered at the Next Einstein Forum, being held this week in Dakar in Senegal. Next Einstein, the brainchild of Thierry Zomahoun, a Béninois administrator, is an attempt to scale up African science. At the moment, most African scientists work either in isolation or abroad. They do not know one another and are invisible to prospective colleagues. Visas for collaborative work are hard to come by and even flying from one part of Africa to another may require going via a non-African hub, such as Dubai. Next Einstein is an attempt to overcome this fragmentation, by providing a continental congress at which African scientists can meet.

The forum has grown out of the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS), of which Mr Zomahoun is president. AIMS is a graduate school with branches in Cameroon, Ghana, Tanzania and South Africa, as well as in Senegal. It was founded in 2003 by Neil Turok, a South African who now directs the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics. In a sense, Dr Turok’s situation is an example of the problems Next Einstein is trying to overcome, for the Perimeter is based in Canada, and so he now lives in Ontario.

AIMS concentrates on maths for two reasons. First, being a subject that requires little equipment beyond students’ brains, it is cheap to teach. Second, when Dr Turok was asking fellow African researchers which subjects would be most pertinent to the continental scientific Renaissance he hoped to trigger, most agreed that maths, which is fundamental to the rest of science, was the one to go for.

The Senegalese campus, built on a beach-front an hour’s drive south of Dakar, is a place where up to 80 graduate students (who pay no fees for the privilege, the institute being funded by government grants and commercial sponsors) can sit for a year at the feet of visiting academics from Africa and elsewhere. These visitors come for three-week stints to lecture in subjects such as cryptography, finance and quantum mechanics. Students are thus exposed to a wide variety of ideas during their stay.

Whether Next Einstein, which plans to meet every two years, will be able to build on AIMS and create for African scientists the sorts of opportunities that those in the rich world take for granted remains to be seen. But, as Mr Zomahoun observes, 40% of the world’s children are African. Statistically, therefore, the chances that the next Einstein will come from Africa are good. This week’s meeting in Dakar is at least a step on the road to making those odds more than just theoretical.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21694514-new-forum-hopes-bring-africas-scientific-researchers-together-crucible/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Crop storage and the internet of things

Cool beans

Legume-shaped sensor packages may help preserve stored crops

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition

Just call me Jack

HANDING a farmer a fistful of magic beans with the promise that they will improve his business might sound like something out of a fairy-tale. But, as Arthur C. Clarke put it, any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic. The sensor-filled “beans” developed by Andrew Holland, an electronics engineer from Swaffham Bulbeck, near Cambridge, England, are not only advanced technology. They could also, Mr Holland says, provide an answer to many a farmer’s prayers.

Mixed into the contents of a granary, his beans would report continuously on the temperature and humidity, both of which encourage rotting if they are too high, and on carbon-dioxide levels, which reflect the amount of insect breath exhaled, and thus the level of infestation. At the moment these things have to be measured (if they are measured at all) using hand-held instruments that are plunged into the grain pile at regular intervals by farmhands.

The beans themselves are plastic shells 45mm long and 18mm wide, manufactured by 3D printing. This process is used to encapsulate within each bean a diminutive circuit board containing a low-power Bluetooth radio and sensors that can measure motion, temperature, humidity, air pressure and the concentrations of several gases, including carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide. A bean also contains an electronic compass and a tiny gyroscope that, acting together, sense its orientation. All of these devices are powered by a wirelessly rechargeable battery.

Mr Holland sees potential for his device beyond the monitoring of stored crops. Placed discreetly in a living room or office, he suggests, it could register intruders via the trembles of its motion sensor. A change in air pressure brought about by blowing on it might let it work as a switch for a room’s lights. The gyroscope would permit it to act as the remote control for a television or hi-fi: swiping a bean through the air could turn the device on, while spinning it in a circle could step the volume up or down, depending on whether the spin were clockwise or anticlockwise. For the elderly, a bean carried in a pocket could register a fall and then call for help via its owner’s phone. For the suspicious, it could record whether a parcel had been mistreated in transit by being heated up or crushed.

That beans would be better than existing ways of doing these things is not always obvious. But they will be programmable via a phone app, so owners will be able to devise other uses as they see fit.

Grain-monitoring, though, is likely to be the first use. Once placed in and around a heap of grain, a collection of the beans will connect together wirelessly, becoming nodes in a network that gives a clear, three-dimensional picture of what is going on inside that heap. Mr Holland’s company, RFMOD, has just started testing beans for this purpose, and he hopes they will be commercially deployed within two years.

One problem is recovering the beans when the granary is emptied. If they became a routine technology this could, no doubt, be done by “pinging” them when a shipment was sorted at the wholesaler, and pulling them out automatically as the grain left a hopper. In the meantime, RFMOD is experimenting with putting them in the plastic insect-trapping containers that farmers already deploy in grain-piles to keep infestations under control.

If the beans do well at monitoring grain, Mr Holland hopes their other applications will make them an important part of the much-discussed “internet of things” which some prophets believe will, in the future, link many objects not currently connected electronically. If his own wildest dreams are fulfilled, that would make RFMOD a large and successful company. It might also suggest that Swaffham Bulbeck, a tiny village, has its own brand of magic to confer, for it was also once home to another startup, Advanced RISC Machines Ltd. ARM Holdings, as that firm is now known, has grown into one of the world’s biggest designers of microprocessors. In Silicon Valley, they do it in garages. In the English fens, it seems, old barns are just as good.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21694517-legume-shaped-sensor-packages-may-help-preserve-stored-crops-cool-beans/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Books and arts




Graphic novels: Lion City march

British political biography: The shredding of Tony Blair

Mervyn King and the financial crisis: Halfway there

Running India: Domesday 2.0

Johnson: Don’t p@nic





Articles Sections Next

Graphic novels

Lion City march

A touching, thoughtful meditation on Singapore’s relentless progress

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye. By Sonny Liew. Pantheon; 320 pages; $30.

WHAT sort of country is Singapore? Westerners who live there get used to being asked two questions whenever they go home: “Can you chew gum?” and “Have you been caned yet?”

These foreigners may be familiar with “Disneyland with the Death Penalty”, a scathing essay that William Gibson wrote in 1993, depicting the Lion City as a soulless, consumerist, authoritarian wasteland. Yet to much of the developing world, Singapore is a model. It is politically stable and geopolitically independent; its citizens enjoy a high standard of living and all the trappings—but not much more than the trappings—of democracy. To its politicians and defenders, Singapore is an achievement born of self-sacrifice, hard work and committed multiculturalism (for instance, public-housing blocks, where most Singaporeans live, must reflect the ethnic make-up of the country: “There are no segregated ghettos in Singapore,” its prime minister boasted in a speech last year).

Like any other country, Singapore means different things to different people. Its detractors admit that modern Singapore is safe, well-run and has achieved remarkable material progress since it became independent just over 50 years ago. And even its defenders admit that Singapore restricts civil liberties (for good reason, in their view), and that its progress has had costs as well as benefits.

Sonny Liew’s brilliantly inventive “The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye” weighs those costs and benefits. Graphic novelists have made a mark in politics: Marjane Satrapi with Iran and Joe Sacco with Palestine are two of the most admired. The latest experiment in political storytelling through graphic art explores Singapore’s history through the career of Charlie, a fictional cartoonist, which begins in the mid-1950s when Singapore was still a British colony.

The book is a series of interviews with Charlie, beginning in 2010, when he is 72 years old. Charlie is mild but steel-spined, observant and proud; with masterful economy of detail—an arched eyebrow here, his head at a resigned angle there—Mr Liew crafts him into a fully realised character.

Charlie’s first published comic is a fairly standard mid-century science-fiction tale in which a boy and his dog discover a giant robot hidden in a cave. But his work quickly turns political. The boy and his dog find themselves embroiled in an anti-colonial demonstration. British police attack unarmed students, but the robot, who responds only to commands in Chinese, steps in to save the day.

Lee Kuan Yew, who founded the People’s Action Party (PAP) in 1954 and won his first parliamentary seat a year later, makes an early appearance in Chan’s work in “Invasion”. The series depicts humanity under the rule of an alien race, the Hegemons. Mr Lee is a lawyer who argues for human self-rule and speaks fluent Hegemonese (“Invasion” is, of course, an allegory, with humans representing Singaporeans and Hegemons the British). Charlie also uses allegory to tell the story of Singapore’s failed merger with the Federation of Malaya in the early 1960s, with Mr Lee as Sang Kancil, a mouse-deer figure from Malaysian folk tales who lives by his wits; the British as Sir Lion, the Malayan prime minister as a kindly orang-utan.

Charlie’s versions of Mr Lee grow steadily more Machiavellian. By 1983 he is “Mr Hairily” (Mr Lee’s name at birth was Harry Lee Kuan Yew), chairman of the so-called Sinkapor Inks corporation, who chucks his company’s newsletter-writer in the janitor’s cupboard for reporting inconvenient truths, and forces his employees to confess to their part in “a Richard Marxist conspiracy”—a sly reference to Operation Spectrum, in which 16 people were arrested and detained without trial, having been accused of being part of a “Marxist conspiracy” to topple the government.

These events remain controversial: the country’s Media Development Authority in effect banned “To Singapore with Love”, a documentary about nine people exiled for their alleged involvement in a communist conspiracy during the 1960s and 1970s. The National Arts Council (NAC) revoked a grant awarded to “The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye” because, as a NAC director explained, the book “potentially undermines the authority or legitimacy of the Singapore government”. The book does not shy away from controversial periods in the nation’s history.

But Singapore did not stop publication. One wonders if Lee Kuan Yew would have been so lenient. But the Singapore of 2016 is not the Singapore of 1983 or the 1950s. It is a more mature, confident country.

Talk to an older Singaporean, however, and at some point you will hear her wax lyrical about the lost kampongs—the small, intimate villages of Singapore replaced by highways and high-rises. In perhaps the book’s most moving section, Charlie recalls the “old uncle with his cinema-on-wheels”: an old man on a bicycle toting a film projector. Eventually that gave way to theatres and television. The old uncles still came by, Charlie, recalls, “but the kids just didn’t seem to get as excited about his appearance anymore. As the years went by you’d see him less and less often, until one day (out of the blue), you’d look, but would not find him anywhere.” Most people, of course, would rather watch films on their flat-screen TVs than on the side of a courtyard wall. But in the rush to give everyone the means to buy state-of-the-art TVs, it’s worth sparing a thought for the walls.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694495-touching-thoughtful-meditation-singapores-relentless-progress-lion-city-march/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

British political biography

The shredding of Tony Blair

The former prime minister gets the Bower treatment. At least some of it is undeserved

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition

War on terror firma

Broken Vows: Tony Blair: The Tragedy of Power. By Tom Bower. Faber & Faber; 653 pages; £20.

IT IS a measure of how far Tony Blair’s stock has fallen that he has attracted the unwelcome attention of Tom Bower. Usually Mr Bower takes aim at controversial businessmen, such as Robert Maxwell, Mohamed al-Fayed, Conrad Black, Bernie Ecclestone, Simon Cowell and (twice) Richard Branson. A diligent cuttings job and interviews with anyone with dirt to dish or an axe to grind provide the material to shred a chap’s reputation.

The charge sheet against the former prime minister is predictably devastating. He was a fraud whose communications skills obscured a paucity of accomplishment during a decade in office. He deceived voters: over Britain’s involvement in two wars and by presiding over an undeclared open-door immigration policy. Distrustful of the competence of cabinet colleagues, unwilling to resolve the dysfunctional relationship with Gordon Brown and sceptical of the “modernising” commitment of senior civil servants, his approach to the exercise of power became destructive of the very fabric of government. His second career as a highly remunerated globe-trotting political consultant, often to some pretty dodgy regimes, has done nothing for his reputation.

The attack is relentless. Much of the evidence supporting Mr Bower’s narrative of a gifted but shallow politician who over-promised and under-delivered appears, at first sight, compelling. However, there is early on a warning about just how unbalanced this account is. Few would disagree that one of Mr Blair’s signal achievements was the Good Friday Agreement that brought an end to 30 years of violence in Northern Ireland. Yet it merits only one rather barbed paragraph.

Mr Blair’s first term certainly lacked any guiding idea about how underperforming public services should be improved other than by spending more money. His losing gamble on the outcome of the Iraq war also drained the prime minister of political capital. Without it, pushing through a reform agenda that was at odds with the ideological prejudices of most of his own party and which Mr Brown, as chancellor in control of the purse strings, was determined to undermine (for personal as much as political reasons) was uphill work.

Where Mr Bower gets it wrong, however, is in casting Mr Blair as a feckless flibbertigibbet incapable of the serious analysis required to think through and implement complex policies. In the second half of his term of office, Mr Blair had a very clear idea of what needed to be done. There was no doubting his intellectual conversion to the role that market discipline could play in improving public services, nor his command of intricate policy detail. But there were only a handful of people who could help him realise his goals. All too often, when faced with Mr Brown’s intransigence, he failed to stand by them.

On Iraq, Mr Bower does his best to suggest that Mr Blair was guilty of an act of deliberate deception in sending Britain to war. He fails to come up with anything fresh. Too much weight was indeed given to patchy intelligence about weapons of mass destruction. But there is no doubt that Mr Blair believed in it and thought it right to act on it. When the long-awaited Chilcot report is finally published, it will interest historians, but it will not satisfy those who say Mr Blair is a war criminal.

Mr Bower is on firmer ground when it comes to Mr Blair’s life since leaving Number 10. Copying Bill Clinton, Mr Blair has combined lucrative political consulting and business networking with running philanthropic foundations: one aims to spread good governance in Africa, another advocates religious tolerance. In theory, the consulting is meant to provide funds for the philanthropy. But the latter often provides moneymaking openings for the former, Mr Bower alleges.

Mr Blair’s acquisition of considerable wealth since leaving office has contributed as much to his subsequent vilification as the residual bitterness over Iraq. But his governments were far from being the unmitigated disaster Mr Bower describes. Had they been, voters would not twice have re-elected him. The author never tries to see things from his subject’s point of view. Nor does he consider the often adverse political context in which Mr Blair was operating. The result is a shrill and misleading account. Readers deserve a fairer and more serious book about this important political figure.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694494-former-prime-minister-gets-bower-treatment-least-some-it-undeserved/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Mervyn King and the financial crisis

Halfway there

The former governor of the Bank of England on reforming global finance

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



The End of Alchemy: Money, Banking and the Future of the Global Economy. By Mervyn King. W.W. Norton; 448 pages; $28.95. Little, Brown; £25.

INSIDER accounts of the financial crisis are two a penny. The recollections of Timothy Geithner, a former American treasury secretary, are packed with pulsating drama. A book from Ben Bernanke, a former chairman of the Federal Reserve, lacks the pyrotechnics but offers a robust defence of the Fed’s response to market meltdown. Mervyn King, who was governor of the Bank of England in 2003-13, sees such “instant memoirs” as “partial and self-serving”. In “The End of Alchemy” there is no gossip and few revelations. Instead Lord King uses his experience of the crisis as a platform from which to present economic ideas to non-specialists.

He does a good job of putting complex concepts into plain English. The discussion of the evolution of money—from Roman times to 19th-century America to today—is a useful introduction for those not quite sure what currency really is. He explains why economies need central banks: at best, they are independent managers of the money supply and rein in the banking system. Central bankers like giving the impression that they have played such roles since time immemorial, but as Lord King points out the reality is otherwise. The Fed was created only in 1913; believe it or not, until 1994 it would not reveal to the public its interest-rate decisions until weeks after the event. Even the Bank of England, founded in 1694, got the exclusive right to print banknotes (in England and Wales) only in 1844.

At times, Lord King can be refreshingly frank. He is no fan of austerity policies, saying that they have imposed “enormous costs on citizens throughout Europe”. He also reserves plenty of criticism for the economics profession. Since forecasting is so hit and miss, he thinks, the practice of giving prizes to the best forecasters “makes as much sense as it would to award the Fields Medal in mathematics to the winner of the National Lottery”.

This is all perfectly interesting, and Lord King opines on a wide range of issues (though with more emphasis on breadth than depth). But the real point of the book, it seems, is to propose a policy to reform global finance. The problem leading up to the crisis, as Lord King sees it, is that commercial banks had little incentive to hold large quantities of safe, liquid assets. They knew that in a panic, the central bank would provide liquidity, no matter the quality of their balance-sheets; in response they loaded up on risky investments.

Instead of this unhappy arrangement, Lord King wants banks to buy “liquidity insurance”. In normal times banks would pledge collateral to the central bank, which would agree to lend a certain amount against it, if necessary. Banks would thus know in advance precisely how much help they could get in the event of a meltdown, making them behave responsibly when times were good.

The argument is persuasive (indeed, some central banks have policies that bear resemblance to the one Lord King is suggesting). However, there is something unsatisfying about a plea for radical reform from a man who has recently spent a decade in a position of exceptional power: if your suggestions are so good, readers will find themselves asking, then why did you not push for them yourself? Lord King has produced a worthy book, but a shamelessly self-serving account of his role during the financial crisis would have been a lot more fun.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694496-former-governor-bank-england-reforming-global-finance-halfway-there/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Running India

Domesday 2.0

A technological blueprint for better government

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition

Your turn now

Rebooting India: Realising a Billion Aspirations. By Nandan Nilekani and Viral Shah. Allen Lane; 337 pages; £20.

IN A month or so, India will have registered a billion residents—the latest stage in the creation of a complete identity database of what will soon be the world’s most populous country. Aadhaar, which means “foundation” in Hindi, matches names with fingerprints and iris scans on a scale that has never been seen before. Reimagining government with such technology at its core will be key to meeting the mounting aspirations of India’s citizens, according to two of the scheme’s architects, Nandan Nilekani and Viral Shah.

If the Domesday Book, an 11th-century survey of England, was commissioned to raise funds for government, Aadhaar’s most useful purpose is to help their disbursement. Making sure each farmer gets one dose of subsidised fertiliser and all poor families their share of rice is fiendish without knowing who they are. Many of those who are entitled to government handouts live in one of the 600,000 Indian villages with no banking facilities.

Serving the citizenry in a country where 59% of births are not registered, and many people can’t read, is a task that has been a costly failure. Rajiv Gandhi, a former prime minister, once claimed that just 17% of subsidies reached the right people: not so much a leaky bucket as a sieve. A patchwork of rival ID schemes, from driving licences to ration cards, electoral rolls and tax-registration numbers, did not serve the purpose of making each and every citizen visible to the state.

Much debate about public policy is about the principles behind it: which citizens should pay how much tax, for example. “Rebooting India” is a welcome detour to the often-overlooked realities of how these principles translate into reality. A government benefit which requires days of trekking to receive, and then a bribe to unlock, may not feel like much of a benefit at all. Women who can access a subsidy without the involvement of their husbands or brothers are in quite a different position than those who cannot.

Aadhaar is transforming the way many citizens interact with the state. It allows the government to pay benefits directly to over 200m bank accounts linked to its database, so cutting out layers of corrupt and inept middlemen. That will feel much more tangible, to the average Indian, than a tax break here or a new subsidy there.



“Rebooting India” is at its best when it delves into the veritable sausage-making that is large-scale government IT projects. (Mr Nilekani, one of the authors, knows more than most about what it takes to deliver these, having co-founded and then run Infosys, an Indian IT giant.) How do you coax a reluctant bureaucracy to adopt a new technology that might erode its privileges? How do you resist those who want to turn it into something more comprehensive than just an ID scheme—and therefore make it more likely to fail? Given Aadhaar’s relatively smooth implementation, civil servants across the world would do well to seek inspiration from it.

Its potential is vast but mostly unknown. It is described as a “platform” in which an “ecosystem” can thrive, much like the iPhone is a platform for apps. Beyond subsidy payments, a few such applications for Aadhaar already exist: one allows citizens to track in real time which bureaucrats are physically at their desk. If that is not helpful, other uses that have not yet been thought of undoubtedly will be.

There is the occasional whiff of naivety. The book’s title alone suggests that India’s governing apparatus could be improved if it could just be turned off and on again. And how can a government that is so inept as to need recasting be trusted to avoid the Orwellian possibilities of a billion-strong database? Police have already nagged to get access to its fingerprints and have been rebuffed—for now.

If Aadhaar is indeed as revolutionary as the personal computer, it is frustrating that the second half of the book veers into other ways IT can help deliver government services. The authors’ suggestions on how road tolls or India’s court system could be better run with added tech savvy are correct, but their solutions to other problems, such as managing health records, lack Aadhaar’s elegance.

It is a credit to Aadhaar that the book, while fascinating, feels like primary material for a weightier tome. The high politics of the scheme are glossed over, particularly the election of Narendra Modi halfway through its implementation (Mr Nilekani stood unsuccessfully as an MP for the rival Congress party). The chronicles of a revolution, if indeed this is one, are best not written by the perpetrators.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694493-technological-blueprint-better-government-domesday-20/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Johnson

Don’t p@nic

Punctuation has rarely been truly stable

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



INTHEBEGINNINGWASTHEWORD, and the word was run together. Ancient texts (like the Greek of the Gospel of John) had few of the devices that tell readers where words begin and end (spaces), which words are proper names (the upper-lower case distinction), where breaks in meaning come (commas, dashes, semicolons and full stops), who said what (inverted commas), and so on.

Most people take punctuation to be something obvious and settled. In fact, the system is in a bit of upheaval. The beginnings of that date back to 1971, when Ray Tomlinson sent an experimental message between two computers in the same room, connected only by ARPANET (the precursor to the internet).

Tomlinson, who died on March 5th, made a lasting contribution to the world’s orthography by choosing the @ symbol for e-mail addresses. His legacy will be a long one. E-mail and the @ sign have conquered the world: you cannot truly say you speak a foreign language until you can give your e-mail address complete with the local word for the glyph, like snabel-a (“elephant-trunk A”) in Danish or aapenstartje (“little monkey’s tail”) in Dutch.

It seems that Tomlinson opened a Pandora’s box. As communication using computers proliferated, so did people’s recourse to those lesser-used characters at the edges of their computer keyboard. In the 1990s, it was the rise of the emoticon, from the humble :-) to the more elaborate, like >:\ (a furrowed-brow look of scepticism). The use of # to signal a topic (#language), as on Twitter, has evolved as a way to send messages through a kind of second channel. Some find this #playful, and others find it #irritating, but it has its uses in condensed media like Twitter.

Other innovations may have seen their day come and go: nerds once preferred tags in the style of HTML (used to code web pages) like “<sarcasm>”. But this already seems to be on the wane, in favour of things like “*sigh*”. A *sigh* was Johnson’s reaction to another story of non-traditional writing: last year Oxford Dictionaries chose an emoji—those cartoonish faces descended from emoticons—as its “Word of the Year”. (It was the face intended to signal “tears of joy”.) Emoji aren’t really words or punctuation, but something akin to a graphical hashtag, performing a bit of the same role as tone of voice and body language in speech.

With all this flux, many people worry that skill with punctuation is disappearing: witness, after all, the way teens text and tweet not bothering to capitalise or punctuate at all. It is in fact more complicated (and interesting) than that. Not putting a full stop in a text is normal for teens in an internet message, and including it sends a separate note of annoyance or frustration on the part of the writer. Full stops can also be used for other effects, like “You. Must. Be. Joking.”

Such chaos is not all that historically unusual. The first English writers, when they punctuated at all, availed themselves of long-forgotten symbols like the diastole and trigon, the interpunct and the diple. Printing began the process of settling the punctuation system, but even that took four centuries. Samuel Johnson’s commas, in the mid-18th century, were not only heavy; many would be ungrammatical today, and this style persisted into the first editions of The Economist in 1843.

As David Crystal, a linguist, points out in his history of punctuation (“Making a Point”) published in 2015, at the dawn of the 19th century, punctuation prescribers were still divided into those who insisted that punctuation follow grammar and those who wanted it to aid elocution. Even one of the grammarians, Lindley Murray, wrote in 1795, in a hugely influential grammar book, that a semicolon signalled a pause twice as long as a comma; that a colon was twice as long as a semicolon; and that a full stop was twice as long as a colon. (Try that next time you read a text aloud.)

Punctuation, in other words, has not always been the epitome of order that some of its fans think. It is unsurprising that the rise of computers would unsettle a system that had barely settled to begin with. Fortunately, most of the upheaval is confined to new channels: e-mail, texting, Twitter and whatever is to come next. Even most teens know to keep it out of formal writing. And those who prefer not to follow fads at all need only wait a while: much of today’s playful punctuation will soon become unfashionable, dead as the diastole and the diple.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21694497-punctuation-has-rarely-been-truly-stable-dont-pnic/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Obituary




Obituary: Nancy Reagan: Keeping control





Articles Sections Next

Obituary: Nancy Reagan

Keeping control

Nancy Reagan, America’s First Lady through the 1980s, died on March 6th, aged 94

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



IF ANYONE attacked her Ronnie, when he was governor of California in the 1970s, Nancy Reagan knew just what to do. She would run a big tub, pour in lots of bath salts, and as she soaked she would shout defiance at the wall. Didn’t happen. Didn’t happen. What are you doing to my husband? What’s wrong with that? By the time the tub was cool she was all sweetness, and the world was in kilter again.

Keeping life’s untidiness at bay was a full-time job. It started with herself. Only Julius could style her hair, and he had to be flown in from Los Angeles. As a teenager her nose was too big, so she had it done, of course. (She wanted to be a movie star; that never came to much, but she networked with Spencer Tracy and Clark Gable and met Ronnie, so it was worth it.) With daily exercise she could stay a size four, and look stunning in the Bill Blass gowns and red Adolfo suits that came in armfuls to the White House. But her ankles were so thick that she cried for days when the Washington Star noticed.

On every side lay disorder, even in the White House. Ashtrays that needed emptying (she would do it herself, if no one else would). Pictures hanging askew, which must be straightened. Coffee cups on desks. Aides coming in sweaty, wearing trainers and with mussed hair: just inappropriate. Appearances mattered, which was why she had refused to live in the governor’s house in Sacramento, that old firetrap, and instead moved to a 12-room Tudor mansion in a better part of town. Good taste, and a horror of mismatched plates, was the reason she spent $209,508 on new china for the White House, which everyone attacked her for. Otherwise she was frugality itself, recycling unwanted presents and getting her rich friends to donate their furniture. Because everything had to be just so, she continually fussed, phoned and deployed her two steeliest weapons, the silence and the stare. Before state dinners, she checked that the salad leaves were perfectly arranged and the sauce exactly seasoned. When the Queen of England visited, she drafted the guest list five times over. If anything went wrong, she was furious. Naturally.

Unhappy families

Her own history needed tidying, too. Two years were lost from her age somewhere. Her potty-mouthed mother was kept at arm’s length. Her father, a car-dealer, out of the picture since her parents’ divorce, was replaced as “real” by Loyal Davis, her stepfather, a respectable neurosurgeon who did not agree to adopt her for six years. As for her own children, they were frankly a nightmare: Patti a damn hippie and Ron, eventually, a ballet dancer. She ransacked his bedroom for drugs and worried herself sick that he was probably gay, but had to accept in the end that families couldn’t be wrapped up prettily in white paper. The hardest thing was that Ronnie had brought two children of his own, with Jane Wyman, to the marriage. Her shadow came too. They couldn’t be fitted in at all.

As for Ronnie himself, her wonder and her hero, the man without whom she couldn’t live—he was her chief project. Dear, sweet, easy-going Ronnie had no straight-line ambition to be governor or president. She had it for him. (She wasn’t political one scrap, beyond being, obviously, Republican, but could nudge him to do smart things like reach out to the Soviets.) Ronnie loved and trusted everyone; so it was just as well she didn’t. If anyone was harming him, they had to go, and she would keep at it and at it.

She couldn’t win every battle, of course. Don Regan, pushy awful man, was turfed out as White House chief of staff, but Ronnie refused to put all protesters in jail, as she requested, or sack Cap Weinberger from the Pentagon, because he was his friend. (And sure enough, she wouldn’t drop her own best friends, like the Bloomingdales or Frank Sinatra, just because they got in a mess.) In front of the cameras she made certain Ronnie looked good, and tore up official snaps that showed him sleepy or old. If he got lost for words, she supplied them. Her unwavering, loving gaze when he spoke was, in fact, a firewall.

One thing she could not order was the future and his fate. She could try her damnedest, though. She insisted that on election day in 1970, when Ronnie was running again for governor of California, he should play golf and eat chicken curry for dinner, just as he had on the day when he was first elected. It worked. In the White House she brought in astrologers to fix, according to Ronnie’s star chart, the times of press conferences and foreign trips. That worked, too. It even helped when she felt she needed to change her own image as a clothes-horse and an icicle to something softer. Following her seers’ advice, she started a “Just Say No” campaign against drug use and began to appear more often with sick children. When Ronnie got Alzheimer’s, she rather bravely—for a Republican—started pushing for stem-cell research.

People still misunderstood her. They kept sniping at her tight little laugh, her jewellery and her influence over her husband. Perhaps, since Ronnie was so popular, they needed her as a lightning rod. Perhaps these press types—especially the women reporters—wished they too could be that slim and that much in control. Well, they would just have to work at it as hard as she had. Even in the bath.



* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21694453-driving-force-behind-ronald-reagans-presidency-was-94-nancy-reagan-americas-first-lady/print





Articles Sections Next





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Employment outlook

The Economist commodity-price index

Markets





Articles Sections Next

Interactive indicators

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/node/21694519/print





Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Output, prices and jobs

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21694506-output-prices-and-jobs/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21694507-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-rates/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Employment outlook

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition



A survey from Manpower, an employment-services firm, shows that in most countries a majority of employers are planning to expand their payrolls in the second quarter of this year. But the mood among firms has become gloomier since the equivalent survey for the first quarter of 2016; in only eight countries do a majority of employers expect to see improving conditions. Brazil is not one of them: the percentage of employers planning on shedding workers exceeds those who think they will hire more, and employer confidence is at its lowest since the survey was launched in 2009. Japan’s labour market looks healthier for jobseekers: nearly a third of employers say they have jobs to fill.





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21694508-employment-outlook/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

The Economist commodity-price index

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21694509-economist-commodity-price-index/print





Previous Articles Sections Next





Previous Articles Sections Next

Markets

Mar 12th 2016 | From the print edition





* * *



This article was downloaded by calibre from http://www.economist.com/news/economic-and-financial-indicators/21694513-markets/print





Previous Articles Sections Next



Table of Contents

The Economist [Fri, 11 Mar 2016]

The world this week



Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders



After Moore’s law: The future of computing





The Petrobras scandal: Interrogating Lula





Farming in Africa: Miracle grow





China’s economy: Ore-inspiring





Europe’s migrant crisis: A messy but necessary deal





Letters



Donald Trump, trachoma, trust companies, China, the Maldives, English law firms, Gaelic games: Letters to the editor





Briefing



African agriculture: A green evolution





United States



Varieties of inequality: The great divergence





Justice in Louisiana: The ruin of many a poor boy





Polling flops: Mich-fire





GOP souvenir edition: Heard on the trail





The primary race: Trump done well





Becoming an astronaut: The mice in their million hordes





Lexington: Not so special





The Americas



Brazil’s political and economic crisis: Standing by their man





Caribbean prisons: Blue seas, black holes





Antiquities in Latin America: Returning the hatchet





Bello: The return of an old enemy





Asia



Elections in the Philippines: A family affair





Politics in Kiribati: Making waves





India’s guru-entrepreneurs: Holy noodles





Taiwanese identity: Multiculti roots





Japanese politics: Abe agonistes





Banyan: Not gloating, but fretting





China



The National People’s Congress: Unlucky for some





Political music: The song dynasty





Carbon emissions: Aiming low





Trade with North Korea: What sanctions?





Middle East and Africa



Women in Saudi Arabia: One step forward, one step back





Transport in the Middle East: Let’s go together





Equatorial Guinea: Palace in the jungle





Rwanda: A hilly dilemma





Energy in Rwanda: What lies beneath





Europe



Europe’s migrant crisis: Desperate times, desperate measures





Regional elections in Germany: Mutti’s challenge





Nadia Savchenko: A modern martyr





Italy’s Five Star Movement: Smartening up





Charlemagne: The necessity of culture





Britain



Britain and the European Union: Next stop: Brexit?





Illegal immigration: Channel hopping





Aston Martin and McLaren: Speed merchants





Brexit brief: The roots of Euroscepticism





Portsmouth’s shipyard: Pompey’s predicament





Higher education: Open universities





Young people and work: Jobs for the boys and girls





Sunday-trading laws: Scotched





Bagehot: Goggling at Britain





International



Civil servants: Mandarin lessons





Exam-cramming in India: Turn over your papers…now





Technology Quarterly



After Moore's law: Double, double, toil and trouble





More Moore: The incredible shrinking transistor





New designs: Taking it to another dimension





Brain scan: Bruno Michel





Quantum computing: Harnessing weirdness





What comes next: Horses for courses





Business



Health care: Things are looking app





Fracking companies: DUC and cover





Royal Enfield: Approved by mothers-in-law





The Wallenberg group: A Nordic pyramid





BMW at 100: Bavarian rhapsody





Retailing: Shops to showrooms





Schumpeter: Open for business





Finance and economics



Chinese property: For whom the bubble blows





Buttonwood: High tech meets low finance





America’s economy: On the one hand





Commodities: Steel chrysanthemums





Greek banks: On the front line





Financing divorce: Till debt us do part





Discount brokerages: Free trade





Free exchange: A proper reckoning





Science and technology



Artificial intelligence and Go: Showdown





Early human diets: Without fire?





African science: Crucible





Crop storage and the internet of things: Cool beans





Books and arts



Graphic novels: Lion City march





British political biography: The shredding of Tony Blair





Mervyn King and the financial crisis: Halfway there





Running India: Domesday 2.0





Johnson: Don’t p@nic





Obituary



Obituary: Nancy Reagan: Keeping control





Economic and financial indicators



Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





Employment outlook





The Economist commodity-price index





Markets





