The world this week

Leaders

Letters

Briefing

United States

The Americas

Asia

China

Middle East and Africa

Europe

Britain

International

Special report: Business in Africa

Business

Finance and economics

Science and technology

Books and arts

Obituary

Economic and financial indicators





The world this week




Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon





Politics this week

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Ukraine’s prime minister, Arseniy Yatseniuk, said he will resign as soon as the parliament finds a candidate to replace him. President Petro Poroshenko has nominated Volodymyr Groisman, the speaker of parliament, but he has struggled to gather enough support among the splintered parties to form a new government. Mr Yatseniuk’s approval ratings had fallen to single digits over his failure to attack corruption; Mr Poroshenko’s are drooping too. See article.

Belgian police arrested Mohamed Abrini, a suspected terrorist who confessed to being the “man in the hat” in images of the attack on Brussels airport on March 22nd. He is believed to have played a role in the terrorist attacks in Paris last November too. Police interrogators said he revealed that the Brussels attackers had originally aimed to strike a football tournament in France.

Emmanuel Macron, France’s economy minister, launched a movement called “En Marche!” (On the Move!), to bring liberal economic ideas into the Socialist Party. France is preparing for presidential elections in 2017 with a Socialist president, François Hollande, who is the least popular president in French history. See article.

Turkey formally requested that Germany prosecute a comedian who ridiculed President Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Under a little-used German law criminalising the defamation of foreign leaders, Jan Böhmermann faces up to three years in prison for a poem that involved ludicrous sexual innuendoes regarding Mr Erdogan and animals. The row complicates Germany’s increasingly important relationship with Turkey. See article.

Slight return

Keiko Fujimori, a conservative, came top in the first round of Peru’s presidential election with nearly 40% of the vote. She will face Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, a liberal former prime minister and IMF official, in a run-off on June 5th. Ms Fujimori’s father, Alberto Fujimori, Peru’s president in the 1990s, is serving a jail sentence for human-rights abuses and corruption.

A congressional committee in Brazil voted to press ahead with impeachment proceedings against the president, Dilma Rousseff. Next, the lower house of Congress will take up a vote against her, on charges that she manipulated government accounts. If that passes by two-thirds, she will face trial in the Senate. A steel wall was raised in the capital to separate the crowds who are expected to demonstrate for and against impeachment.

A federal appeals court in New York cleared the way for Argentina, which defaulted on its debt in 2001, to repay bondholders who had rejected earlier debt restructurings. This should allow the country to resume borrowing on international capital markets. It plans raise up to $15 billion through a new bond issue. Most of the money will be used to pay the holdout bondholders. See article.

Knowing when to fold ’em

Congress made an opening bid towards solving Puerto Rico’s $72 billion debt crisis. A House committee offered the island most of the benefits of a bankruptcy, including the suspension of litigation while a fiscal plan is sorted, new abilities to corral creditors and the power to modify its debt. This relief would come at a steep cost. An “oversight board”, nominated by Congress, would in effect revoke the self-government the commonwealth has enjoyed since 1948. See article.

Paul Ryan, the Speaker of the House, once again ruled out putting himself forward as a candidate for the Republican Party’s presidential nomination. Some Republicans had hoped he might ride to the rescue at the convention in Cleveland, saving them from either Donald Trump or Ted Cruz. That now looks unlikely.

War, peace and war

Peace talks between some of Syria’s warring parties restarted in Geneva. But with a new ground offensive, supported by Russian air strikes, poised to start against rebel-held parts of Aleppo, the “partial ceasefire” struck in February risks falling apart. Meanwhile Bashar al-Assad’s government organised elections in its remaining territory, which Western countries denounced as a sham.

Drought forced Malawi’s president, Peter Mutharika, to declare a national emergency. Some 3m people in his country already require food aid.

American air strikes in Somalia killed 12 members of the Shabab, a jihadist outfit. A Pentagon spokesman said they posed an imminent threat to American soldiers assisting the Somali government.



Egypt’s president, Abdel-Fatah al-Sisi, caused uproar on social media by announcing that two uninhabited islands that Egypt has been looking after since the 1950s will be handed back to Saudi Arabia. He angrily refused to answer questions about the agreement.

China’s nervous neighbours continued to look for new ways to defend themselves. A visit to India by Ash Carter, America’s defence secretary, brought an outline agreement on sharing military bases, equipment and fuel. Separately, defence officials from Vietnam and the Philippines will meet to discuss joint patrols of the South China Sea.

Taiwan objected to Kenya’s decision to send 45 Taiwanese to China for criminal investigation in a fraud case. It called the move “extrajudicial abduction” by China and accused Kenyan police of forcing suspects onto an aeroplane.



A court in Changsha in central China ruled that a gay couple could not register as married. Officials allowed about a hundred supporters of the two men to attend their hearing, which was the first of its kind in China. Hundreds more gathered outside the building.

Mobile-internet services were suspended in parts of Indian-controlled Kashmir, to slow the spread of protests against the security forces’ killing of four civilians at two separate demonstrations.

The ruling party in South Korea lost its long-held parliamentary majority, worsening a long-standing legislative gridlock that hampers President Park Geun-hye’s plans. Her Saenuri party had hoped to increase its share of the 300-seat National Assembly to three-fifths (the fraction required to bring bills to a vote).

So long, suckers

Inky, a common octopus, made a bold contortionist’s escape from New Zealand’s national aquarium. Slipping through a gap at the top of his tank, he scurried across the floor and made his way down a 50-metre drainpipe into Hawke’s Bay, North Island.





Business this week

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

The EU detailed plans to force big firms to open up their tax affairs. Under the scheme, companies with sales of more than €750m ($846m) a year would be required to publish how much tax they pay and in which countries, including in tax havens. Although the move has been long-planned, it has been given impetus by the revelations contained in the recent “Panama papers” leak. Britain, meanwhile, is mulling a new law that would criminalise companies that failed to stop their staff assisting in tax evasion. See article.

Mail shot

The publisher of the Daily Mail is looking for private-equity backing to launch a bid for Yahoo. Potential buyers have until April 18th to submit bids for the ailing internet firm. Yahoo has lost ground to rivals such as Facebook and Google, both of which receive significantly more revenue from advertising. The Mail is the world’s most-read English-language news website, with an estimated 220m monthly unique visitors. Several other media firms are also thought to be considering bids. See article.

Nomura is to reduce the size of its European equities business. Reports suggest the Japanese bank may cut between 500 and 600 jobs in the region. Nomura made a loss of ¥50 billion ($458m) in Europe for the first three quarters of this financial year. It will unveil a full restructuring plan on 27th April, along with full-year results, when it may also announce cuts to its operations in America.

Goldman Sachs is to pay $5.1 billion to settle a case brought by American authorities over the mis-selling of mortgage-backed securities between 2005 and 2007. Investors lost billions of dollars through the practice, according to the US Department of Justice. Goldman Sachs said it was pleased to put such “legacy matters” behind it.

Regulators told five big American banks, including JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America, that their living wills—plans that would make it easier to dismember them or start winding them up—did not pass muster. The firms have until October to submit new plans or face sanctions.

Britain’s Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) asked the European Commission to block CK Hutchison’s proposed £10.5 billion ($14.9 billion) purchase of O2, a rival mobile-phone operator. The deal, which would reduce the number of mobile networks in Britain from four to three, would be bad for consumers, said the CMA. Although a final decision by the commission is not due until mid-May, it may bring its judgment forward, so as not to impinge on Britain’s referendum on EU membership in June.

Italy approved a plan that would see a consortium of the country’s banks, insurers and pension firms set up a €5.5 billion ($6.2 billion) bail-out fund to help troubled lenders. It hopes that since most of the institutions involved are private, the scheme will skirt EU rules on state subsidies. It also said it would streamline bankruptcy procedures, a step that might help banks resolve the €360 billion of bad loans on their books, by making it easier to seize collateral. See article.

It emerged that American regulators have threatened to bar Elizabeth Holmes, the founder of Theranos, a blood-testing company, from owning or operating a lab for two years. Concerns have been raised that the firm’s procedures and practices.

The IMF lowered its forecast for global growth in 2016 from 3.4% to 3.2%—although that is still a shade faster than 2015. While America, Europe and the emerging world as a bloc all saw similar downgrades, the forecast for sub-Saharan Africa was pared back the most, in large part because of a gloomier outlook for oil-rich Nigeria, the continent’s largest economy.

Not-so-delicate China

There was better economic news in China’s latest trade figures. Exports from the country grew by 18.7% in March compared with a year earlier, the biggest increase for 13 months. Imports fell by 1.7%— less than expected—prompting hopes that manufacturing is recovering. However, the results looked good only in comparison with bleak 2015 figures.



The more optimistic outlook in China came too late for Peabody Energy, the world’s largest private coal firm, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Peabody blamed weak demand in China, as well as a fall in the coal price, environmental legislation and abundant natural gas in America, for its woes. The firm said it would continue to operate as it attempts to restructure its debts. See article.

Vivendi, a French media firm, chaired by Vincent Bolloré, took a 3.5% stake in Mediaset, Italy’s largest commercial broadcaster. The deal moves Vivendi closer to creating a pan-European media empire.





KAL's cartoon

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



More KAL's cartoons





Leaders




Dealing with autism: Beautiful minds, wasted

Business in Africa: Making Africa work

Tax transparency: Two rights, wrong policy

The French left: Liberty, equality, seniority

Solar energy: The new sunbathers





Dealing with autism

Beautiful minds, wasted

How not to squander the potential of autistic people

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



IN AMERICA in 1970 one child in 14,000 was reckoned to be autistic. The current estimate is one in 68—or one in 42 among boys. Similarly high numbers can be found in other rich countries: a study in South Korea found that one in 38 children was affected. Autism is a brain condition associated with poor social skills. It has a wide spectrum of symptoms, from obsessive behaviour to hypersensitivity to sound, light or other sensory stimulation, the severity of which ranges from mild to life-blighting. The range of consequences is also wide. At one end, the autism of a computer scientist may be barely noticeable; at the other, a quarter of autistic children do not speak.

Autism is a condition that defies simple generalisations. Except one: the potential of far too many autistic people is being squandered. Although around half of those with autism are of average intelligence or above, they do far worse than they should at school and at work. In France, almost 90% of autistic children attend primary school, but only 1% make it to high school. Figures from America, which works harder to include autistic pupils, suggest that less than half graduate from high school. In Britain, only 12% of higher-functioning autistic adults work full time. Globally, the United Nations reckons that 80% of those with autism are not in the workforce.

These numbers represent a tragic human toll, as millions of people live idle and isolated outside the world of work. Loving parents and siblings struggle to know how to help. Autism imposes hefty economic costs, reducing economic growth and swelling disability rolls. One American study suggests those costs could be as high as 2% of GDP. Fortunately, this need not be the case. Evidence, particularly from advanced economies, suggests there are plenty of things, from earlier screening to greater assistance with finding jobs, that could transform the lives of many autistic people (see Briefing).

Pieces in the puzzle

Early screening is essential. There is no definitive test for autism. It can be diagnosed only by observing behaviour. Most babies learn by watching their parents smile, hug, eat and bicker; autistic children often fixate on inanimate objects or play with their toys in an oddly repetitive way. Relying on diagnosis by observation makes the statistics around autism slippery: one reason the condition’s incidence has risen in recent decades is that doctors have changed the way they detect it. Yet there is little doubt that early diagnosis and intervention can help autistic children’s brains develop better. If parents fill in a detailed questionnaire about what their children can and can’t do, doctors can usually spot the symptoms by the age of two. Speech therapy and other intensive treatments can help an autistic toddler cope and encourage learning and interaction at an age when the brain is at its most plastic. A study in 2013 in Washington state found that, though costly, such early coaching paid for itself within eight years by reducing the need for extra help in school. Alas, the average age of diagnosis in the rich world is three and a half.

A second aim should be to provide autistic children with schooling that suits them. A debate rages about when and how to include autistic children in mainstream classes. The evidence argues against blanket rules. Some do better when mixed in with other children and given additional support. Some need to be taught separately, either for their own sake or because they are disruptive. Others need a bit of both. Whatever the degree of integration, teaching autistic children effectively will require more funding, to train both specialist and mainstream teachers. In one study 60% of British teachers said they felt unprepared to teach autistic children.

From genes to synapses

Maximising the returns from this investment in education means ensuring that autistic adults find work. Not all such people can hold down a job. But the high-functioning among them tend to be deft analysts. They can spot patterns or errors in data that are invisible to most non-autistics, making them attractive employees for software firms.

Even less gifted autistic people often have an extraordinary capacity to focus and an eye for detail that make them effective workers. Their desire for routine and dislike of change make them loyal ones, too. They can excel at jobs that require precision and repetition, such as updating databases, stocking shelves, organising libraries or tinkering with broken cars. Firms that set out to recruit autistic workers, such as Walgreen’s, a big pharmacy chain, find them just as productive as their peers.

Plenty more companies could benefit from hiring autistic people. Agencies that specialise in recruiting them stress that even if they interview badly (not making eye contact, taking questions too literally), they may still be good workers. For autistic candidates, employers should consider replacing interviews with tests of relevant skills—filing tests for filing jobs, coding tests for coding jobs, and so on. Once an autistic person is hired, small adjustments help employers to get the best out of him: for example, by providing a calm workspace and clear instructions, expressed textually or visually rather than verbally. (Teaching managers to give clear instructions is a good idea for other reasons, too.)

The final element of an ambitious autism agenda should be greater investment in research. Medical understanding of the condition has improved since 1949, when the psychiatrist who first identified autism blamed cold, unloving mothers for making their children withdraw into themselves. Scientists today are sure that genes play a role, as do environmental factors. Still, many questions remain unanswered, both about the condition’s origin and its progression. The amount of public money spent studying autism is shockingly modest. Britain’s government spends a trivial £4m ($5.6m) a year. America shells out around $200m a year—about what it costs to look after 100 severely autistic people for a lifetime. Such sums are dwarfed by the opportunity cost of having so many potentially productive people dependent on others. Beautiful or otherwise, an autistic mind is a terrible thing to waste.





Business in Africa

Making Africa work

The continent’s future depends on people, not commodities

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



“IS ANYONE here actually hoping to make any money, or are you all just trying to minimise your losses?” The question, asked at a dinner in London for investors who specialise in Africa, showed how the mood has changed in the past year. The financiers around the table—mostly holders of African bonds—all said they were simply trying not to lose money.

Only a few years ago people were queuing up to invest in Africa. As recently as 2012 Zambia paid less than Spain to borrow dollars. Private-equity funds dedicated to Africa raised record sums to invest in shopping malls and firms making everything from nappies to fruit juice. Businessfolk salivated at the prospect of selling to the fast-growing African middle class, which by one measure numbered 350m people. Miners sank billions into African soil to feed China’s appetite for minerals.

Now investors are glum. In the short run, they are right to worry. In the long run, as our special report on African business shows this week (see article), the potential rewards from a market of 1.2 billion people are too juicy to ignore, despite the risks.

From oil in the gears to sand in the wheels

For decades, sentiment about Africa has followed commodity prices, rising and falling like a bungee-jumper at Victoria Falls. The recent plunge has caused a 16% drop in sub-Saharan Africa’s terms of trade (the ratio of the price of its exports to that of its imports). Growth across the region will slow to about 3% this year, predicts the World Bank, down from 7-8% a decade ago. That is barely ahead of population growth of 2.7%. Nigeria and Angola, two big oil exporters, will probably need bail-outs from the IMF within a year.

Yet Afro-pessimists should remember two things about commodity busts. They don’t last for ever. And they don’t hurt everyone: 17 African countries with a quarter of the region’s population will show a net benefit from the current one, thanks to cheaper energy. More important, by focusing on the minerals markets it is easy to miss some big trends that are happening above ground—and these are mostly positive.

The first is that Africa is far more peaceful than it was even a decade ago. The wars that ripped apart the Democratic Republic of Congo and sucked in its neighbours, causing millions of deaths, have largely been quelled. A few states, such as Somalia, South Sudan and the Central African Republic, are in chaos. But overall the risk of dying violently in Africa has tumbled. The latest ranking of the world’s most violent countries by the Geneva Declaration includes just two African states (tiny Lesotho and Swaziland) among its top ten.

Africa is also far more democratic than it was. In the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, only one sub-Saharan government was peacefully voted out of office. Now nearly all face regular elections, which are harder to rig thanks to social media. Voters have real choices—one reason why policies have improved.

Old-style governments favoured nationalisation, printing money and (in some cases) rounding peasants up at gunpoint and forcing them onto collective farms. Small wonder Africa grew poorer between 1980 and 2000. Now inflation has largely been tamed, most central banks are islands of excellence and many ministers boast of cutting red tape. Five of the ten fastest reformers in the World Bank’s latest report on the ease of doing business are African. Better government has led to better results. The proportion of Africans living in absolute poverty has fallen from 58% to 41% since 2000. In that time primary-school enrolment has risen from 60% to 80%. Annual malaria deaths have fallen by more than 60%.

Pessimists fret that much of this progress will reverse now that Africa faces economic headwinds. There are some worrying signs. Leaders once hailed as democrats are amending constitutions to escape term limits. In Congo, Joseph Kabila’s efforts to cling to power risk restarting a civil war, as the president of neighbouring Burundi already has. The continent’s two biggest economies are making needless and costly policy errors. Nigeria is trying to prop up its overvalued currency by, in effect, banning imports. Instead it is driving up inflation. South Africa, meanwhile, has prompted capital flight and brought economic growth to a halt by keeping in power a president who was found to have breached the constitution and on whose watch corruption has flourished.

But massive missteps like these are now the exception rather than the rule. Most countries in Africa are following sound economic policies, controlling government deficits and keeping inflation in check. Dig beneath the headlines, and even in countries that are making big errors there is momentum for reform: in South Africa once-taboo policies such as privatisation are back on the table, and in Nigeria the government is clamping down on corruption and trimming a bloated civil service. Ethiopia is sucking in foreign investment, and smaller economies such as Ivory Coast and Rwanda are growing rapidly after making it easier to do business.

Minds, not mines

The continent’s future is in the balance. Whether it bounces back from this commodity slump or slips back into stagnation, war and autocracy will depend on whether enough of its leaders keep moving forward. Two goals stand out. The first is to recognise the new reality. Given the decline in its terms of trade, Africa’s buying power has gone down. Currencies must fall and governments adjust. Those that relied on mineral royalties must broaden their revenue bases: taxes are just 10-15% of GDP in most African countries.

Second, African governments need to keep up the hard slog of improving the basics. Bad roads, grasping officials and tariff barriers still hobble trade between African countries, which is only 11% of total African exports and imports. Improving that means investing in infrastructure, fighting corruption and freer trade.

Africa’s past has long been defined by commodities, but its future rests on the productivity of its people. By 2050 the UN predicts that there will be 2.5 billion Africans—a quarter of the world’s population. Given good governance, they will prosper. The alternative is too dire to imagine.





Tax transparency

Two rights, wrong policy

A push to publish people’s tax returns pits transparency against privacy. Which should win?

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



THE “Panama papers”, a vast data leak on the use of offshore tax havens by the rich and powerful, have already claimed the scalp of Iceland’s prime minister. Now they are seriously embarrassing Britain’s leader. David Cameron will not—and should not—lose his job over revelations that his family has made use of offshore tax arrangements. But the Panama papers have led to clamorous demands that politicians should be required to make their tax returns public. Mr Cameron revealed six years of tax data on April 10th (see article), the first time a British prime minister has done such a thing.

Questions about how much information should be made available on people’s tax affairs stretch beyond Britain. In America, where presidential candidates are used to public scrutiny of their returns, Donald Trump has been batting away requests that he release his tax records. The debate also extends beyond politicians: in Norway, Sweden and Finland, everyone’s tax returns are available online. Working out where the line should be drawn on requiring the publication of individuals’ returns is not easy, because it brings into conflict two basic principles: transparency and privacy.

Arguments for Scandinavian-style radical transparency fall into two categories. The first is that it will reduce bad behaviour. People who know that their details can be scrutinised by friends and associates will report their income more meticulously, and hesitate before using convoluted schemes to minimise the taxes they pay. One study found that business owners declared 3% more income when Norway made its returns searchable online in 2001 (see article). The second is that more information will mean better choices: by individuals as they decide which jobs to pursue or wages to push for, and by policymakers as they examine issues such as equal pay.

The opposing camp musters several responses. Bad behaviour simply changes its form, rather than being eliminated: even those nice Scandinavians are fond of using foundation-owned corporate structures to reduce tax bills, for example. And transparency is as likely to encourage nosiness as better policy choices: in full-frontal Norway, many complain that the exercise does little more than furnish “tax porn” for the idly curious. A trove of aggregate data on income distribution and gender pay gaps is publicly available in many countries.

In defence of privacy

The case for privacy is not purely utilitarian: it is important in its own right. To justify putting everyone’s tax information in the public domain, the case must be made that it is the best way to achieve a greater good. That case is not compelling enough. A simpler code and more resources for the tax authorities are better ways to reduce tax-dodging than nosy neighbours and social shaming.

What of a narrower disclosure requirement, for politicians and others in positions of authority? People in public office have less entitlement to privacy, the argument goes. Those who make the laws should show that they are not subject to conflicts of interest. If today’s systems for preventing conflicts are not working (Britain’s register of MPs’ interests has clear gaps), the remedy is to strengthen them rather than to throw tax returns into the breach. When it is only public figures who see their tax affairs spread out for the delectation of the multitudes, many people with useful skills will refuse to enter the public arena. Some 68% of British respondents told YouGov pollsters this month that they think all senior MPs should publish their tax returns; a growing number will no doubt do just that. But it should be a choice, not an obligation. The case that transparency should trump privacy is not convincing.





The French left

Liberty, equality, seniority

French politics usually favours grey hair and fusty ideas. Emmanuel Macron provides fresh thinking

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



CANADA boasts 44-year-old Justin Trudeau; Italy has Matteo Renzi; even America’s Barack Obama became president in his 40s, promising change. When a dynamic 38-year-old launches a new political movement in France, however, he is dismissed as an upstart. This, at least, is the reaction of many party barons to the launch last week by Emmanuel Macron, the economy minister, of “En Marche!” (On the Move!), a cross-party movement designed to “unblock” France. They are right to judge him an untested outsider—and will try to keep him one. But Mr Macron has captured the broader French imagination, and his ideas deserve a hearing.

In many respects, Mr Macron’s effort to reboot France by creating a consensus for change that reaches from the centre-left to centre-right looks doomed. He has never been elected, and is not a member of President François Hollande’s Socialist Party. He thus has no party base, no political machine and no grassroots network. Much of the French left considers his past as an investment banker unforgivable. He is (probably) too loyal to run against Mr Hollande, if the unpopular president defies reason and seeks re-election next year. Were Mr Hollande instead to retire quietly, Mr Macron would face a crowd of other presidential hopefuls, including a fellow moderniser, the prime minister, Manuel Valls.

Yet there is a yearning in France, as elsewhere, for a different sort of politics. The left-right divide is increasingly seen as the source of obstructive petty politicking rather than a reflection of distinct ideological identity. Outdoor sit-in movements, born in Spain and now spreading in France, show exasperation with tired party machines. The march of populist nationalism from the fringes of respectability to the centre of voting intentions demands new thinking by mainstream parties about how it can best be disarmed. The right response to all this in France surely cannot be the prospect in 2017 of the same line-up as in 2012: Mr Hollande on the left, Nicolas Sarkozy on the centre-right and Marine Le Pen on the nationalist right.

Politics 2.0

Mr Macron’s high poll ratings suggest that he appeals to the politically disillusioned. Two of his efforts merit particular attention. One is the desire to reach across the left-right divide. This is partly an attempt to overcome the resistance to change entrenched by a polarised system. But it also hints at a possible future shift. Europe’s globally minded parties of left and right often have more in common, on matters of trade and immigration, for instance, than either do with the protectionist, identity politics of the nationalist right. For now, tribal instincts, backed by institutional machinery, still prop up the old split. But France has already learned, in regional elections, that the left and right cannot always fight each other, as well as Ms Le Pen.

His other effort is about how to adapt progressive thinking for the 21st-century economy. Unlike many others on the French left, Mr Macron argues that digital disruption can be a progressive force if it opens up opportunities for, say, the 25% of young French people who are unemployed. But it also demands a broader rethink about how systems of welfare and job protection, forged in an era of jobs-for-life, can adapt to Uber-isation. What do rules about working time mean, for example, when salaried employment is no longer the norm?

More than 40 years ago Michel Crozier, a French sociologist, published “The Blocked Society”, deploring his country’s difficulties in adapting to a changing world. It is far from clear that Mr Macron will manage to build his movement into a force that can overcome such blockages. Maybe all he can hope for is to put out uncomfortable ideas, and nudge the debate forward. European social democracy is not flush with fresh thinkers right now. France dismisses its own at its peril.





Solar energy

The new sunbathers

To see how bright the future of solar energy is, look to the developing world

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



THE sun is the world’s battery pack. Photosynthesis captured the energy that is burned in fossil fuels. The sun drives the wind and ocean currents. And in an hour and a quarter the amount of sunlight that threads through the clouds to the Earth’s surface could power all the world’s electricity, vehicles, boilers, furnaces and cooking stoves for a year.

Yet solar power produces less than 1% of the world’s commercial energy. For a long time it was dismissed as a luxury only the rich could afford; it spoke volumes that Germany, a place where the sun shines for less than five hours on an average day, used to lead the world in installed solar capacity. Now, however, solar is coming of age (see article).

Solar power garnered $161 billion in new investment in 2015, more than natural gas and coal combined. A trend that began in northern Europe, where electricity demand is stagnant and clouds proliferate, is taking root in countries where power needs are growing fast and the sun shines brighter. For the first time last year, developing countries attracted more investment in renewable energy than rich ones. Poorer countries, from China to Chile, are increasingly getting their electricity from giant solar parks in arid places linked to their national grids. This year America hopes to triple the 3 gigawatts (GW) of solar capacity it added in 2015; China, the new world leader, and India each plan to add about 100GW in the next four and six years respectively.

Lower costs help explain this extraordinary expansion. The price of solar panels, which are produced almost exclusively in China, has fallen by 80% in the past five years. A new business model is proving just as beneficial. Grid providers are offering long-term contracts to private firms to produce large amounts of solar energy, which in turn helps those firms secure cheap finance and cut prices. A recent tender in Mexico will generate electricity at a record low cost of $40 a megawatt per hour—cheaper than natural gas or coal.

That is good news for almost everyone (oil firms may beg to differ). The industry is expanding in hotter climes mostly without lavish subsidies; China is an exception, but it plans to cut its feed-in tariffs in June. The sun provides power when it is needed most, during daylight hours when air-conditioning systems are running at full blast. And by reducing the need to import carbon-burning fossil fuels, solar power helps the planet as well as the balance of payments in such countries.

Flying closer to the sun

When industries sizzle like this, some caution is usually warranted. Bids to provide power may prove to be too ambitious. Two stricken renewable-energy providers, America’s SunEdison and Spain’s Abengoa, provide salutary lessons on the dangers of financial engineering and taking on too much debt in order to expand quickly.

Bottlenecks in energy infrastructure are another problem. Developing countries will need to invest more in building transmission lines to connect the solar power being generated in far-flung deserts with its users. Makers of solar panels should focus not just on slashing their cost but on improving the technology so that more of the sun’s energy is converted into electrical power. The intermittency of the sun will remain an issue. But if storage costs continue to decline, the possibility of combining batteries on land with energy from the giant battery pack in the sky could be unbeatable.





Letters




Business in America, regulation, US election, South China sea, the EU, Shakespeare, the semicolon: Letters to the editor





Business in America, regulation, US election, South China sea, the EU, Shakespeare, the semicolon

Letters to the editor

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.com



For what does it profit a man?

You pointed out that profits are too concentrated in America, which does not benefit consumers (“Too much of a good thing”, March 26th). You mentioned the airline industry. Around 85% of American passengers in 2013 travelled on American, Delta, Southwest and United. The predictable outcome is higher fares, inferior service and restricted routes. Paradoxically, although it was the first to deregulate airlines, the American government maintains a massive entry barrier to competition through the air cabotage law, which prohibits transport between points in the United States in a foreign civil aircraft.

Repealing this outdated legislation, which the European Union did in 1997, would inject foreign competition into the domestic market. Like Europe, internal competition from international carriers would create new jobs, cut fares, increase flight options and open up new routes. The added bonus of lower transport costs for all manner of products could boost economic growth and increase the global competitiveness of the United States.

FRANCOIS MELESE

Professor of economics

Naval Postgraduate School

Monterey, California

Regulation and government bail-outs also help explain entrenched profits. A big company will have a compliance department that can finagle the federal code. And the bail-outs of the car and banking industries were direct subsidies to those established players. More than anything, an aspiring rent-seeker seeks the warm embrace of federal, state and local regulators, whose protection obstructs the tiresome chore of actually competing for business.

SHIRAZ ALLIDINA

Tiburon, California

Not enough attention was given to the power of buyers in your briefing. New, innovative, smaller regional suppliers run into many obstacles put in their way by national retailers with great bargaining power. Most big companies have whittled down their base of suppliers, as a smaller supplier-base costs less to administer in terms of logistics, store maintenance, ordering and compiling data. Furthermore, a small supplier may have cost-effective new products to offer, but will have problems navigating the waters of a big national business that has the heft to provide various financial incentives such as promotions and advertising, support that is only provided to their entrenched partners.

DOUGLAS CHIPMAN

President

Charles Chipman & Sons

Easton, Pennsylvania





No need for regulation

* It was surprising to read in The Economist the suggestion that “regulation is needed” should the current set of incentives affecting the performance of private universities in Europe fail (“Class apart”, March 19th). An economist would more probably argue that the correct solution is to alter the incentive structure and align it to the desired objective.



If students “want courses that offer a clear progression to a career” then universities should be paid accordingly, and in proportion to their graduates’ earnings rather than with a fixed fee regardless of whether or not their charges secure graduate level employment. In England graduates already pay for their studies in proportion to earnings so they would see little change.

But by directing the proceeds of the loan repayments to the university rather than government its incentives would be aligned with the career interests of its students and regulation would be wholly unnecessary.



PETER AINSWORTH

Managing director

EM Applications

London





The pledge of allegiance



Lexington notes that given the available choices in the party’s presidential nomination race, “these are ghastly times for thoughtful Republicans” (April 2nd). I would hope that I am one of those thoughtful Republicans, but even if John Kasich cannot pull off an unlikely win, we still have one rational choice left: Hillary Clinton. Our loyalty should be to country first, then party.

JEFF BODENSTAB

Boston





Going to Scarborough is fair

“Sunnylands and cloudy waters” (February 20th) fails to reflect basic facts about the South China Sea. As the oldest country in the region, China’s sovereignty over the South China Sea islands has solid historical and legal basis. Ample historical documents and literature found all over the world show that China was the first country to discover, name, develop and exercise continuous and effective jurisdiction in this area.

China has always exercised maximum restraint in disputes over maritime territory, seeking peaceful resolution through negotiation and consultation. Instead of stopping encroachment on China’s sovereignty, the Philippines insisted on initiating and pushing forward an international arbitration on the South China Sea thus violating international law, including the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and its agreement with China that the two sides shall settle their disputes through negotiation and consultation, an agreement confirmed by the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea.

The essence of the Philippines’ claim relates to the sovereignty of some of the maritime features of the Nansha (Spratly) islands, which is beyond the scope of UNCLOS, and maritime delimitation, which is excluded from arbitration through a declaration of the Chinese side in 2006 pursuant to Article 298 of UNCLOS. The Philippines have failed to observe the fundamental international principle that agreements must be kept and has undermined the integrity and authority of UNCLOS. It is a downright political provocation disguised as a legal process.

China is the last of the countries in the South China Sea to engage in construction on its islands and reefs. These construction efforts will benefit and reinforce freedom and safety of navigation in the South China Sea. Ironically, in the name of protecting freedom of navigation, American naval ships and military aircraft have been making frequent visits to areas close to or even inside the maritime and air space of some Chinese territories in the Nansha islands. That not only threatens China’s sovereignty and security but also gravely imperils peace and security in the South China Sea.

China pursues peaceful development and firmly safeguards peace and stability in the South China Sea and is ready to work with the countries in the region to safeguard peace and stability. Peace, friendship and co-operation are what China wants for the South China Sea.

ZENG RONG

Spokesperson of the Chinese Embassy in the United Kingdom

London





Switzerland and the EU

* You were right to point to the complexity of bilateral treaties between a post-Brexit Britain and the European Union (“Unfavourable trade winds”, March 26th). The Swiss experience confirms the costs and conditions of such a relationship. Currently some 100 bilateral agreements between Switzerland and the EU are in effect, completed during four decades of tough negotiations beginning with a free-trade agreement in 1972. A package of seven agreements is inextricably linked to the free movement of people.



This package includes crucial issues such as the waiver of technical barriers to trade and the mutual recognition of standards, as well as access to the European framework programme for research and innovation, “Horizon 2020”. In recent years, annual migration from the EU to Switzerland amounted to about 1.3% of its workforce; the EU accepts no limitation despite lengthy discussions. As a precondition to any further progress, the EU insists on a general agreement, superior to all bilateral treaties. This would bring about the automatic amendment of Swiss law in line with the development of EU law covering existing bilateral agreements together with the acceptance of the European Court of Justice to adjudicate disputes.



Switzerland rejects these requirements insisting on sovereignty. These and other controversial aspects are set to challenge the relationship between Switzerland and the EU for the foreseeable future.



BEAT HOTZ-HART

Bolligen, Switzerland





Lend me your ears

The review of “Shakespeare in Swahililand” (“All the world was his stage”, March 19th) did not mention that Julius Nyerere, the first president of Tanzania, who took office in 1964, translated “Julius Caesar” into Swahili, with the title “Julius Kaisari”. How many other national leaders have managed such a feat?

DAVID BROKENSHA

Fish Hoek, South Africa





Punctuation rules

A reader called for semicolons to be thrown “onto the scrap heap of history” (Letters, March 26th). I disagree. A good guide is Lewis Thomas’s “Notes on Punctuation”, which says:

The semicolon tells you that there is still some question about the preceding full sentence; something needs to be added; it reminds you sometimes of the Greek usage. It is almost always a greater pleasure to come across a semicolon than a period. The period tells you that that is that; if you didn’t get all the meaning you wanted or expected, anyway you got all the writer intended to parcel out and now you have to move along. But with a semicolon there you get a pleasant little feeling of expectancy; there is more to come; to read on; it will get clearer.

MARK LEE

Montreal

* Letters appear online only





Briefing




The rise of autism: Spectrum shift





The rise of autism

Spectrum shift

Children in the rich world are far more likely to be diagnosed with autism than in the past. Why is this and what can be done to help them lead fulfilling lives?

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



ALONE and in silence, Sören Schindler sits in a white-walled conference room in Munich for six hours a day. He is writing a program that will run an online service for HypoVereinsbank, one of Germany’s largest financial institutions. His workspace suits him better than his previous one: an open-plan office where he felt constantly assaulted by the din of phones, clacking keyboards and chatty colleagues. “Working in such a loud environment exhausted me,” he says. Mr Schindler has Asperger syndrome, a form of autism.

Mr Schindler’s condition appears to have become more common over the past half-century. Autism was first identified in 1949 but not studied systematically for decades. An early study in 1970 found that one in 14,000 children in America was autistic. In 2000 America’s Centres for Disease Control and Prevention began collecting data regularly. Since then the share of eight-year-olds diagnosed with some form of autism has more than doubled to one in 68 or 15 in every 1,000 (see chart). A recent study in South Korea is the world’s first to be based on an entire population of school-age children rather than a sample. Alarmingly, it finds that one child in 38 between the ages of seven and 12 has some degree of autism.



Autism is a complex brain condition, encompassing a broad range of symptoms. These can include discomfort around other people, hypersensitivity to sounds, touch, tastes, smells and light, and obsessive interests. At least a quarter of children with autism do not speak, though some studies put the figure higher. At the other end of the scale are people of average or high intelligence who can live relatively normal lives. Dan Aykroyd, a Canadian comedian, is a notable example.

Autism affects different people in different ways. Some autistics score above average on intelligence tests but struggle to communicate verbally and make compulsively repetitive movements, such as rocking back and forth or flapping their arms. Others have a healthy vocabulary but a low IQ and poor motor control, which can make writing by hand or using a fork difficult. The autism of a particularly high-functioning person might be almost imperceptible, manifesting itself only subtly in an obsessive interest with maps, say, or the merits of different aeroplanes.

The causes of autism are not well understood. Research on identical twins suggests that genes play a big, probably dominant, role. But some environmental factors appear to matter, too, such as complications at birth or prenatal exposure to viruses or air pollution.

Researchers believe that autism begins developing early in life, perhaps in the womb. Although parents sometimes notice their babies behaving oddly before the age of one, symptoms do not always appear until later. Males appear to be more susceptible. In America, for example, autism is diagnosed almost five times as often in boys as in girls. There is no cure, although sometimes autistic children become adults for whom the label seems inappropriate because they grow out of it or improve with treatment.

One reason for the apparent rise in autism across the rich world is growing awareness, says Simon Baron-Cohen of Cambridge University. Some cases that used to be diagnosed as an “intellectual disability” or (in the bad old days) as “mental retardation” are now being recognised as autism, says Jennifer Stapel-Wax of Emory University’s Marcus Autism Centre. The proportion of people affected by autism appears much lower in poor countries. That is not necessarily because it is less common, but because of shortcomings in diagnosis and data collection, says Andy Shih of Autism Speaks, a charity.

Making a different diagnosis

Another reason is that doctors have changed the way they diagnose autism. The “spectrum” of autistic conditions has expanded to include Asperger syndrome, a milder social disorder, and some other similar conditions. As with autism, those with Asperger’s often struggle to connect with others, but are usually of average or above average intelligence and tend not to have difficulty talking.

There is no objective test for autism; a diagnosis is made by observing behaviour. Does a baby fail to make eye contact or respond when called by name? Does he play with toys in an oddly repetitive way—running the same car back and forth on the carpet thousands of times or lining up plastic dinosaurs in perfect rows? Has he begun speaking at the appropriate age?

By asking such questions, doctors can spot autism with some reliability by the age of two. Even so, the average age of diagnosis in many rich countries is three-and-a-half. Screening is seldom universal. Long waits between a parent first expressing worry and final diagnosis are common. Fewer than a fifth of the children in America who are eventually diagnosed with autism are diagnosed before they turn two.

The consequence, says Dr Stapel-Wax, is that autism has too much time to advance. The human brain is at its most malleable in the first two years of life. Infants typically learn voraciously during this time. They watch and listen as people around them talk, laugh and eat. They play with others. By contrast autistic babies tend to fixate on inanimate objects, limiting how much they can learn from their environments. Autism is a “social disability that develops so quickly it can become an intellectual disability”, says Dr Stapel-Wax.

Autism can be treated, particularly if it is caught early. Intensive coaching from a young age can help alleviate the symptoms. Using applied behaviour analysis (ABA), therapists work with children one-on-one, sometimes for 40 hours a week. They evaluate a child’s life skills and reward signs of progress. A child who stops spinning or rocking may earn praise. One who learns how to greet people may be rewarded with a smile.

A study in Washington state in 2015 was encouraging. It found that children treated for two years, starting between the ages of 18 and 30 months, using the “early-start Denver model”, which combines building relationships through play and ABA, had less intense symptoms by the age of six. What works for one person, alas, may not for another. Nonetheless, early intervention is clearly cost-effective. A Swedish study found that the cost of lifelong care for someone with autism could be cut by two-thirds with early diagnosis and treatment.

School of hard knocks

Even if they are spotted and treated early, autistic children often have a wretched time at school. Mr Schindler says that as a schoolboy he avoided his fellow students and never engaged in classroom discussion unless explicitly required to do so. A survey by the Interactive Autism Network, an American research group, found that autistic children are three times as likely to be bullied as their non-autistic siblings. Many drop out. In France, for example, 87% attend primary school, but only 11% progress on to lower secondary school and just 1% to upper secondary school.

In several countries, including America and Britain, autistic pupils are mostly educated in mainstream schools but offered extra help from therapists and teachers trained to deal with them. Education authorities like this approach because it is cheaper than setting up specialist schools. Parents often prefer their children to be taught alongside non-autistic children. But integrating the two groups can be hard. In a survey of the NASUWT, a British teachers’ union, 60% of members said they were not adequately prepared to teach children with autism. This creates frustration and sorrow. Three-quarters of parents of autistic kids in Britain complained that it was not easy to get the support their child needed. A similar number said their child’s social skills, self-esteem and mental health had suffered as a result.

Teaching autistic children well can be expensive. Netley primary school in London has an autism programme for children aged 3-11 who can weave in and out of mainstream classes. It receives a grant of £22,500 ($31,800) per pupil per year from the government, far more than is allotted to most other schools in England. There are 16 staff for 24 pupils, compared with a national average of one for every 17.

Teachers often work with the children individually. In the room for kids between eight and 11 years old, a pupil and teacher do sums on a whiteboard. Next door, younger ones sing a song about the alphabet. “For two individualised 15-minute sessions a day students direct activities and a teacher will join in,” says Gianna Colizza, who runs the programme. “If a child wants to flip a toy car over on its back and spin its wheels, instead of saying ‘That’s not how you play with a car’, we’ll play along. It can be exhausting for them to operate in our world all day, so twice a day we go into theirs.” In the “sensory room”, an oasis of beanbags and lava lamps where anxious students can recharge, a boy gets a foot massage from a teacher while calming music wafts from surround-sound speakers.

School can be tough for autistic people, but many have a worse time once they leave it. A study by the A.J. Drexel Autism Institute in Philadelphia found that only 19% of American autistic people in their early 20s lived independently, away from their parents. Wherever they live many are isolated: one in four said that they had not seen friends or received invitations to social events in the past year. Some autistic people prefer their own company, but many are unhappy. Adults with Asperger’s are ten times more likely to mull suicide than the general population, a British study found.

Hard at work

To live independently, autistic people need jobs but the prospects for finding work are bleak. Academic studies on global employment rates for adults with autism do not exist, but the UN estimates that 80% do not work. A survey by Britain’s National Autistic Society, a charity, suggests that only 12% of higher-functioning autistic adults work full time. For those with more challenging forms of autism, only 2% have jobs.

Job training, life-skills coaching and psychotherapy could help. An American study found that 87% of autistic youngsters who were given assistance to find a job, got one. Only 6% who did not receive support were successful. But in most countries, services disappear the moment autistic people finish full-time education. Robert Schmus, a 27-year-old American social worker with Asperger’s, describes leaving school as “going off the cliff”. He no longer received the social coaching that he used to have along with maths and English classes.



Help that should be available often is not. America’s Individuals with Disabilities Education Act is supposed to guarantee services such as vocational training. Gary Mayerson, a lawyer specialising in issues relating to autism, is suing the New York city Department of Education for $500m on behalf of thousands of special-needs students who claim they did not receive assistance they were entitled to.

Judging what proportion of autistic people is actually capable of working is tricky. About half are of average or above average intelligence, but that does not necessarily mean they will all be employable. An autistic person might score well on an IQ test but suffer from such debilitating anxiety that he cannot stray far from home. Most autistic people want to work. In a survey by the National Autistic Society, 79% of autistic adults on out-of-work benefits said they would like to find a job. Higher-functioning autistic adults have an easier time getting and keeping a job than those more severely affected, but both groups find job-seeking tricky.

The first big hurdle is the interview. Many autistic people struggle with social conventions, such as making eye contact when speaking. Laura Williams, a British cat-rescue worker with Asperger’s, recalls that in past interviews she found it hard to know when to shake hands and what to say when greeting the interviewer. When meeting new people she sometimes creates scripts to ease her nerves, working out in advance when to say things like “hello” and “thank you”.

Autistic people often speak bluntly. Asked what he thought of team meetings, Mr Schindler replied: “They don’t work. Before digging into the problem at hand people waste time talking about their weekends. Great, but I don’t care.” Many non-autistic people would wholeheartedly agree, but few would say so openly in a job interview.

Speaking their minds

Non-autistic people routinely exaggerate their abilities during interviews. Many autistic people find this hard. Kurt Schöffer of Auticon, a German IT consultancy that hires people on the autism spectrum (including Mr Schindler), recently spoke with a candidate whom he knew to be a brilliant Java coder. When asked if he was an expert programmer, the candidate said no. Only when pressed did he explain that he did not consider himself an expert because he had not fully mastered all the other computer languages.

An autistic person who makes it through the interview faces other difficulties once in work. Autistic people are frequently hypersensitive to the everyday annoyances of office life: ringing phones and bright fluorescent lights may distress or drain them. They might get tripped up by less-than-specific instructions. Socialising can be thorny, too.

Some find their own ways of coping. Ms Williams recalls the problems of dealing with customers at a grocery where she used to work. “I was very neat and precise—I was good at stocking shelves and things. But I had a hard time when it came to talking to people, so I would just watch my colleague and try to copy her.” After her diagnosis, she also read books about Asperger’s and began asking for more social advice. “I learned that if you smile and say hello, that’s an outward sign that you want to be friends.” Before, she would avert her gaze, stay silent and agonise over why people did not like her.

Despite these drawbacks, employers who hire autistic staff are usually glad they did. Many have strengths that make them well suited to some jobs. They are unusually good at focusing, for example. When asked what he most enjoys about his job, Mr Schindler says: “Solving software-engineering problems.” His favourite hobby? “Solving software-engineering problems.”

Autistic people often enjoy repetitive tasks that others might find boring, such as updating databases, organising filing systems and fixing computers. Employers also report that autistic workers are reliable and loyal. Their desire for routine means, once they find a job that suits them well, they rarely miss work or quit.

Autistic people’s brutal honesty can be socially awkward, but it can also work to an employer’s advantage. One of Auticon’s consultants noticed that a process he was working on could be automated and immediately told the client. (Instead of staying mum, as an ordinary person might to preserve his job.) The project finished ahead of time and under budget.

Finding employment is starting to get easier for some people with the condition. A growing number of charities and businesses find work for autistic people of high intelligence. Specialisterne, a Danish firm operating in several European countries, offers training and help with job searches. Kaien in Japan, AQA in Israel and Passwerk in Belgium all offer autistic consultants to clients in need of software testing. Their employees are provided with job coaches, who help negotiate pay and brief potential clients on what to expect. Siemens, which hired two people from Auticon to develop and implement software-testing systems, said that they processed on average 50% more tests than other consultants.

The benefits to firms of hiring autistic people with rare technical skills are obvious. For autistic adults without such abilities it is harder to find work, but given a chance they usually do well. Steve Pemberton of Walgreen’s, an American pharmacy group which makes a point of hiring people with disabilities, says autistic employees at the group’s distribution centres perform at least as well as other workers.

At Rising Tide Carwash in Parkland, Florida, autistic employees have helped build a bustling business. To work there, candidates—many of whom have never had a job before—must pass tests of their practical skills such as wiping windows and vacuuming interiors. Thomas D’Eri, who founded the business with his father after noticing the dearth of opportunities for his autistic brother, says his workers provide top-notch customer service, work hard and smile even in the oppressive Florida heat. They are grateful for their jobs. Mr D’Eri reckons they stay with him three times longer than non-autistic workers, saving him time and money on recruitment and training.

There are other unexpected benefits for the businesses that take on autistic employees, says James Emmett, a consultant who advises firms about hiring disabled workers. Because autistic people often think very literally, managers have to give much clearer instructions; and that helps non-autistic staff, too.

Learning fast

Fruits of Employment, a programme run by TIAA Global Asset Management, an investment group, recruits autistic employees to tend six farms in California and Washington state. It uses detailed checklists to train workers to tend apple trees and harvest grapes. Heather Davis, the CIO of TIAA, who was inspired by the talents of her autistic son to start the programme, found such prompts helped her non-autistic employees learn quicker, too.

Firms that hire autistic staff may also reap a reputational benefit. Other people may conclude that they are caring and generous, and be more inclined to work for them or buy their products. Mr D’Eri thinks his firm’s social mission brings publicity and thus business: “You don’t usually talk about car washes at the dinner table unless they return you a dirty car. With Rising Tide, people do.”

Autistic workers are proving themselves in many fields. Israel’s army uses autistic volunteers to interpret complicated satellite images. L’Oréal, a cosmetics firm, hires autistic adults to pack products and update databases. Harry Specters, a chocolate shop in Cambridge, England, employs autistic adults to cook truffles. The number of schemes to help autistic people find work is growing. Autism Speaks, a charity, recently introduced a jobs database, Spectrum Careers, that allows autistic jobseekers to browse thousands of opportunities across America.

A recent study in JAMAPaediatrics, a science journal, calculated that the lifetime cost of supporting an American with autism was $1.4m-2.4m. Paul Leigh of the University of California at Davis and Juan Du of Old Dominion University have added up not only the cost of care but also the opportunity costs of autism in America. They include an estimate of the output lost when autistic people are jobless or underemployed, and when their relatives cut back on working hours to look after them. They put the total at $162 billion-367 billion in 2015, the equivalent of 0.9-2% of GDP, on a par with both diabetes and strokes. By 2025 the figure could exceed $1 trillion, they predict. Confronting autism is costly, but failing to do so may cost even more.





United States




Southern Republicans: Going rogue

Activist mayors: Ted versus the machine

Encryption and the law: Scrambled regs

The campaigns: Heard on the trail

New York’s Republican primary: Bronx cheer

Medicare: Fat loss needed

Puerto Rico: News from the colonies

Lexington: Bad vibrations





Southern Republicans

Going rogue

Republicans in the southern statehouses are angry—fundamentally, perhaps, about the waning of the values they are fighting for

Apr 16th 2016 | ATLANTA | From the print edition



THE traditional way to influence the governor of Georgia, insiders say, is to enlist the boss of the power company or a big bank. In the case of the state “religious-liberty” bill passed last month, the lobbyists were more eclectic but equally effective. The bill would have allowed faith-based groups to withhold services, or to hire and fire, on grounds of religious belief; its opponents included Disney, Coca-Cola, Delta Air Lines and the National Football League. Nathan Deal, the Republican governor, vetoed it. For Mr Deal, though, the trial of reconciling alarmed moderates and a legislature controlled by doctrinaire members of his party isn’t over: he must also decide on a measure that would let students carry concealed guns on campus.

The brief legislative session, laments Vincent Fort, a Democratic state senator, was wastefully devoted to “God, guns and gays”. Nor is Georgia’s the only southern legislature that, this year, has gratified hardliners at the cost of wider outrage. In March North Carolina’s governor, Pat McCrory, signed a law that obliges transgender people to use public lavatories according to their birth sex, notionally to protect other vulnerable patrons; it also mandates a statewide anti-discrimination policy that omits sexuality as a criterion.

Following a pattern established last year in Indiana, the fallout included litigation and boycotts, including one by Bruce Springsteen. Facebook, Bank of America and the National Basketball Association, among many others, weighed in. “Welcome to North Carolina”, read a protest billboard near the state border; “please set your clock back 100 years”. If the law “protected the life of just one child or one woman from being molested,” insists Dan Forest, the lieutenant-governor, the uproar “was worth it.” Mr Springsteen’s stance, rages Mr Forest, “shows the value he places on the women and children of our state.” The governor is sounding less combative: in a conciliatory gesture on April 12th he expanded the equal-employment policy for state workers to cover sexuality.

Mississippi’s governor, meanwhile, has signed an even more startling bill, which allows religious organisations both to fire people and refuse services on the basis of belief, and protects devout bakers and disc-jockeys who eschew same-sex weddings; officials may now recuse themselves from licensing or presiding over them. Disapproval of sex outside marriage (as well as of the gay variety) is one of the convictions the law expressly safeguards. Numerous other bills addressing the use of restrooms and matrimonial tastes have surfaced elsewhere. Virginia’s governor vetoed one of them.

Sexuality is not the only preoccupation. As well as the right to take guns to class, “constitutional carry”—whereby concealed weapons may be carried without a permit—has been exercising legislatures. West Virginia’s Republican-dominated assembly overrode a veto by the Democratic governor to enforce it. In a session that rivalled Georgia’s in its ultraconservatism, West Virginia also enshrined English as the state’s official language (even though its motto is in Latin) and banned some abortion procedures.

Abortion-related activity, says Elizabeth Nash of the Guttmacher Institute, which monitors it, has been “very intense”, fuelled in part by the furore over Planned Parenthood. Along with Indiana’s ban on terminations motivated by fetal disabilities, Florida withdrew funds from abortion-providers; Kentucky imposed new pre-procedure counselling rules.

Do not go gently

On the face of it, much of this seems odd. Judging by the rhetoric of the Republican presidential contest, the country is going to the dogs; in parts of the South, the infrastructure is indeed crumbling. Yet the region’s politicians are concentrating on problems that, to put it mildly, are often less than pressing. Florida passed a law stopping clergy from being dragooned into conducting same-sex marriages, a threat already neutralised by America’s constitution. Predatory men infiltrating women’s toilets, the spectre raised in North Carolina and elsewhere, is a similarly apocryphal fear. Remarkably some southern governors have elevated such concerns above job-creation. Many in Georgia think Mr Deal should have followed suit: predicting that “religious liberty” will haunt next year’s session, too, Josh McKoon, a disappointed state senator, says that while “prosperity is an important value, so is individual freedom”.

What explains this eccentric turn? It is a reaction, most obviously, to last year’s Supreme Court ruling on gay marriage, of the kind that often follows dramatic social change. Melton McLaurin, a historian at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, notes that this particular “rearguard action” resembles opposition to racial desegregation in emphasising the supposed endangerment of women and children. But many southern Republicans feel beleaguered by more than one ruling: they see Washington as at once insidiously liberal and hopelessly gridlocked. Religious-liberty bills and the like offer the consolation of decisive action (even if some are destined to be struck down), of a sort that, unlike new roads and bridges, requires no tax dollars.

And if pressure from above is part of the current southern syndrome, so is insurgency from below. John Dinan of Wake Forest University observes that while stand-offs between the federal and state governments capture more attention, battles between states and municipalities have become as frequent and fierce. The mess in North Carolina originated partly in response to an anti-discrimination ordinance implemented by the council in Charlotte; Tennessee and Arkansas had previously passed laws squashing related city-level initiatives. In February the Alabama legislature nixed a minimum-wage hike introduced in Birmingham (North Carolina’s law also tags on a statewide employment clause). Forgetting, temporarily, their reverence for local self-determination, lots of states have counteracted municipal efforts to control guns; some have moved on to ensuring the unimpeded statewide carrying of knives.

Tension between urban liberals and their more conservative environs is an old story, given extra piquancy by the migration to some southern cities of sophisticated types from elsewhere in the country. Yet the role of demography in the South’s political convulsions runs deeper. As well as exemplifying the frictions between different levels of government and different strands of Republicanism (business-minded and religious), these flashpoints also illuminate a bigger clash: between the past and the future.

Americans’ southward migration—for jobs, cheaper living or better weather to retire in—is helping to transform not just individual towns but the South’s overall complexion. Arrivals from overseas are contributing too; many first-generation immigrants can’t vote, but their children will. All this means that the share of southern states’ populations born outside the region is rising. Already, around 30% of Georgians and North Carolinians come from elsewhere (Florida and Virginia are even more diluted). Georgia is set to be a “majority-minority” state by 2025. Even in less cosmopolitan places, the balance is shifting. Mississippi’s whites, for example, will be outnumbered by mid-century.

Twilight of an empire

As Florida and Virginia have shown, this evolution unmoors political allegiances. It is concurrent with a generational upheaval in attitudes, most starkly in young Americans’ milder views on sexuality. In this light, the rush of reactionary legislation can be seen as the flailing of a long-dominant group which senses that the states it has ruled, as well as the country, are escaping its grasp. As Richard Cohen of the Southern Poverty Law Centre, an advocacy organisation, sees it, these are “the dying throes of a bygone era”.

For the time being, this defiance may help southern Republicans, by galvanising some pious voters who might otherwise have stayed at home in November. Equally, though, the revanchism could hurt. The “coat-tail” effect generally works down the ballot, “from the White House to the courthouse”, says Larry Sabato of the University of Virginia; but when related worries—say, the whiff of nastiness—pervade the ticket, the influence can flow both ways. In North Carolina that may damage Mr McCrory, who faces re-election, and the Republican nominee for president. In the long term, if they remain fixated on bathrooms, southern Republicans may, like Agamemnon, expire there.





Activist mayors

Ted versus the machine

Today, Clarkston; tomorrow, the world?

Apr 16th 2016 | CLARKSTON, GEORGIA | From the print edition

An excellent adventure

AS TO whether he has smoked marijuana, Ted Terry is frank. “I’m a millennial,” he says; “what do you think?” But his reasons for wanting to “deprioritise” possession of small quantities, making it punishable only by token fines, are impersonal and sound. More severe treatment distracts the courts and police, he argues, weighing unfairly on the poor. Unlike most millennials—Mr Terry is 33, a youth his hipsterish beard underscores—he is, as Democratic mayor of Clarkston, outside Atlanta, well-placed to do something about it.

Mr Terry hopes the measure will come up before the city council in May. He is confident that, unlike outright decriminalisation, varying drug punishments in this way falls within the city’s authority; anyway, he points out, issuing tickets for pot, rather than arresting people, is already widespread. First elected in 2013, he has flexed his municipality’s muscle—and irked Georgia’s conservatives—before. When, last year, the state’s governor, like many others, theatrically announced that it would not be accepting Syrian refugees (a position he was forced to reverse), Mr Terry said they were welcome in Clarkston. He mentors one Syrian family himself.

Most people seem to fit in. Clarkston has been called “the Ellis Island of the South”; its 13,000 residents, Mr Terry estimates, encompass 60 languages and 40 nationalities. Only 13% are white. At the local coffee shop, staffed by refugees, he bumps into a councillor reputed to be the country’s first elected Eritrean; the waiter is Congolese. Some of these newcomers, arriving from conservative cultures, might be expected to resist the mayor’s liberal impulses. But the older ones, he says, are too busy making a living, while their offspring tend to share their American peers’ tolerance.

Like liberal mayors in other southern cities, Mr Terry—who endorsed Bernie Sanders for president, and, outside his civic duties, works for the AFL-CIO—is hemmed in by state laws that limit municipal powers. For instance, he would like to raise the minimum wage, but can’t. Yet precisely because “the progressive agenda doesn’t really get a hearing” in the Republican-controlled legislature, he thinks it falls to places like his to be “laboratories of democracy”. He is inspired, he says, by bigger cities like Nashville and Charlotte. He anticipates Clarkston emulating the anti-discrimination ordinance passed in Charlotte that set off the current rumpus in North Carolina.





Encryption and the law

Scrambled regs

The cold war between government and computing firms is hotting up

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



ON APRIL 5th the world’s billion or so users of WhatsApp, a messaging service owned by Facebook, woke to the news that their messages would from now on be protected by “end-to-end encryption”, a mathematical technique for scrambling messages which ensures that only the sender and his intended recipients are able to read them. Computing firms have been shoring up the security of their products ever since Edward Snowden leaked thousands of documents outlining what, to many Silicon Valley libertarians, looked rather ominously like a system of mass electronic surveillance.

That focus on security has put America’s technology firms on a collision course with its policemen and spies, who worry that encrypted e-mails and messages help criminals and terrorists to evade detection. That spat became public in February, when the FBI tried to persuade a court to compel Apple to hack an iPhone that had belonged to Syed Farook, a terrorist who, along with his wife, killed 14 people in an attack in California in December. The agency backed down after it found a way to hack Farook’s phone without Apple’s help.

On April 7th the legislative branch tried a different approach, when the draft text of a bill that aims to regulate cryptography appeared online. Co-sponsored by Diane Feinstein and Richard Burr, a pair of senators, the draft bill would require technology firms to provide readable, decrypted versions of electronic messages whenever the authorities asked them to.

This sounds reasonable enough. Computer-security specialists, though, thought the draft bill appalling. Jonathan Zdziarski, a freelance security researcher, described it as “a hodgepodge of technological ineptitude”; Matthew Green, a cryptographer at Johns Hopkins University, said it was “clueless and unworkable”.

The bill avoids technical questions of how firms should comply, saying only that they must. In practice, says Kenn White, a security researcher, there are only three ways: to abandon cryptography altogether, to keep hold of “keys”—long, randomly-generated numbers used to scramble and unscramble messages—or intentionally to cripple the cryptography so that the original message can be read after all (what security types call a “back door”). The best analogy is with locks: the bill requires either unlocked doors, a central repository of skeleton keys, or locks deliberately designed to be picked with a paperclip.

The trouble is that, like locks, cryptography has many more legitimate uses than illegitimate ones (without it, for instance, online shopping would be impossible, because credit-card information would have to traverse the internet unprotected). And there is no way to weaken it so that only the authorities would benefit. “There’s no algorithm to check your moral intentions,” notes Mr White. A central repository of keys would be a magnet for cyber-crooks, who could use them to impersonate and defraud ordinary internet users. And government computers are far from hack-proof: in February, the FBI announced that it had discovered a years-long hack of a series of government computer systems. So would a back door, which is safe only as long as it is secret: announcing that you are building one would only encourage people to look for it (and enough have been discovered by accident to convince researchers that they are fundamentally not secure). “This is not a trade-off between privacy and security,” says Mark Jaycox of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a lobbying group. “It’s security versus security.”

The rules would apply only to American products. That would leave the law-abiding relying on crippled cryptography while the truly dangerous made use of more robust software written elsewhere. It would badly damage America’s technology firms, which would be forbidden by law from providing secure software to their customers—who would probably choose to go elsewhere.

Many security types find the debate frustrating, because it rehashes arguments first made in the 1990s, when online cryptography began to spread. But the bill as it is currently drafted has little chance of becoming law. Senator Feinstein has a reputation for sympathising with the intelligence agencies when it comes to encryption, but other senators have spoken out against her bill. The White House has said that it will not support it. But alongside the FBI’s attempts to compel Apple to co-operate, it marks another escalation in what had, until recently, been mostly a war of words.





The campaigns

Heard on the trail

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



Freudian slip

“I appreciate Bill Clinton being my psychoanalyst. It’s always nice.”

Bernie Sanders responds to an accusation of subconscious sexism by Mr Clinton. CNN

Backpedal

“I didn’t mean to attack people in New York. I love New York.”

Ted Cruz, campaigning in New York, backtracks from his sneering comments about “New York values”. New York Times

No one can hear you scream

“I told them, ‘Just hang in there. This is the silly season. It will pass’.”

Lindsey Graham reassures Middle Eastern leaders about the chance of a Trump presidency. Roll Call

Wicked games

“The system, folks, is rigged. It’s a rigged, disgusting dirty system. It’s a dirty system and only a non-politician would say it.”

Donald Trump find that some states have awkward rules for allocating delegates

The apprentice

“Donald’s whole pitch is he’s a great businessman and yet…it appears he can’t run a lemonade stand.”

Ted Cruz replies to Donald Trump’s complaints about delegate distribution. “The Glenn Beck Programme”

All in the family

“They had a long time to register, and they were...unaware of the rules, so they feel very, very guilty, they feel very guilty, but it’s fine, I understand that.”

Two of Donald Trump’s children did not register to vote in New York’s primary

Bestest ever

“We’re gonna have, you know, the most secure and best convention that will be put on. I just got back from Cleveland, the preparation is unbelievable. The city is excited, it’s going to be phenomenal.”

Republican Party spokesman, Sean Spicer, seems to have absorbed the rhetorical style of the leading candidate. CNN

Mad money

Of the more than $132m spent on negative ads by candidates and the groups supporting them, nearly $70m has gone to commercials assailing Mr Trump.

New York Times analysis of data provided by Kantar Media/CMAG

White knight? No thanks

“I simply believe that if you want to be the nominee for our party—to be the president—you should actually run for it. I chose not to do this…End of story.”

Paul Ryan denies, again, that he will somehow magically save the Republican presidential race





New York’s Republican primary

Bronx cheer

Seeking votes in America’s poorest, most Democratic district

Apr 16th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



WHEN Ted Cruz’s tour bus stopped in the Bronx on April 6th, the man in alligator-skin boots chose to make his stump speech at a Chinese-Dominican restaurant. The next day, a few miles away, John Kasich gobbled spaghetti at an Italian deli. Both eateries sit firmly in New York’s 15th congressional district, the poorest, most Democratic district in the country.



America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar

Why did the candidates spend time in a place that is home to just 13,000 registered Republicans? Because New York’s Republican primary on April 19th will allocate three delegates to the majority winner in each of the state’s 27 congressional districts. That gives Republicans in the 15th district seven times more clout than the average New York Republican.

Hispanic Republicans are likely to account for over half the vote in New York’s 15th district according to Aristotle, a data provider. Exit polls reckoned Donald Trump attracted just a quarter of the Hispanic vote in Texas and Florida. That does not bode well for his New York City campaign. For Mr Cruz and Mr Kasich, who trail the front-runner, the 15th district offers low-hanging votes and delegates. In a district where just 5,315 people voted for Mitt Romney in November 2012, never will a Republican vote be heard so loudly. The 7th, 13th and 14th districts also give a small number of Hispanic Republicans disproportionate sway in the primary.



Polling suggests that Mr Trump, whose penthouse on 5th Avenue offers a view of the Bronx, is likely to win just over half of New York’s vote, with Messrs Cruz and Kasich level-pegging at around 20%. Mr Trump looks set to prosper in New York’s hinterland, which is less racially mixed. Speaking at a rally in Rome, 200 miles north of the Bronx, on April 12th, he bemoaned the primary rules, which in some states have given him fewer delegates than his vote-share suggested he deserved. But thanks to a change in New York’s rules last year, he will pick up one delegate in each of the state’s congressional districts where he is runner-up (when the winner does not gain over half of the vote).

If Mr Trump fails to win New York convincingly, a brokered convention in July will become hard to avoid. “I think I may have to move to the South if New York doesn’t treat me great,” mused the candidate. Many of his fellow New Yorkers are crossing their fingers.





Medicare

Fat loss needed

A welcome proposal to cut payments for drugs has doctors on the defensive

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



WHEN a doctor treats a patient enrolled in Medicare—government-funded health insurance for the old—for breast cancer, he may prescribe Paclitaxel, a treatment costing the government $201 and netting the doctor $12 in profit. Or he may prescribe a comparable treatment, Abraxane, costing the government a whacking $16,700 but netting the doctor $1,000. With incentives like these, it is little wonder that, despite America’s system of private health insurance, the government spends more on health than Britain does on its nationalised health service. The Obama administration reckons some liposuction is in order.

About two-fifths, or $619 billion, of the government’s health spending goes on Medicare. A little over $20 billion of that pays for drugs administered under the so-called “Part B” programme, which covers outpatient visits to doctors and hospitals— for example, to receive the cancer treatments described above. When a doctor prescribes a drug under Part B, they are paid the average market price for it, plus a 6% premium, allowing them to make a profit (they are compensated separately if they administer the drug, too).

This creates an incentive for doctors to prescribe more expensive drugs, much as a car salesman earning a fixed commission wants to sell the priciest set of wheels. The payments also look generous because some providers—usually those who serve many poor patients—receive mandatory discounts on their drug purchases averaging 34%. In 2013 doctors and hospitals claimed $3.5 billion for prescribing these discounted drugs, of which they pocketed $1.3 billion—a 37% margin.

The federal government, which would rather pay for better care than for salesmanship, wants change. In March it proposed testing a reduction in the premium from 6% to just 2.5%, plus a flat fee per treatment. In fact, the premium would be lower still, because since 2013 most Medicare payments have been trimmed by 2% as part of the so-called sequester cuts to government spending. In November’s budget deal this discount was extended to 2025.

Doctors and drug companies hate the idea. Medicare already pays less than private plans. A new study by the Evidence-Driven Drug Pricing Project finds that the average margin on cancer drugs, including Medicare and private sales, is 16% for doctors and a whacking 140% for hospitals.

It is not clear how much doctors’ profits influence care quality. Some fear lower margins will mean that only hospitals will be able to provide cancer care at the necessary scale, choking off smaller, more innovative providers before they have a chance to develop their businesses, says Prabjhot Singh of the Peterson Centre on Healthcare. However, the 2% cut in Medicare payments in 2013 seems not to have caused too much trouble.

The uncertainty means pilot programmes are welcome. Much of America’s inflated health-care spending ends up in the pockets of doctors and drug companies. They can be expected to protest as the government tries to end the largesse. It is hard to distinguish justified complaints from disingenuous scaremongering.

The fuss over the proposed change has parallels with another recent regulation: the so-called “fiduciary rule” which will require investment advisers, who are usually paid on commission, to act in the best interests of their clients rather than peddle the most expensive products. When making the right choice requires extensive training, it is usually better to separate advisers and salesmen. But the procedure can be painful.





Puerto Rico

News from the colonies

The island’s debt crisis will put its political status under new scrutiny

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

The long road ahead

LAST December Paul Ryan, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, promised that the Republican Congress would pass legislation to tackle Puerto Rico’s fiscal woes no later than March 31st. America’s cash-strapped Caribbean commonwealth needs a lifeline. After a decade of recession and population loss, some of its state-owned enterprises (SOEs) have already missed interest payments. However, they cannot declare bankruptcy, because that privilege is limited to the 50 states. As a result, disgruntled creditors have sued, hoping to force the issuers to produce money they did not have.

Mr Ryan’s self-imposed deadline has come and gone, and the rescue bill is still stuck. On April 12th the House’s natural-resources committee released a new draft that offers Puerto Rico the essential criteria for a successful restructuring: a “stay” that temporarily suspends litigation while a fiscal plan is developed; the authority to impose terms accepted by a supermajority of creditors on all claimants; and the ability to modify all $72 billion of Puerto Rican debt—including the central government’s general-obligation (GO) bonds, which the island’s constitution guarantees will be paid before all other spending. However, this financial relief would come at a steep political cost: the imposition of an “oversight board”, similar to the one that ran Washington, DC from 1995 to 2001. Board members would be nominated by Congress and would have the authority to reject the Puerto Rican legislature’s budgets, write their own and order spending cuts by fiat. In practice, this would amount to a revocation of the self-government that the island has enjoyed since 1948.

The bill will face a steep path to becoming law in anything resembling its current form. Creditor groups have been lobbying furiously to prevent Puerto Rico from gaining the power to reduce its debt load without their consent, particularly regarding the supposedly sacrosanct GOs. In the Senate, Charles Grassley and Orrin Hatch, the respective chairs of the judiciary and finance committees, have said they oppose letting the island restructure its obligations. In order to compensate for the loss of votes from Republican legislators who are reluctant to harm bondholders, Mr Ryan and Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, will probably need to secure support from some congressional Democrats, as well as Barack Obama’s signature. And Democrats—particularly with their party’s presidential caucus in Puerto Rico scheduled for June 5th—are likely to quibble with the imperialist overtones of dispatching administrators from Washington to run roughshod over the sovereignty of a poor, Spanish-speaking overseas possession.

On May 1st Puerto Rico’s Government Development Bank, whose coffers are all but dry, faces a $423m payment. A default would probably turn what so far has been a modest trickle of lawsuits from jilted creditors into a stampede. Two months later the next GO instalment comes due. The island’s legislature did pass a law on April 5th authorising the governor to declare a moratorium on debt service, but such powers would be hard to square with the GOs’ constitutionally protected status. If the courts force Puerto Rico to tell police, teachers, doctors and firefighters to stay at home—which Alejandro García Padilla, the governor, has said he would refuse to do—a debt crisis that has so far been relatively contained and slow-moving would erupt into a cataclysm comparable to Argentina’s in 2001.

However these fiscal troubles are eventually resolved, the most important legacy of the island’s lapse into insolvency may be a re-evaluation of its political status. For nearly 70 years Puerto Rico, formally a United States commonwealth, has seemed to enjoy the best of both worlds: its residents receive all the benefits of American citizenship, while still being left to manage their own internal affairs. But the recent debate in Washington has reinforced the long-standing argument made by opponents of the status quo: the territory cannot claim meaningful sovereignty if a Congress in which it has no voting representative can take over its government at will. If Puerto Rico were an independent country, it could simply renounce all debt issued under its law; as the 51st American state, its localities and SOEs could throw themselves on the mercy of a federal bankruptcy court. As a commonwealth, its only hope is that a pair of misfiring, polarised political parties 1,500 miles away manage to strike a deal to save it before the lights go out.





Lexington

Bad vibrations

Meeting Pete Wilson, a successful governor blamed for killing California’s Republican Party

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



THIS week Lexington had lunch with a bogeyman. In the cool hush of a law firm’s conference room, 45 floors above central Los Angeles, he munched sandwiches with California’s most successful living Republican, Pete Wilson, a three-term mayor of San Diego later elected four times statewide as a senator, then governor. On the same day, the din of the Republican presidential race reached California, ahead of its primary election on June 7th. At a rally in Orange County Senator Ted Cruz of Texas predicted that the state—which usually votes too late to pick presidential candidates—will be decisive this time. That may be right: if the front-runner, Donald Trump, does badly in California he will not have enough delegates to avoid a contested national convention.

A busy working lawyer at 82, Mr Wilson is following the race closely. As governor from 1991-99 he led his state through a recession, riots and earthquakes to an economic boom. Working with Democrats to fix a budget crisis and a supporter of legal abortion and gay rights, he judged voters shrewdly, helping Republicans to their first majority in the state Assembly in decades.

Yet bad vibrations still hang about him. Critics, starting with Democrats and advocates for Latinos in California (who are now 38% of the state’s population, equalling whites of European descent), blame Mr Wilson’s tough line on illegal immigration, and above all his support for Proposition 187, a ballot initiative in 1994 that sought to deny state services to unlawful residents, including free schooling for some 300,000 children, and sought to order teachers and doctors to report pupils and patients who might lack legal status. The proposition passed easily, backed by TV spots that showed migrants sprinting across the Mexican border as a narrator intoned, “They Keep Coming”.

Courts soon blocked most of the proposition’s rules, but critics assert that the political fallout lingers. In 1990 Mr Wilson won almost half the Latino vote. Four years later he got just a quarter of it, and—apart from a blip when Arnold Schwarzenegger became governor in 2003—Californian Latinos have increasingly fled the Republican Party. That ended years of Latino movement towards the Republicans, notably after a 1986 immigration reform by a Californian governor turned president, Ronald Reagan, who breezed that with their family values and work ethic, “Latinos are Republicans, they just don’t know it yet.” In the decade after Proposition 187 over 1m new Latinos registered to vote in California, and most were Democrats. A once-mighty California Republican Party has not won a statewide office since 2006. Latinos did not single-handedly deliver California to the Democrats, but their hostility makes a Republican recovery dauntingly hard.

Republicans are divided on whether Mr Wilson is to blame. Wooing Latinos during his first presidential campaign, George W. Bush said that he opposed the “spirit” of Proposition 187, seeming to chide Mr Wilson. Against that, many conservatives call it a “myth” that a fierce line on immigration killed Republicans in America’s most-populous state. The debate is of more than academic interest. The demographic transformation of California is being repeated at national level, with white Americans of European descent on course to become a minority around 2044. Today Mr Wilson condemns Mr Trump’s talk of Mexico flooding America with rapists as “boorish and grossly unfair”. But other Republicans express immigration views similar to Mr Wilson’s old policies. Mr Cruz, for one, wants more border fencing and a big increase in Border Patrol agents. Like Mr Wilson, the Texan senator questions the “birthright citizenship” granted to babies born in America, even to mothers with no legal status. Echoing Mr Wilson, Mr Cruz praises migrants who came the right way, summarising his immigration views as “Legal good, illegal bad”.

It matters, therefore, when Mr Wilson concedes that voter perceptions of his immigration policies “played a significant role” in successive election losses for Californian Republicans. To be sure, he adds many caveats. The Republican who tried to succeed him as governor, Dan Lungren, was hurt by opposing abortion, he argues, losing the women’s vote “by a large margin”. Mr Wilson scolds the press for deliberately omitting the word “illegal” from discussions of illegal immigration, and for deeming “anti-immigrant” anyone demanding a secure border. He is cross that his TV ads in 1994 are called harsh: he calls “They Keep Coming” a “statement of fact”. He accuses Democrats of pushing the “contemptible” lie that Republicans are racists (it is true that when Mr Wilson left office, San Francisco’s black Democratic mayor, Willie Brown, said of him: “He is no racist. His problem was his party”).

Mr Wilson says that he backed Proposition 187 to prod the federal government to action, and to spur review of a Supreme Court ruling of 1982 that states must offer all children a free education. Had unlawful-resident children lost that right, California would have helped them to “transition” and not expelled them instantly, he insists. Still, after criticising what he calls “demagoguery” aimed at convincing Latinos that Republicans are bigots, he concludes: “Unhappily, it was successful with a great many, and has been successful with young people as well.”

Wouldn’t it be nice

Lexington put it to Mr Wilson that a lesson for Republicans is that many voters do not draw his sharp distinction between legal and illegal immigrants. Border-crossing is not like bank-robbery. Sometimes good people come the wrong way, including kids. Surely Republicans need a plan for the country’s roughly 11.3m undocumented residents that sounds both realistic and humane?

Mr Wilson calls that premature: secure the border before discussing what to do with those here unlawfully, he retorts. That will restore public trust and avoid encouraging new arrivals: if Washington politicians broker an amnesty first, “then the damn border will never be secure”. Lots of Republicans agree with him. History suggests they are taking a risk.





The Americas




Argentina: Old whines

The FARC’s finances: Unfunny money

Ecuador’s universities: Academic arguments

Bello: How to win an election





Argentina

Old whines

The new president has moved fast to reform the economy. The results so far have been painful

Apr 16th 2016 | MENDOZA | From the print edition



MAURICIO MACRI, Argentina’s reformist president, has been in office for just four months. For Constanza Pimentel, who along with her mother and brother runs a small winery on the outskirts of Mendoza, the country’s winemaking capital, his government has so far been a mixed blessing. Bodega Caelum, their 50-hectare vineyard, produces 70,000 bottles a year of Torrontés, Malbec and other wines. Recently it has struggled. Argentina’s previous president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, introduced currency controls, which kept the peso artificially strong and made exporting unprofitable. Ms Pimentel was delighted when Mr Macri allowed the currency to float in December: she plans to expand sales in the United States and Britain this year. But for now her customers are mostly Argentine oenophiles, and they are drinking less. In March she raised prices by 12% to keep up with inflation. “Wine is becoming a luxury,” Ms Pimentel laments. “Customers are watching their wallets.”

One can hardly blame them. Mr Macri, whose election ended 12 years of populist rule by Ms Fernández and her late husband, Néstor Kirchner, has been feted by foreigners. He is on the verge of ending a 14-year confrontation with foreign creditors; Barack Obama paid him a visit in March. But for most Argentines, life is getting worse. The annual inflation rate is approaching 40%, according to independent estimates (official numbers are not being published while Argentina overhauls its statistics agency). It is the highest rate in Latin America outside Venezuela. Meat, a staple, is 44% more expensive than a year ago. A study by the Catholic University reports that 1.4m Argentines have dropped below the poverty line so far this year.



Mr Macri inherited high inflation (see chart). During Ms Fernández’s reign the central bank printed money to pay for subsidies, which reached 4% of GDP last year. But the measures the new president has taken to stabilise the economy have made things—temporarily—worse. The floating of the peso, to make exports competitive and reduce a drain on the central bank’s foreign-exchange reserves, pushed up inflation. So did cutbacks to subsidies of electricity, water, gas and transport to control the budget deficit, which reached 5.8% of GDP in 2015. On April 8th bus and train fares in Buenos Aires, the capital, doubled. The public sector has laid off nearly 11,000 workers since December. The economy is likely to shrink by 0.5% this year.

Mr Macri warned that there would be pain, but he was not gloomy enough. His government is likely to miss the inflation target of 20-25% it set for 2016, in part because the country’s powerful unions are demanding pay rises of 30%. The finance minister, Alfonso Prat-Gay, now promises that inflation will fall in the second half of the year and predicts an inflation rate of 17% for 2017. “We are very confident that we can hit” that rate, he told a conference on April 5th.

One reason for his optimism is the prospect of Argentina’s return to the international capital markets. On April 13th a court in New York cleared the way for Argentina to repay bondholders who had rejected earlier debt restructurings (see article). The country now plans to issue up to $15 billion in new bonds. It will use most of that to pay the holdouts. The rest will pay for government spending, reducing the need for inflationary financing of the budget deficit.

The government is betting that the return to the credit markets will encourage investment by foreign companies. There are hopeful signs. Since Mr Macri took office Dow Chemical and American Energy Partners have announced that they will invest alongside YPF, the state-owned oil company, in exploring for shale gas and oil in Vaca Muerta, which holds vast reserves of both. Coca-Cola has promised to invest $1 billion in Argentina over the next four years; Fiat Chrysler, an Italian carmaker, has said it will spend $500m to upgrade its plant in Córdoba in central Argentina.

But investment may not recover quickly enough to provide the lift that the government is hoping for. Brazil, Argentina’s largest trading partner, is suffering its worst recession since the 1930s. Some analysts argue that Mr Macri needs to do more to restore confidence. Martín Redrado, a former head of the central bank, thinks investment will not rebound until prices stabilise. Even with renewed borrowing on the international markets, the government will need to raise a lot of money from local investors to pay its bills or resort to central-bank financing. To shore up confidence, Mr Redrado calls for the president to establish a “council for macroeconomic stability”, which would set inflation and growth targets at least two years in advance.

Ms Pimentel is “confident” that Mr Macri has good intentions and thinks “it will take some time” to heal the economy. The president is counting on the patience of voters like her. According to a survey conducted in March by Isonomía, a consultancy, 72% of Argentines view him favourably and 69% think he can control inflation. Their confidence may have been shaken when Mr Macri’s name appeared among the thousands in the leaked “Panama papers”, showing that he was a director of an offshore company founded by his father. He says he drew no income from it and has nothing to hide; a judge is investigating. Argentines are giving him the benefit of the doubt. If inflation does not retreat by the end of this year, they may turn on him.





The FARC’s finances

Unfunny money

The government may never get its hands on the guerrillas’ ill-gotten gains

Apr 16th 2016 | BOGOTÁ | From the print edition

A typical day at Club FARC

WHEN Colombia’s government and the FARC rebel group missed their self-imposed deadline of March 23rd to sign a peace agreement, the main sticking points were how to demobilise the FARC’s 6,500 fighters and how the deal would be ratified. Both sides expressed confidence that an agreement ending their half-century fight will be signed by the end of 2016.

One contentious issue no longer on the agenda is money. At its strongest, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, the FARC had 18,000 fighters and a war chest brimming with cash from illegal gold-mining, extortion, kidnapping and the drug trade. Estimates of the FARC’s annual income at the time range from $200m to $3.5 billion. Since then the FARC’s fortunes have faded, both on the battlefield and at the bank. Its finances “aren’t what they were 15 years ago”, says a government official.

But the group may have held on to much of its loot. According to an unpublished study by government analysts, even after paying to maintain its fighters the FARC still had assets worth 33 trillion pesos ($10.5 billion) in 2012. In the peace negotiations taking place in Havana the government tried to extract some of this to compensate victims of the FARC’s crimes. After more than a year of wrangling, the FARC agreed to “contribute to the material reparation of the victims” but said it was broke.

The government is welcome to take over its offshore bank accounts, said the FARC’s top negotiator, Iván Márquez, in an interview with the BBC. “But we don’t have any.” No one known to be connected with the FARC (or the ELN, a smaller guerrilla force with which the government will hold talks) is among the 850 Colombians whose names appear in the “Panama papers”, leaked documents that reveal the hidden wealth of thousands of clients of a Panama-based law firm (see article). Mr Márquez is no doubt delighted that the government’s top peace negotiators—Humberto de la Calle, who leads talks with the FARC, and Frank Pearl, who handles the ELN—do appear in the document haul. Both say the offshore companies they established were legitimate, had been reported to the Colombian tax authorities and are no longer active.



Colombia's peace process, in charts

Financial analysts think that much of the FARC’s hoard, its criminal origins disguised, is invested inside Colombia, in transport companies, rural property and even the stockmarket. Some has probably been stashed abroad, in Costa Rica, Venezuela and Ecuador, as well as in Panama. Anti-money-laundering officers at Colombian companies fear that a share of this money will come back into the country after the peace accord is finally signed. According to a survey conducted in 2015 by Lozano Consultores, a consulting firm, 61% of banks’ compliance officers felt ill-prepared to identify and report such cash to the government.

A peace agreement will not deter the authorities from trying to track down the FARC’s assets. Under Colombian law, they can seize the fortunes of people who mysteriously become rich until they can account for their wealth. But investigators are unlikely to find much. Worldwide, governments detect just 20 cents of every $100 of laundered money, estimates the UN Office on Drugs and Crime. That is a pity. The cost of implementing any peace accord, which includes paying for demining and infrastructure, is likely to be $15 billion-30 billion over ten years. The FARC’s hidden fortune might pay for a big chunk of that.





Ecuador’s universities

Academic arguments

The government has built up higher education, and weighed it down

Apr 16th 2016 | QUITO | From the print edition



THE guests filed past an honour guard of Shuar warriors, their serrated spears of chonta hardwood wreathed in Ecuador’s national colours of yellow, blue and red. The ceremony in January marked a handover of power. The founding rector of the Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar in Quito, an Oxford-trained historian called Enrique Ayala, made way for César Montaño (pictured), a professor of law. Mr Montaño has yet to exercise his duties. The government says his election violates a rule that rectors must hold doctorates from a university other than the one they lead. Mr Montaño has stepped aside for a caretaker.

The row has drawn attention to the testy relationship between Ecuadorean academia and the left-wing government of Rafael Correa. A reform in 2010, aimed at improving the quality of universities and helping poor people attend them, was one of his most ambitious policies. But the dispute with Andina shows that the government is keener on regulating universities than on liberating them.

Mr Correa has shaken things up. The constitution adopted in 2008 ended fees at public universities. The government raised its budget for them from $335m in 2008 to $1.7 billion in 2013 (it spent less). It shut down 14 low-quality institutions with 38,000 students in 2012 and set up four new “world-class universities”, including Ikiam, a life-sciences institute near the Amazonian town of Tena, and Yachay, a technology school meant to transform Ecuador into a “knowledge economy”. Getting a place at one of those is harder than entering Harvard, Mr Correa claims. To allow universities to become more selective, the government reintroduced entrance exams.

Enrolment is growing twice as fast as the population, boasts René Ramírez, the government’s secretary for higher education. From 2008 to 2014 the share of students who come from hard-up families has risen from 11% to 25%. But critics contend that in pushing for better and more open universities the government has weighed them down with bureaucracy and clipped their autonomy. They now answer to regulatory bodies that include no university representatives. Only rectors (and student representatives) are elected by faculty, students and staff; the government ended a long tradition of electing deans, says Mr Ayala. Courses of study are to be linked to the “national development plan”, as interpreted by bureaucrats.

It is not unreasonable, retort Mr Correa’s defenders, for the government to set goals for publicly financed universities. Why should taxpayers pay for the training of too many lawyers? A bigger worry may be that money is becoming scarcer, and some is being misspent. While the government lavishes cash on Mr Correa’s pet projects—last year some deans at Yachay were paid $16,300 a month—less-favoured universities face cutbacks. In 2014 the government cut the universities budget to less than $1 billion; low oil prices are likely to force further cuts. Some universities have laid off staff and suspended classes. Mr Correa plans to cancel the government’s $32m payment to the three postgraduate universities, including Andina, saying it is the “fruit of custom and lobbying”. FLACSO, one of the three, has suspended construction of a new building.

Andina, which operates under the auspices of the Andean Community of Nations (CAN), is in a class of its own. Mr Montaño says the treaty establishing the CAN allows the university to follow its own rules in naming a rector. Mr Correa says he would rather quit than “permit this insult to the people of Ecuador”. Siding with the government, the CAN council that oversees Andina has given the university a week to present a plan for electing a rector. Mr Correa may win, but academics who cherish independence will not forget.





Bello

How to win an election

The rise of the Latin American political guru

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS a sensational claim. Andrés Sepúlveda, a Colombian computer-hacker serving a ten-year jail sentence for espionage, told Bloomberg Businessweek that he spent years carrying out dirty tricks during Latin American elections. He spied on rival campaigns, stole data and manipulated social media, often working for Juan José Rendón, a Miami-based Venezuelan political consultant. One of his tasks was to hack the communications of rivals of Enrique Peña Nieto in Mexico’s 2012 presidential campaign, he says. (Mr Rendón denied using Mr Sepúlveda for anything illegal. Mr Peña’s campaign denied hiring either of them.) Many of Mr Sepúlveda’s efforts were unsuccessful, Businessweekacknowledged, “but he has enough wins that he might be able to claim as much influence over the political direction of modern Latin America as anyone” in this century.

Disturbing as Mr Sepúlveda’s claims are, that is an exaggeration. Elections in Latin America, as elsewhere, turn mainly on the merits of the candidate and the mood of the voters. Mr Peña, for example, won because many Mexicans disliked his opponents. But Mr Sepúlveda’s account does show that the influence of political gurus and technology is growing in the region, and that it is not always benign.

Time was when Latin American elections were fairly predictable, with stable parties based on secular ideology or religion and with a dollop of political clientelism. Much has changed in the past two or three decades. Voters are better educated, more urban and less ideological (party loyalty has hit rock bottom). They share ideas and preferences through social media, which can help political outsiders get noticed. “The [established] media and political leaders have ever less influence,” says Jaime Durán Barba, an Ecuadorean consultant who helped Mauricio Macri pull off an unexpected victory in Argentina’s presidential election in November.

Such trends are a boon for gurus. Joseph Napolitan, who worked on John Kennedy’s presidential campaign in 1960, introduced American-style consulting to Latin America, starting in Venezuela in the 1970s. As democracy spread in the 1980s, so did consultants. “Thirty years ago there were ten or so of us,” says Mr Durán. “Now there are thousands.”

Some campaigns use Americans, such as Dick Morris or James Carville, both advisers to Bill Clinton. “But it can be very hard if the candidate doesn’t speak English and they have to work through a translator,” says Mario Elgarresta, a Cuban-American consultant. Nowadays, the top Latin American gurus are almost household names, and are richly rewarded.

On the right of the political spectrum, Mr Rendón has worked on many successful campaigns, including those of Juan Manuel Santos in Colombia and, Mr Rendón claims, Mr Peña. On the left, João Santana, a Brazilian who is a former journalist and writer of pop songs, shot to fame when he helped Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva win a second term in 2006. His clever television spots contributed to Dilma Rousseff’s victories in 2010 and 2014. He notched up four other presidential wins outside Brazil, and does not deny a report that he is worth more than $50m. In February he was arrested on suspicion, which he called “baseless”, of receiving illicit payments in Brazil’s campaign in 2014 from Odebrecht, a construction firm.

The gurus tend to be self-promoting and bitchy. How effective are they? “You can do a good campaign but you can’t do miracles,” says Mr Elgarresta. “It’s the candidate who wins or loses,” Mr Durán agrees. But an understanding of the electorate, derived from polling and focus groups, a sound strategy and effective publicity can make a difference. The gurus complain that candidates often don’t know how to use them.

They insist that they do not engage in illegal actions, such as hacking. Daniel Zovatto of International IDEA, an inter-governmental body that promotes democracy, says that cyber-attacks are still exceptional in Latin America. He sees Mr Sepúlveda’s story as a wake-up call. The combination of hacking and social media means that there will be “more scope for both negative and dirty [ie, illegal] campaigning”, he says. Some countries are more awake to the threat than others. Brazil’s electoral tribunal, for example, organises hacking sessions to test the security of its electronic voting system.

No amount of dirty tricks can turn the tide of history or defeat a strong candidate. Today’s Latin American voters tend to dislike negative campaigning, Mr Durán thinks. But in a tight race, hackers might conceivably tip the result. Those who think elections should be fair as well as free have been warned.





Asia




Warming relations between India and America: A suitable boy?

Religion and politics in Pakistan: Bad moon rising

Japan’s gossipy weeklies: Pulp non-fiction

Thailand’s deadly roads: Look both ways

South-East Asian economies: Okay, for now

Banyan: Trawling for trouble





Warming relations between India and America

A suitable boy?

The Pentagon is wooing India, but the bride is still coy

Apr 16th 2016 | DELHI | From the print edition



THEY seem such a promising pair, India and America. The two biggest and noisiest democracies are linked by language and blood: 125m Indians speak English, and over 3m Americans claim Indian descent. They share a belief in the rule of law and (most of the time) in free enterprise, as well as common regional concerns over such things as fighting Islamist extremism and accommodating the rise of China. But as much as a match of American wealth and know-how with Indian brawn and drive would make sense, and ought to bolster global security, Indian pride and American prejudice have repeatedly got in the way.

Yet with regional stars realigning, Indian pride has grown less prickly and American prejudice less smug. “Pivoting” to Asia during Barack Obama’s presidency, America has sought new friendships just as India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, finds it lacks the punch to back his bigger ambitions for India on the wider stage. There will be no flashy wedding between the two in the near future. But what is emerging is a quiet, cautious meeting of mutual interests. American officials call it a strategic handshake, Indian ones a strategic partnership. Neither would utter the word “alliance”, but if the relationship continues to thicken, that is what conceivably might take shape somewhere down the road.

The latest development is small but significant. During a visit to India between April 10th and 12th, his second in less than a year, the American defence secretary, Ashton Carter, joined his Indian counterpart, Manohar Parrikar, in promising quickly to sign a logistics agreement to enable smoother mutual support between the two armed forces. Two other pacts, covering communications and protocols for digital mapping, are also close to conclusion. Together they will make it easier for the two countries’ forces to co-operate, and allow India access to a bigger range of American equipment.

Indian logic rules

America has similar arrangements with dozens of countries. But in India’s case it has taken a decade of haggling to get this far. Before concluding the logistics deal, India insisted on a change of names to distinguish its own version. It is to be a Logistics Exchange Memorandum of Agreement rather than the usual Logistics Support Agreement. “We changed the initials so we don’t seem to follow the same logic as US allies,” says C. Uday Bhaskar, a military analyst and former Indian naval officer. He added that there remain “strong views in our services” about too close an embrace with America.

Those views have a long history. After independence, India prided itself on being “non-aligned”, while turning to the Soviet Union for military supplies. It has been wary of other countries’ causes, a wariness reinforced by watching America bungle in Vietnam and later in Iraq and Afghanistan. Trounced by China in a brief but bloody border war in 1962, India is also cautious about provoking its big neighbour, or being seen as part of an American-led gang-up. Most of all India resents the continued military support America gives to Pakistan, even in the face of evidence that Pakistan has sponsored anti-Indian terror attacks and worked to undermine American-led efforts to bring peace to Afghanistan.

Yet disdain for America is weakening. The latest agreements come on top of a growing pile of protocols that go beyond defence co-operation to include a “joint strategic vision” for Asia signed in January 2015. American armed forces now hold more joint exercises with India than with any other country. And two years ago India overtook Pakistan as a buyer of American weaponry. It helps that America has the kinds of goods that India’s armed forces want as they seek to project power more widely in the Indian Ocean, including long-range patrol aircraft and drones, maritime helicopters, aircraft-carrier technology and anti-submarine gear. America has also moved nimbly to accommodate India’s plans (see article) for strengthening its own defence industry. Aside from half-a-dozen existing partnerships involving such things as jet-engine design and avionics, the two sides have suggested jointly producing fighter aircraft, probably an Indian version of the F-18.

The trigger for all this is the growing boldness of China. With a GDP that is now five times India’s, the regional heavyweight has courted India’s smaller neighbours with aid. Chinese warships now regularly push into the Indian Ocean, and the Chinese government has sought to build a network of bases or, at the least, friendly ports extending from Myanmar to Pakistan to Djibouti. India has mostly stayed aloof from troubles outside its immediate waters. When American officials jumped the gun in February by claiming that India would join patrols in the South China Sea, where China is pressing maritime claims over the objections of everyone else, India issued a vigorous denial. But Chinese pressure closer to home raises alarms.

It is over China that Indian and American interests converge most. Mr Bhaskar says that Americans want India to become more capable and “carry a bigger load”. They may seek more than that. Speaking last month in Delhi, the Indian capital, Admiral Harry Harris, who heads America’s Pacific Command (responsible, he said, for American military operations “from Hollywood to Bollywood”), described expanded military co-operation with India as “arguably the defining partnership for America in the 21st century”.

But deepening mutual interests, kind American words and tempting American hardware are not enough, yet, to prod India into an open embrace. For one thing, the possibility has yet to be exposed to the rough and tumble of Indian politics, where opposition would be fierce. And for all its size and growing strength, India’s armed forces remain compartmentalised and tradition-bound. India still prefers its old bachelor ways to married life.





Religion and politics in Pakistan

Bad moon rising

Pakistan’s Barelvis used to be trusted as anti-militants. Perhaps no longer

Apr 16th 2016 | ISLAMABAD | From the print edition

Qadri on his way to his shrine

MALIK BASHIR, a retired builder, now spends his days sitting under the shade of a tarpaulin, supervising the transformation of his son’s final resting place into a pilgrimage site near Islamabad, Pakistan’s capital. Eventually it will incorporate a shrine, mosque and madrassa. Six weeks after the burial of Mumtaz Qadri, a policeman-turned-bodyguard who murdered his own charge in the name of Islam, there is a temporary structure above his rose-petalled grave and a shop catering to the hundreds who visit each day. Among the trinkets are data-cards packed with videos of Qadri awaiting his execution, singing religious songs from a prison cell.

The hanging of Qadri on February 29th has become a rallying point for Pakistan’s Barelvis, a broad movement within the majority Sunni community which had been regarded as non-political and non-violent as well as a useful foil to more militant sects. Their furious reaction to Qadri’s death has challenged those assumptions.

To the astonishment of senior police in Punjab province, some 100,000 people turned out for Qadri’s funeral prayers on March 2nd. Equally unexpected was the behaviour of the Barelvi mullahs at Qadri’s chehlum, an event held on March 27th to commemorate his death. The clerics led crowds of protesters into Islamabad, where they fought with police, smashed up bus stations and occupied an area outside Parliament for four days. They left only after senior ministers agreed to hear their demands.

Chief among these, many Barelvis want to preserve a draconian ban on blasphemy. They count Qadri as a hero because the man he killed, Punjab’s liberal governor, had criticised it as a “black law”, whereas they think it essential for protecting the honour of Muhammad. Their characteristically South Asian veneration of holy figures puts them at odds with an austere school of Islamic thought that emerged from the Indian seminary of Deoband in the 19th century. Deobandi hardliners disapprove of revering martyrs’ graves, and much else besides. The Barelvis, named after the north Indian town of Bareilly, were organised in defence of folk Islam; most regard themselves simply as Sunnis. The Pakistani Taliban and other terrorists are Deobandis.

Arif Jamal, an expert on religious militancy, says the Barelvis are not as far down the militant path only because Pakistan and its ally Saudi Arabia deliberately kept them out of the state-backed jihad in Afghanistan in the 1980s. But “even without state patronage they will be radicalised, slowly but surely”, he says.

A radical turn could pose serious problems. The Barelvis are the majority among Pakistani Sunnis, and probably in the population as a whole. They are especially prominent in Punjab, home turf of both the ruling Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the army. Devotees at Qadri’s shrine say they are furious with both institutions.

Mr Bashir says he will never again vote for the PML-N, whose leader is condemned in florid graffiti near the shrine. Instead, he says, he is drawn to a new party coming up in Lahore, led by a Barelvi cleric.





Japan’s gossipy weeklies

Pulp non-fiction

Scurrilous tabloids step in where other media fear to tread

Apr 16th 2016 | TOKYO | From the print edition



A LIVELY brew of tabloid-style sensationalism, erudite literary commentary and exposés of figures ranging from pop idols to politicians, Japan’s tabloid weekly magazines, or shukanshi, defy categorisation. Their scoops ought to shame the big television channels and newspapers, which pull their punches when reporting on the establishment, of which they are firmly part. Revelations earlier this year of bribe-taking in the office of the economy minister first appeared in a weekly, the Shukan Bunshun, not a mass-circulation daily. The minister, Akira Amari, resigned, in the biggest political setback for the prime minister, Shinzo Abe, since he came to office in late 2012.

Together the weeklies sell over 2m copies a week. Goings-on in the world of yakuza gangsters, the night-time wanderings by torchlight of a member of the imperial family, corruption in sumo wrestling and the grisly doings of child murderers: all are staples for the shukanshi. They blossomed after the second world war to entertain readers hungry for distractions from the hard graft of pulling Japan from the ruins. For salarymen enduring long commutes and overbearing bosses, they remain morale-boosters, says Mark Schreiber, who has published collections in English of their wackiest stories.

The weeklies echo an earlier publishing tradition: towards the end of the Edo period (1603-1867) comic books full of gossip and political satire flourished. Written largely in the vernacular, they stirred up controversy so successfully that the censors stepped in. In some ways the weeklies are as bold today. Their reporters are mainly outside the cosy system of “press clubs” in which groups of reporters accredited to particular ministries are fed titbits by politicians and senior bureaucrats, on the (usually unspoken) assumption that they will not spill the real beans.

In few other democracies do reporters know so much yet convey so little. By contrast, freelances are hungry to supply scoops for the weeklies, while on occasion mainstream reporters frustrated at not being able to get their story out will give it to a weekly to run under a pseudonym. Two weeklies in particular, the Shukan Bunshun and the Shukan Shincho, which are put out by reputable publishing houses and do without the pictures of naked women that other weeklies carry, are read widely by Tokyo’s political establishment.

Their usefulness grows as journalists complain of increasing self-censorship on television and in newspapers. The head of NHK, the state broadcaster, has said that he thinks its job is to hew to the government’s line. And in recent months talk-show hosts critical of the Abe government have left NHK and two leading commercial television stations, with some suggestion that they were under government-led pressure to go.

It is all grist for the weeklies. Indeed, says Shukan Bunshun’s editor-in-chief, Manabu Shintani, the best way to resist attempts to co-opt the media is to uncover facts that discomfort the powerful. That is all very well, but the “guerrilla” media’s scoops tend to fritter away the public’s attention on trivial personal scandals, says Michael Cucek of Temple University. Rather than reading about how the political system is failing to deal with growing inequalities in the labour market, for instance, shukanshi devotees prefer the story about the severely handicapped married celebrity author with political aspirations and five lovers.





Thailand’s deadly roads

Look both ways

Another bout of hand-wringing over the country’s lethal roads

Apr 16th 2016 | BANGKOK | From the print edition

Spot the crash helmet

SMOKE belched from the exhaust of a double-decker coach as it laboured over a rail crossing a short distance from Bangkok, Thailand’s teeming capital. The vehicle, which was full of Thai holidaymakers, paused for a moment, as if stalled. Within seconds a train ploughed into it, spinning the coach by 90 degrees and depositing it metres up the track. Three people were killed and 30 injured.

Captured on a security camera, the accident at a crossing in early April is one more reminder of the daily carnage enacted on Thailand’s roads (although this one, unusually, involved a train). More grisly scenes are likely this weekend, when 22m Thais travel back to their workplaces after celebrating Songkran, the Thai new year. Road accidents always spike during the “seven days of death” that encompass the festival. A similar surge accompanies revelries at the turn of the calendar year.

Among countries for which the World Health Organisation (WHO) measures road safety, Thailand is less lethal per head of population only than Libya, whose drivers have to contend, among other things, with rocket-propelled grenades. Each year more than 24,000 people are killed on Thai roads, a mortality rate well above other South-East Asian countries (see chart), even much poorer ones with lousier roads. Until recently, misreporting had obscured the scale of the problem, says Pichai Taneerananon, an expert at Songkla University.



Thai roads are busy, testament both to the country’s relative wealth and its limited public transport. They are also packed with vulnerable motorbikes and scooters, which are involved in nearly three-quarters of fatalities. Only half of their riders wear an obligatory helmet, and even fewer of the passengers riding pillion.

Speed limits are too high—up to 80 kilometres (50 miles) an hour in urban areas—and local authorities have limited power to change them. Traffic cameras are proliferating, but fewer than half of Thais pay the measly fines for transgressions. Red tape within government means that licences are rarely revoked. As for drunk drivers, until last year they could legally refuse breathalyser tests. Even now, many traffic cops do not have breathalysers in their kit.

Thailand may have better roads than scruffier neighbours such as Cambodia, says Mirjam Sidik of the Asia Injury Prevention Foundation, a charity, but that only makes it more tempting to go too fast. And as local roads have grown into monstrous highways, safety features such as traffic calming on the edge of towns have not kept pace, says Michael Woodford of the Safer Roads Foundation, which funds improvements at accident black spots.

Thais are growing less tolerant of the daily slaughter, some of which does graphic rounds of the internet thanks to dashboard cameras. Yet the policy response can be dismal. It is hard to see how licensing cyclists, as some recommend, would stop them being ploughed under by lorries. Proposals that new drivers should take psychiatric tests to weed out reckless types ought to disqualify most males under 25. Meanwhile, superstitious Thais have taken to placing small zebra figurines at the sites of accidents. The animals are said to ward off the unhappy ghosts of crash victims, lest they cause more pile-ups.

Thailand’s ruling junta says it is on the case. A review of road-safety laws is under way, and this month authorities said that dangerous drivers would have to do work experience in morgues. A new policy of impounding cars and motorbikes driven by drunks is an “important stride”, says Daniel Kertesz of the WHO. Mr Woodford says the police he meets are determined to cut death rates. There is little sign yet that they are succeeding. The 380 fatalities recorded over the new year in January was the highest figure for years.

The government has to convince Thais that its new offensives will be enforced without favour. In March two students died when their small car was rear-ended by a Mercedes travelling at top speed. Yet the police allowed the driver, from a wealthy family, to decline a test for alcohol or drugs. The ensuing furore reflected a sense among ordinary Thais that the law goes easy on the rich and influential. In 2012 Vorayuth Yoovidhya, heir to a fortune earned from Red Bull, an energy drink, was accused of running down a police officer in his Ferrari. His case has yet to be heard.





South-East Asian economies

Okay, for now

The region is looking perkier than most, but its growth potential is waning

Apr 16th 2016 | SINGAPORE | From the print edition



WHEN you consider the backdrop of weak global demand, a faltering Chinese economy and uncertainty over American monetary policy, then the predictions for South-East Asian economies appear quite upbeat. Of the ten countries in the region, only tiny Brunei is close to recession. Indeed the Asian Development Bank (ADB) forecasts that growth in regional GDP will climb from 4.4% last year to 4.5% this year and 4.8% in 2017. But hold that backdrop in mind: such forecasts may prove too optimistic, especially if global financial markets get another bout of jitters like those earlier this year, and foreign capital is pulled out in a hurry.

The region’s healthiest economies are those of Vietnam and the Philippines: both have young populations and rely less than most in South-East Asia on either China or exports of commodities, whose prices are currently depressed. Growth in Vietnam was 6.7% last year, driven by competitively priced exports. It was only a tad less in the Philippines, thanks to strong services, particularly call centres. Fresh investment in infrastructure in both countries is also driving growth. But the going will not be so easy in the future. Vietnamese manufacturing would be hurt by weaker global trade; meanwhile the government has many galumphing state-owned enterprises to wrestle with. And Philippine call centres face competition from automation software.

A slowdown in China, with its reduced demand for commodities, is hitting Indonesia and Malaysia particularly hard. Commodities (including coal, palm oil and nickel ore) account for three-fifths of Indonesian exports. But tax collection is too weak for the government to do much to soften any slowing of growth. Hoping to spur further investment, the government said this week that it would cut corporate tax from 25% to 20%. But it will probably be years before this stimulates enough investment to translate into more tax receipts. President Joko Widodo entered office in 2014 promising to return the country to 7% growth; today that looks somewhere between fanciful and impossible, despite ambitious plans to ramp up spending on much-needed infrastructure.

Malaysia, Asia’s biggest oil exporter, suffers not just from low commodity prices but from its prime minister’s increasingly surreal hold on power, a combination that has put downward pressure on the currency, the ringgit. Najib Razak has spent months giving unsatisfactory answers to questions about how hundreds of millions of dollars passed through his personal bank accounts. He has cracked down on political opponents and engaged in racial politics—while the price of oil, which makes up a fifth of Malaysian exports, has fallen by over 60% from its peak two years ago. Strong exports of electronics give Malaysia a cushion that other oil producers lack. Yet that sector is more exposed than many to global demand. Malaysia’s annual GDP growth is forecast to average below 5% to the end of 2018. But that assumes questions over Mr Najib do not paralyse government or spill onto the streets.

Poor governance also afflicts Thailand. Last year it grew at a sluggish 2.8%, following dismal growth of under 1% in 2014, after General Prayuth Chan-ocha led a coup and then installed himself as prime minister. Domestic demand has since recovered, and tourists are coming back to the beaches. But uncertainty about the country’s political direction is surely a dampener on foreign and domestic investment. Should infrastructure projects, some backed by China, proceed as planned, and political calm prevail, then growth may pick up. Yet Mr Prayuth’s team has yet to evince a flair for economic management.

Beyond these economies’ immediate prospects, however, longer-term issues are more important, as the ADB’s latest outlook highlights. Among the most serious are shrinking workforces and declining birth rates, especially for Thailand and rich Singapore. Another is lower productivity growth in the future. Easy gains were made when tens of millions of poor South-East Asians moved from the countryside to work in new factories or burgeoning service sectors. But the next leap will be much harder, and will depend on more young people getting a college education, more flexible labour markets, constant upgrading of technologies and smarter, more responsive governments.

It is all a tall order. In fact, the ADB concludes that South-East Asia, along with most of the rest of Asia, has seen its potential growth flag by over two percentage points since 2006-10: the sizzling rates of a decade ago will not return without that next leap.





Banyan

Trawling for trouble

Why do Chinese fishermen keep getting arrested?

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



AS A deterrent it is wasteful, polluting and provocative. But it is also, Indonesia’s government insists, highly effective. On April 5th the country’s maritime-affairs minister, Susi Pudjiastuti, watched live feed from seven different places as 23 Malaysian and Vietnamese trawlers, seized for illegal fishing in Indonesian waters, were blown to smithereens. Since Joko Widodo assumed the presidency in 2014 and promised to look out for local fishing communities, Indonesia has now destroyed more than 170 foreign vessels. The government says the number of poachers has fallen, and the catch of the domestic fleet has increased. Now the combative and popular (at least at home) Miss Susi hopes that the country’s Supreme Court will allow her to destroy ten more vessels, seized for poaching in 2014 and coming from the country with more boats than any other involved in Asia’s huge and growing business of illegal fishing: China.

Burning their boats

Indonesia is already seething with anger at China’s reaction to an incident last month in which a Chinese coastguard cutter rammed free a Chinese fishing boat as the Indonesian authorities were towing it to port, having just caught it poaching in waters off Indonesia’s Natuna islands. Eight of the crew were detained. The ninth has since managed to bring the boat back to the southern Chinese port of Beihai, escorted by the Chinese cutter. There he told the New York Times it was “probable” that he and his shipmates had been fishing in Indonesian waters. In fact, it seems almost certain. Indonesia’s possession of the Natunas is undisputed, and under international law the Chinese were well inside its “exclusive economic zone”. Yet China defended the crew by claiming they were in waters that were “traditional Chinese fishing grounds”. The waters are inside the sweeping “nine-dash line” that China draws on its maps (and even passports) to mark its claim over almost the entire South China Sea.

Chinese fishermen have been detained in Japan, the Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam, all of whose maritime claims overlap with or mirror China’s. But it is not just in contested waters that they get into trouble. Chinese have also been detained in the Russian Far East, North Korea and Sri Lanka in recent years. In 2011 a Chinese fisherman stabbed a South Korean coastguard to death. The next year one was killed by the police in Palau, a tiny Pacific republic. Farther afield, last December two dozen African countries called on China to stop illegal fishing off west Africa. And just this week four Chinese fishermen were freed from detention in Argentina.

More than national sovereignty, what is driving these far-flung adventures is that China is by far the world’s largest consumer (and exporter) of fish. Chinese fish-consumption per person is twice the global average. Aquaculture has met much of this growing demand. But China’s wild catch also dwarfs that of other countries (13.9m tonnes in 2012, compared with 5.4m for Indonesia, 5.1m for America, 3.6m for Japan and 3.3m for India). Overfishing and pollution have blighted China’s inshore fisheries. Stocks are severely depleted: in the South China Sea, with a tenth of the global fish catch, inshore (coastal) fisheries have just 5-30% left of the stocks they had in the 1950s. Chinese fishermen are driven farther offshore and into distant waters.

China’s government encourages this, seeing food security as a priority and fishing as a good source of jobs (14m of them). In 2013 the president, Xi Jinping, visited Tanmen, a fishing port on the southern island of Hainan, and urged fishermen there to “build bigger ships and venture even farther into the oceans and catch bigger fish.” The government provides subsidies for new boats, fuel and navigation aids.

This does not necessarily make fishermen the tools of an expansionist policy. Indeed, the government has sometimes struggled to control Chinese fishermen, some of whose scrapes have surely embarrassed it. In a new paper in Marine Policy, a journal, on “Chinese fishermen in disputed waters”, Zhang Hongzhou, a scholar at RSIS, a think-tank in Singapore, reports on trips to Chinese fishing ports, including Tanmen. There he found that, rather than following Mr Xi’s exhortation, many fishermen had taken up the wholly illegal but lucrative trade in endangered turtles and giant clams, which are protected species.

Nevertheless, fishing can have strategic uses. Like China’s splurge on building artificial islands on reefs in the South China Sea, the habitual presence of big numbers of Chinese boats in disputed waters congeals into facts on the water that become harder to dispute. It also underpins the notion that China has “traditional” claims. And at times fishermen have indeed been used to advance those claims. In 1974 armed fishing trawlers acted as China’s advance guard as it seized the southern part of the Paracel archipelago from the regime of the former South Vietnam. Similar tactics worked in driving the Philippines out of two other parts of the South China Sea: Mischief Reef in 1995 and Scarborough Shoal in 2012.

Giving state backing to poaching or to fishing in contested waters is a dangerous ploy, however. The grave rise in tension with Japan over the uninhabited Senkaku, or Diaoyu, islands in the East China Sea dates back to September 2010, when a Chinese trawler, apprehended for illegal fishing, rammed a Japanese coastguard vessel. As the seas become more militarised, the risks of clashes mount. To date, the Chinese navy has rarely been involved. But some Chinese fishing ports have expanded their “maritime militias”—ie, armed civilian vessels—and both China and other coastguards are becoming better armed. After China’s provocation in the Natunas, Indonesia says it will send marines, special forces, an army battalion, three frigates, a new radar system, drones and five F-16 fighter jets. But this probably won’t stop China and its fishermen from casting their nets ever wider.





China




Industrial clusters: Bleak times in bra town

Intimate apparel: The little red look

Porters in Chongqing: Bang bang, I hit the ground





Industrial clusters

Bleak times in bra town

One-product towns fuelled China’s export boom. Many are now in trouble

Apr 16th 2016 | GURAO | From the print edition



A PYRAMID of bras stands beside each worker at the Honji Underwear factory in Gurao, a town in the southern province of Guangdong. The workshop resounds with the clack-clack of sewing machines as employees repeat their single, assigned task before passing the garment on to the next person on the production line. Most of the 22,000 thickly padded bras made here each day are destined for shops in China. In this “Town of Underwear”, as the local government likes to call it, there are thousands of similar factories. Gurao produces 350m bras and 430m vests and pairs of knickers a year for sale at home and abroad. Undies account for 80% of its industrial output.

Across Gurao, billboards show big-breasted—usually foreign—women sporting the lingerie that underwires the town’s prosperity (see picture). But many people in Gurao and other underwear-factory clusters around Shantou, a coastal city, worry about the future. Costs are rising, but customers are unwilling to pay more, says June Liu of Pengsheng Underwear, which makes lingerie and swimwear. Last year several factory-owners fled from Gurao, leaving debts and unpaid wages. Some also shut up shop in Chendian, another underwear town nearby.



During the past three decades of rapid economic growth, one-industry towns like Gurao and Chendian sprang up along China’s eastern seaboard, often in what were once paddyfields. With investment from Hong Kong and Taiwan, and a huge influx of migrant labour from China’s interior, they fuelled the country’s export boom. There are now more than 500 such towns, making products such as buttons, ties, plastic shoes, car tyres, toys, Christmas decorations and toilets (see map).

Knickerbocker glories

Gurao is one of several underwear hubs that have made China the world’s largest lingerie producer. The country made 2.9 billion bras in 2014, 60% of the world’s total, according to Frost & Sullivan, a consultancy. In several industries, the clustering of similar firms in the same place creates a critical mass of good suppliers and workers with relevant skills. Niche towns in China produce 63% of the world’s shoes, 70% of its spectacles and 90% of its energy-saving lamps.

All this growth has had an environmental cost. In 2010 Greenpeace, an NGO, reported that fabric-dyeing plants in Gurao had severely polluted the water, making it unfit to drink. But the bra-makers of Gurao are far more worried about foreign competition than foreign eco-warriors.

China’s consumer goods grabbed a huge share of global markets thanks to their low prices. That advantage is fading. Since 2001 wages have risen by 12% a year. Thailand and Vietnam, where labour is cheaper and taxes lower, now make lingerie for global brands such as Victoria’s Secret and La Senza. China’s biggest underwear firm, Regina Miracle, will open two factories in Vietnam this year, its first outside China. It plans another two there by 2018. Cambodia and Myanmar are joining the fray. Wacoal, a Japanese underwear-maker, opened factories in both countries in 2013 and another in Myanmar last year.

Gurao still has advantages, such as excellent supply chains. Several factories there make components for undergarments: dyed textiles, lace and the tough foam used to upholster push-up bras. Every form of elastic waistband used for boxer shorts is produced locally. The town also appears to enjoy loose regulation of trademarks. Some of the waistbands use misspellings such as “Calven Klain” and “Oalvin Klein” in an attempt to cash in on famous brand names.

Officials in Gurao insist that the town can overcome its difficulties by upgrading its technology and using machines instead of people. But attracting the capital and skill to transform Gurao may be more difficult than the daring step taken by a local entrepreneur in 1982 when he opened its first bra factory, at a time when private enterprise was still frowned on in China.

Even China’s largest underwear manufacturers have always found it hard to get long-term commitments from buyers. That has made them reluctant to spend on research or technology. Some factories in Gurao are upgrading, for example by making seamless laser-cut underwear and using new, more comfortable, materials to underwire bras. But most remain low-tech and labour-intensive.

Because they are dominated by private enterprises, towns such as Gurao may be nimbler at adapting to changing market conditions than China’s steel and coal cities, where 1.8m layoffs are planned in the next few years. In 2013 migrant workers made up nearly half of Gurao’s 161,000 people. Many are low-skilled, moving from one job to another, sewing the same part of the bra as they did in the previous factory. Most did not complete high school and are ill-equipped to retrain for jobs in service industries, which the Chinese government hopes will replace manufacturing ones. But luckily most of them have houses and farmland to go back to in their villages if they lose their jobs.

Some of the one-product boomtowns could fade away, leaving little behind but the concrete shells of empty factories and polluted soil. Gurao and other such places have generated extraordinary wealth in once dirt-poor parts of the country. But to thrive in the future, they will need to look beyond the bare necessities.





Intimate apparel

The little red look

A brief history of Chinese underwear

Apr 16th 2016 | BEIJING | From the print edition



REVEALING the curves of breasts was considered lewd for most of Chinese imperial history. Bosoms were often bound (though not as savagely as feet, a bone-crushing practice intended to enhance the female form). Imperial underwear developed accordingly. Various types of compressing vests or tunics were popular over the centuries. High-class women often favoured the dudou, or belly-band—a diamond-shaped piece of embroidered cloth that stretched from neck to waist and was tied at the back (some designers are now trying to resurrect the dudou as a fashion item). Men wore thong-like loincloths, similar to sumo-wrestlers’ competition belts, but underpants for women were rare.

Bosoms briefly enjoyed a renaissance after the collapse of the last imperial dynasty in 1911. Fancy foreign bras also began to spread around that time. But such items were dismissed as bourgeois when the Communists took over in 1949. Under Mao’s rule, both sexes sported loose outfits. If women wore any underpinnings at all they were typically modelled on functional Soviet undergarments. During the anti-bourgeois fanaticism of the Cultural Revolution in the 1960s and 1970s a famous producer of female underwear, Gujin, started making woollen jumpers to survive.

After China began opening to the outside world in the late 1970s, social mores loosened only slowly. It was not until 1986 that bikinis were worn for the first time in public—and only then because an international bodybuilding contest in China required female contestants to wear them (the bikini had made its debut in Paris in 1946). Some Chinese commentators said the garment offended “oriental sensibilities”. But Guangming Daily, a national newspaper, declared the bikini to be compatible with Communist values. As one judge at the competition put it: “The women of China, after thousands of years of imbibing feudalist thinking, are opening their minds.”

Even in the 1990s, fashions remained modest. Big, flesh-coloured knickers were then in vogue, often stretching down to the knee. Bras made for the domestic market still tend to be less skimpy than those for export. But breast size has since become an obsession: racks are now filled with technicolour, diamanté and heavily padded cleavage-boosters. These days China makes and buys more fancy underwear than any other country, supporting socialism from top to bottom.





Porters in Chongqing

Bang bang, I hit the ground

The decline of a great urban institution

Apr 16th 2016 | CHONGQING | From the print edition



YU XIAOYAN waits for work in the rain, sitting on a bamboo pole near the centre of Chongqing, a large city in the south-west. A wiry 60-year-old with pepper-and-salt hair, a wispy beard and an air of resignation, he muses: “I’ve been here 20 years, and it’s never been so tough.” He is what locals call a bangbang man.

Bang means stick. Mr Yu is one of the porters who for generations have hauled the worldly goods of Chongqing from the Yangzi and Jialing rivers on which the city sits, and up its precipitous slopes, using only bamboo and string. Everything from wide-screen televisions and blocks of ice to bricks and car tyres is tied to a short pole and hoisted onto willing shoulders. The bangbang brigade is unique to Chongqing and an emblem of the city (also once distinguished for the rarity of bicycles; as China gets richer, they are becoming rarer everywhere). In 2014 when Li Keqiang, the prime minister, paid a visit, he called the bangbang men “a symbol of the Chinese people’s hard-working spirit”.

But the trade is dying. “When I first came,” says Mr Yu, “there were thousands of bangbang men and plenty of work, but not any more.” According to a documentary made in 2015 for state television, the city had over 300,000 stick men in the late 1990s. Now there are only 3,000. “No one with any education would become a bangbang man,” says Mr Yu. “It’s all old people.”

He is right. A study in 2015 of 400 porters by Chen Hong, Liu Dapei and Du Zhongbo of Chongqing Normal University found that two-thirds of them were over 50. “The decline in the profession symbolises the ageing of Chinese society,” says Zhou Xuexin, dean of the Chongqing Economic and Social Development Institute.

It also reflects improvements in urban infrastructure. When roads were unpaved and buildings lacked lifts, brawn was the only way to move goods up and down the steep hills and into tower blocks. But with better roads and more modern buildings, that is no longer true. Delivery companies with young men on motorcycles have taken over, and the remaining bangbang men are coming to terms with modern technology. They have set up an instant-messaging group to parcel out the available jobs.

For Mr Yu, it is too late. “Most people are going back to their villages,” he says. He turns to write his name, using a finger to draw characters on the wet marble where he sits; the rain soon washes them away.





Middle East and Africa




Islamic State in Iraq: The last battle

Iraq’s politics: Abadi agonistes

Running in Cairo: Miles by the Nile

Narcotics in Africa: An emerging drug market

Southern Africa’s drought: Too little, too late

China and Africa: A despot’s guide to foreign aid





Islamic State in Iraq

The last battle

The long fight to retake Iraq’s second-biggest city, Mosul, has begun

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



IT WAS not an auspicious start. On March 24th the government in Baghdad announced the beginning of operations to retake the city of Mosul, Iraq’s second largest, from Islamic State (IS). The first phase went well. An Iraqi force of about 5,000 quickly overran several villages. But within a few days progress stalled, when a counter-attack by no more than 200 IS fighters resulted in the loss of the village of al-Nasr and the high ground it sits on. Some 20 Iraqi soldiers were killed. An American marine also died from a rocket attack on a small American “fire base”, established to provide artillery support, an indication of America’s expanding role in the conflict.

Iraqi officials still talk positively about pushing IS out of Mosul before the end of the year. It is a big prize: the mainly Sunni Arab city had a population of 2m when it fell to IS in June 2014, and is the key to regaining control of the northern province of Nineveh. But the setback at al-Nasr has been a reality check. Just to take and hold al-Nasr, the local operations command says it needs to bring in more tribal fighters and police.

Military analysts reckon there is, in fact, little prospect of a concerted attempt to regain Mosul before 2017. Michael Pregent, a retired colonel who served as an adviser to Kurdish peshmerga fighters in Mosul during the 2007 surge (and is now at the Hudson Institute, a think-tank), says no force large enough to do the job has been built. One under-strength Iraqi division with some American military advisers will not cut it. Pentagon sources reckon that a force of at least 40,000 will be needed.

The problems do indeed appear immense. Iraqi intelligence puts IS’s fighting strength in Mosul at around 10,000, although the Americans think that the number is dwindling as IS comes under pressure elsewhere. Whatever the precise figure, IS has had the best part of two years to build multilayered defences. Mr Pregent says that although there are reasonably capable peshmerga forces to the east of Mosul that can help, these units have little interest in trying to take a city that will never be a part of Kurdistan and in which their presence would provoke ethnic tensions.

The Shia question

The same concerns, only more so, apply to the Shia-dominated Hashd al-Shaabi, or Popular Mobilisation Units. Their leaders claim that it will be impossible to regain control of Mosul unless they are involved. However, when Iraqi security forces (ISF) drove IS out of Ramadi, the capital of largely Sunni Anbar province, earlier this year, the Baghdad government, under pressure from the Americans, ordered the Hashd, some of which are trained by Iran, to stay away. They did not want a repeat of the sectarian reprisals that marred the retaking of another Sunni city, Tikrit, last year.



There are other risks in deploying the Hashd for the assault on Mosul. In a survey carried out in February by an Iraqi polling firm that included 120 respondents in Mosul, 74% said they did not want to be liberated by the mainly Shia Iraqi army on its own, while 100% said they did not want to be liberated by Shia militias or Kurds. That does not mean Mosul’s inhabitants support IS—according to a nationwide survey in January, 95% of Iraqi Sunnis oppose it—but it does suggest that they are at least as fearful of their potential liberators as they are of their oppressors. One solution would be to bring more Sunnis into the Hashd, but it will be hard to rebalance a force that consists of some 120,000 Shias and only about 16,000 Sunnis.

Mr Pregent says that the force that eventually goes to Mosul must be mostly Sunni. He argues that it should be recruited from among the American-trained soldiers and officers who were purged from the army by the former prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki. He reckons that there are as many as 50,000 such men, some of them sitting in camps for internally displaced people, who, with an offer of some back pay, would be keen to join up.



An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts

Another factor in the battle for Mosul will be the size and role of American forces. Air strikes are a given, but the Pentagon has said that it wants to set up more fire bases of the kind that came under attack last month. Both Ashton Carter, the defence secretary, and General Joe Dunford, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, have put forward plans that are believed to include, among other things, the deployment of more special forces and Apache helicopter gunships. These could operate from a new airbase at Erbil, 20 minutes’ flying time from Mosul, if allowed to do so by the Iraqi Kurdistan authorities.

However, the White House has yet to agree. Barack Obama’s pledge of no “boots on the ground” has worn thin, but there is little indication that he is ready to sanction military support on the scale needed to regain Mosul. That may have to wait until the election of a new president—another reason to suppose that Mosul will be in IS hands until next year.

The enemy also gets a vote, at least on the battlefield. Patrick Martin of the Institute for the Study of War, a think-tank in Washington, DC, notes that a recent spate of spectacular suicide-attacks by IS in the south suggests that its strategy is now to destabilise Iraq’s southern provinces, thus putting pressure on the Iraqi army and the Hashd to restrict their operations in the north and west. IS knows that the fall of Mosul will signal, in effect, its defeat in Iraq; so it is determined to delay that moment for as long as it can. It may one day lose its bloody grip on the city. But when, how and at what cost it will be liberated, remains to be seen.





Iraq’s politics

Abadi agonistes

Two new governments in a month

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

PM for how long?

WHILE their soldiers gain ground battling Islamic State (IS), Iraq’s political leaders in Baghdad are losing their footing. On April 12th the parliamentary Speaker suspended proceedings as MPs furious at Iraq’s second new cabinet in a month resorted to fisticuffs in front of him. Over a hundred of them demanded that the prime minister, Haider Abadi, should resign, and began a sit-in. And across southern Iraq protest leaders threatened to return to the gates of the Green Zone, the government’s sheltered enclave in the heart of Baghdad.

The reason for all the politicking is a struggle over the sectarian system that has dominated Iraq since America’s invasion in 2003. For over a decade the leading factions and their militias have divvied up ministries, treating them as their fiefs. They have stuffed them with their cadres, inflating the government payroll from 1m under Saddam Hussein to 7m today. Ghost projects and ghost workers have emptied state coffers and, together with plummeting oil prices, have saddled the government with a whopping budget deficit of 25% of GDP. Though oil is being pumped in record amounts, hospitals are suspending services for lack of funds. Transparency International lists Iraq’s as the eighth-most-corrupt government in the world.

Mr Abadi’s promise to end the quota system had powerful support. America and Iran, long-term rivals for influence over Iraq, rallied behind him. Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, Shia Islam’s chief religious authority, urged him on. Each Friday, tens of thousands of demonstrators braved blistering temperatures to echo his call for an end to corruption and Iraq’s transformation into a militia-free civil state. Last month the leader of one of the strongest Shia factions, Muqtada al-Sadr, sent out his followers from Baghdad’s shantytowns to join the protests. Still Mr Abadi dithered, unable to break free of Dawa, his own faction, which has ruled Iraq for a decade.

Only after Mr Sadr erected a protest tent in the Green Zone, and insisted he would stay there until Mr Abadi acted, did Mr Abadi finally pluck up the courage to name his own cabinet. On March 31st the prime minister went to parliament and sought its approval for his new ministers. It never came. His nominee for oil minister, a Kurdish academic, withdrew after Kurdish leaders vowed that men in Baghdad would never choose their ministers again. His finance minister also backed out, fearful of Shia gunmen. To the fury of Mr Sadr and the protesters, Mr Abadi’s second list was designed to appease the factions. Instead of his first choice for foreign minister, Sherif Ali Hussein, a Sunni scion of the Hashemite monarchy that once ruled Iraq and has close ties to Arab Gulf states, he named Faleh al-Fayyad, an inept Dawa hand with a habit of dozing off in meetings.

What happens next is unclear. Mr Abadi’s former backers have turned their backs on him. The protesters are returning to the streets, this time to demand his resignation. Plans are afoot for a vote of no confidence in Mr Abadi, when parliament next convenes, possibly within the next few days. Fresh elections could soon follow. Mr Sadr’s men are mulling a march on the Green Zone, while other armed factions vow to prevent them. “A war is brewing to defend the sectarian system,” says Faleh Jaber, a veteran Iraqi analyst trying to mediate between some of the factions. “When Muqtada Sadr enters the Green Zone, generals open the gates and kiss his hands. If he’s shot there’ll be civil war.” Perplexed Americans, including John Kerry, the secretary of state, have hastened to Baghdad to urge restraint and a renewed focus on what they see as the most important task, battling IS. But the situation is alarmingly volatile.





Running in Cairo

Miles by the Nile

An unlikely fitness craze in Egypt

Apr 16th 2016 | CAIRO | From the print edition



IN RECENT years Egyptians have gathered in public spaces to pursue such lofty goals as democracy and social justice. But one of the country’s best organisers was motivated by something more mundane. “I was a bit fat,” says Ibrahim Safwat, who regularly leads thousands of Egyptians into the streets.

Mr Safwat is the head of Cairo Runners, which gathers on Friday mornings, before the city perks up and goes to mosque. He and about a dozen friends started the group on Facebook in 2012. Now it attracts up to 3,000 people to its runs, which change place and increase in length each week, culminating in a half-marathon on April 15th.

There were runners, and even running clubs, in Cairo before Mr Safwat and friends took to the streets. But not many, and most stayed indoors. Broken pavements, potholed roads and snarling traffic make even walking hazardous. Green space is sorely lacking. Dirty air, extreme heat and the threat of harassment complete the unwelcoming picture.

But on Friday mornings the streets are unusually calm and the air feels fresh. Each week the procession of mostly young, Lycra-clad runners, male and female, elicits stares, but little harassment. There is safety in numbers, and the sight is becoming more common. Cairo Runners has given birth to a running culture, and not just in the capital. Similar clubs have sprung up in Alexandria and Ismailia.

Still, most Egyptians do not exercise. Diabetes is a growing scourge. The trick for Cairo Runners is that most see it as a social activity as much as a fitness routine. Runners stop for water—and to post selfies. Others enjoy the escape. “We wanted something in the streets that had nothing to do with the political stuff,” says Ayman Guemeih, a co-founder.

But the political stuff creeps in. When the group organised a run at the pyramids of Giza last year the police, after initially consenting, tried to stop them. An uproar on social media forced the cops to relent. The group dreams of holding a marathon in Cairo, like the one in Beirut. But it needs the support of the government. “We’re not there yet,” says Mr Guemeih.

Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt’s president, seems inclined to support the runners. He has made a show of riding his bike in public to promote fitness. The president even met the group while they were out on one of their runs. “He stopped his car, took some photos with us and asked what we were doing,” says Mr Ibrahim. Doing more will require Mr Sisi to overcome his fear of large groups of motivated young people.





Narcotics in Africa

An emerging drug market

As parts of Africa get richer, rich-world problems proliferate

Apr 16th 2016 | NAIROBI | From the print edition

Heroin or rat poison?

IN THE early morning at a bar in Nairobi, Kenya’s capital, electronic beats pump from a DJ on a stage. Shielded from the autumn rains under tarpaulins, a substantial crowd, mostly of young Kenyans but with several European and American expats, dances. Outside the women’s toilets, attendants turn their eyes away—in exchange for a tip—as groups of young people go in together and then wander out, wiping their noses.

The drug scene is not entirely new to Nairobi. “There has been cocaine here since I was 14 years old,” says one young Kenyan woman, who works for an e-commerce firm and is now 26. But whereas in the geriatric West recreational drug use is falling and many night clubs are closing, in Africa’s capitals it appears to be growing, both among the new middle class and the poor. Drug-use surveys are rare in Africa, but governments are worried.

Africans have consumed drugs for decades, if not centuries. Cannabis is grown and toked across the continent: the UN estimates that roughly 7.5% of African adults smoke weed in a typical year, almost double the global figure of 3.9%. In Somalia and Ethiopia, many men chew vast amounts of qat, a leaf with mild amphetamine properties, (much to the irritation of their wives).

The more recent spread of harder drugs such as heroin and cocaine is driven by the expansion of Africa as a transit route for chemicals on their way to Europe. Cocaine is smuggled from South America to West Africa by boat or small plane. In some small countries, the trade is huge. In Guinea-Bissau, Colombian drug dealers are alleged to have funded the re-election campaign of President João Bernardo Vieira in 2005. Mostly, the product is then smuggled out to Europe by land, sea or air. But much is sold locally, too. Cocaine-snorting in West Africa is now thought to be as common as in Europe.

In east Africa the more urgent problem is heroin, which is imported from Afghanistan and Pakistan on its way to Europe, but also serves a local market. No one is quite sure how many people take heroin—across Africa, the UN puts the number of injecting drug users anywhere between 330,000 and 5.6m. But everyone is sure it is growing. With injection comes HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, which is easily spread by sharing needles. In the poorer parts of Mombasa, some users even inject blood extracted from another drug user to get a free high, a technique called “flashblood”. It is, of course, incredibly risky.

Governments are reacting. Kenya’s drug-and-alcohol-addiction authority now operates a free helpline for addicts of all sorts, which is advertised on the back of high-visibility jackets given to motorcycle taxi drivers. The phone line is answered quickly, but other treatment is patchy, says Elizabeth Ogott of the Kenya Alcohol Policy and Control Alliance, an NGO. When rehab is available, it costs too much for most Kenyans, she says: at least 1,000 shillings (about $10) a day. Methadone clinics have recently opened in Mombasa, but “that’s just a drop in the ocean”. Few Kenyans understand addiction, she thinks.

Corruption makes prohibition even less effective than in the West. Kenya’s government likes to blow up boats carrying contraband in front of journalists. But few traffickers are prosecuted. Even booze laws are barely enforced: bars are supposed to stop serving drinks at 11pm, but you’d never guess it wandering around Nairobi at midnight. In January Ugandan officials admitted that about 80kg of cocaine which had been seized by the police at Entebbe airport had subsequently gone missing. As Africans get rich, the party seems sure to get louder–whatever the consequences.





Southern Africa’s drought

Too little, too late

Governments are responding too slowly to an approaching disaster

Apr 16th 2016 | TOMALI, MALAWI | From the print edition



IN TOMALI, a village in Malawi’s Chikwawa district, a village elder born in the 1930s says she cannot recall a drier year. Esther Manganjala points to the desolate field where she has planted her maize and cotton. By lifting her hands above her head she indicates how tall her crop should be at this time of year. The seeds have barely sprouted.

The drought has scorched Chikwawa. A year ago, this traditional bread basket of Malawi was suffering from severe flooding. The effect of two poor harvests in a row is more than Chikwawa, or indeed Malawi, can bear. On April 12th its president declared a state of national disaster; Zimbabwe and parts of South Africa have done the same. In February the UN’s World Food Programme (WFP) made an urgent appeal for $38m in international aid. Combined with other countries in the region, southern Africa’s appeal for emergency aid stands at $1.6 billion. That is in addition to east Africa’s $2.7 billion appeal, which has received the lion’s share of media coverage and donations. (Ethiopia gets the most attention.)

The WFP has been operating in Tomali for years. Long-standing programmes help farmers to develop new businesses and aim to wean them off more vulnerable plants. But sensible planning goes only so far. Schemes such as one that encourages people to make and sell efficient clay stoves are useful only if there are customers with money to buy them, or food to cook on them. At a nearby market, bags of maize, the staple, are getting too costly.

In lean years Malawi looks to South Africa and Zambia to supply maize, but the scale of southern Africa’s drought means that they have problems of their own. In South Africa the government reckons that the maize harvest will be 27% lower than last year. It has relaxed restrictions on genetically modified crops, and will import at least 3.8m of the roughly 14m tons of maize needed to feed its people this year.

In Zambia, where an election is due in August, the government is furiously obfuscating. Last month authorities impounded 28 trucks carrying maize bound for Malawi and “restricted” exports to Zimbabwe. But Zambia’s agriculture minister continues to deny that exports have been banned, and insists there will be enough food for everyone.

Further afield, Zimbabwe’s food problem is probably the most acute, with a quarter of the population considered to be at risk. One aid worker who recently visited the country claims to have seen not one healthy crop on the long drive from Harare to Bulawayo. In recent weeks Robert Mugabe, the president, has requested $1.5 billion in food aid.

The world’s response has been slow and stingy. Emma Donnelly, the coordinator for Britain’s Department for International Development in Zambia, says the migrant crisis in Europe and the war in Syria are straining donors’ capacity and will. Delay is costly: a study by the department in 2012 noted that responding to drought early is several times cheaper than waiting until famine takes hold. Aid officials are afraid to talk about famine, for fear of sounding alarmist. But that is what may be in store if more is not done.





China and Africa

A despot’s guide to foreign aid

Want more cash? Vote with China at the United Nations

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



PITY the UN ambassador of a small African country each time a vote is called in the General Assembly. Many of the resolutions will be ones that their president and most of their compatriots neither know nor care about. Take Resolution 70/230, adopted just before Christmas and new year when the world’s mind is on how it will recover from one hangover while bracing for the next. The UN resolved, among other things, to hold a symposium on basic space technology in South Africa and a workshop on “human space technology” in Costa Rica. It passed easily.

But what of more contentious resolutions, such as one condemning North Korea for abuses of human rights? Deciding whether to vote yea or nay ought to be easy: North Korea has one of the worst records on earth. Yet 19 countries voted against the resolution, among them Zimbabwe, Burundi and Algeria. Another 48 abstained, among them Kenya, Mozambique and Ethiopia. One reason, perhaps, is that China (which dislikes criticism of its pals in Pyongyang) smiles on nations that agree with it.

AidData, a project based at the College of William and Mary in Virginia, keeps a huge database on official aid flows. Its number-crunching shows how much China appears to reward African countries that vote with it. The relationship is not a simple one (see chart), according to Brad Parks, a director of the organisation. China gives proportionally more money to poorer countries, for instance. But by and large countries that support China do better. AidData reckons that if African countries voted with China an extra 10% of the time, they would get an 86% bump in official aid on average. If Rwanda, for instance, were to cast its ballot alongside China 93% of the time (instead of its current 67%), its aid from China could jump by 289%.



China's development aid to Africa: who gets most and why?

A purely self-interested foreign policy would need to take into account donors other than China, too. America’s Congress receives an annual report from the State Department showing which countries voted with Uncle Sam. Many academics claim to have found evidence that America, too, buys UN votes with aid. (If so, it is hardly consistent. Afghanistan routinely opposes American positions at the UN, yet still gets great dollops of cash.) Even so, cash-strapped African leaders should probably hire a data scientist or two to optimise the yield on their votes, or at the very least make sure their ambassadors turn up. Burundi, Gabon and the Democratic Republic of Congo missed almost half of the votes that America considers key. Swaziland missed two-thirds of its opportunities to cosy up to America or China. Surely in the business of vote-buying the principle of “no vote, no pay” applies.





Europe




Ukraine’s struggle against corruption: Clean-up crew

Abortion in Poland: No exceptions

Germans ridicule Turkey’s president: There once was a prickly sultan

Italy’s migrant route: Opening back up

The Balkan arms trade: Ask not from whom the AK-47s flow

Charlemagne: All quiet on the Aegean front





Ukraine’s struggle against corruption

Clean-up crew

Ukraine is broken, but its civic activists are trying to build a new country

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



IT is easy to despair of Ukraine. The war-torn country has been engulfed by political crisis for nearly two months. The “Revolution of Dignity” that overthrew the corrupt, authoritarian government of President Viktor Yanukovych two years ago brought no revolutionary change. Corruption is still rampant. Key reforms are incomplete. The separation of powers between the president and prime minister remains vague. The oligarchs are still entrenched and the old political faces are having a makeover. The government is paralysed. Foreign aid is frozen. And the shenanigans around the formation of the new government seem painfully familiar.

On April 10th, after weeks of vacillation, the prime minister, Arseniy Yatseniuk, whose popularity had plummeted along with Ukrainians’ living standards, offered to resign. His two-year term produced mixed results. His government managed to raise the absurdly low price Ukrainians are charged for gas, and reduce the country’s dependence on Russian supplies. Public procurement—a big source of corruption—became more transparent. But his administration was tarred by corruption scandals and stalled reforms.

Mr Yatseniuk’s offer of resignation was followed by dissension and backroom horse-trading. The squabbling exemplified Ukraine’s lack of a responsible political elite. On April 14th the Rada, Ukraine’s parliament, voted in a new government led by Volodymyr Groisman, the speaker of parliament and a close ally of President Petro Poroshenko. Oleksandr Danyliuk, a former consultant at McKinsey, is to be finance minister. The new administration is backed by a thin coalition between Mr Poroshenko’s bloc and Mr Yatseniuk’s party, which despite its miserable ratings will retain key cabinet posts, including the Ministry of the Interior.

Ukraine-watchers could not escape a feeling of déjà vu. Twelve years ago the Orange Revolution was followed by a period of misrule by then-President Viktor Yushchenko. At the time Mr Poroshenko, who was one of Mr Yushchenko’s lyubi druzi (“dear friends”), epitomised the betrayal of the revolution’s hopes.

Yet in at least one respect the current situation is different: the energy of the Revolution of Dignity has not dissipated. Instead it has carried over into civil society. With international support, Ukrainian civic groups are trying to force the government to follow through on the promises of the Maidan uprising to reform a corrupt, oligarchic post-Soviet system.



On a Kiev street parallel to the presidential administration building, dozens of young activists are shaping a new European-style state, building parallel institutions and drafting laws that are pushed through parliament. Some 50 of the leading non-governmental organisations (NGOs) have formed a coalition, oddly styled the “Reanimation Package of Reforms” (RPR) in English, that is pushing bills, staging protests, monitoring reforms and holding weekly meetings with MPs.

RPR includes two dozen groups with expertise on reforms such as decentralisation and the fight against corruption. “We have real sway,” says Vadym Miskyi, a 26-year-old RPR organiser who was on Maidan two years ago. The network also includes independent media organs and some 40 young members of parliament who call themselves Euro-optimists. Many of the young activists, encouraged by the success of Georgia’s reforms in the mid-2000s, are rallying behind Mikheil Saakashvili, a former Georgian president and now the governor of Odessa, who is spearheading a national anti-corruption movement.

Unlike the Georgian reforms, which were zealously enforced from the top, the changes in Ukraine are less visible. Yet they have broader support. Daria Kaleniuk, the head of Anti-Corruption Action Centre, one of the RPR’s member groups, says one reason corruption may seem to be getting worse is that it receives more media exposure than it did under Mr Yanukovych. “We have created a toxic environment for Ukraine’s corrupt officials, who have been stealing for the past quarter-century,” says Sevgil Musaieva-Borovyk, the editor of Ukrainska Pravda, an online newspaper.

But although civil society has scored important victories in the information war, the main battle is over law enforcement. Unable to break up corrupt structures such as the prosecutor’s office (which is even less trusted by Ukrainians than Russia’s propaganda-spewing TV stations, according to polls), Ukrainian civil society is helping to build parallel institutions.

A number of cities have established new police forces to bypass the old corrupt ones. There is a National Anti-Corruption Bureau (NABU) empowered to investigate high-level graft, a new anti-corruption prosecution service and a National Agency for the Prevention of Corruption to monitor the income declarations of government officials. Civic activists are trying to change election rules to limit the private funding of election campaigns and prevent political parties from serving as the oligarchs’ poodles.

The victory of Ukraine’s civil-society movement is far from guaranteed. It will depend partly on the efforts of Western donors to enforce strict conditions for the funds they disburse in Ukraine. Establishing NABU was one of the main conditions the IMF attached to its $17 billion loan programme, which has been frozen over concerns about corruption. Desperately reliant on foreign aid, the Ukrainian government had limited wiggle room.

Inevitably, the civil activists and NABU investigators—rigorously selected, trained by Western anti-fraud services and well paid—are provoking resistance from the old system. The General Prosecutor’s office, headed until recently by Viktor Shokin, a protégé of Mr Poroshenko, has refused to pass information to NABU and attacked the Anti-Corruption Action Centre. “In a country where officials steal by percentage points of GDP, it was always going to be a struggle,” says Ms Kaleniuk. “We were ready for it.”





Abortion in Poland

No exceptions

A proposed ban pits pro-choice women against the government and the church

Apr 16th 2016 | PRENZLAU AND WARSAW | From the print edition

Not their idea of Law and Justice

IT TOOK Anna four weeks to make up her mind. A Catholic from Poland’s conservative south, she already has three children, the youngest just seven months old, and says she could not afford a fourth. Abortion is illegal in Poland except in cases of rape, severe prenatal defects or when the mother’s life is at risk, so Anna and her partner found a clinic in Germany. On a fairly typical day early this April, she was one of six Polish women who underwent abortions at the hospital in Prenzlau, a town north-east of Berlin.

Poland’s abortion restrictions are already among the tightest in Europe, but they may be about to get tighter. Pro-life organisations, backed by the Catholic church, have proposed legislation that would ban the procedure except to save the mother’s life, and lengthen the penalty for those administering it from two years in prison to five. If their draft law collects 100,000 signatures, Poland’s parliament will have to consider it.

The initiative jibes with the social conservatism of Poland’s new government, run by the populist Law and Justice party (PiS). Since coming to power in October, it has announced the end of state-funded IVF treatment and mulled restricting access to the morning-after pill. At the same time, it has launched a child subsidy of about $130 per month. Jaroslaw Kaczynski, PiS’s leader, suggested that most of the party’s MPs would vote in favour of the abortion ban.

But although many in the party back the initiative, it is causing a political headache. Three-quarters of Poles oppose abortion on demand, but most approve of the existing exceptions, according to a recent poll. Thousands of pro-choice demonstrators waving wire coathangers have marched against the proposed ban in Warsaw and other cities. When priests in Polish churches began reading out a letter from the country’s bishops supporting the initiative, female worshippers walked out in protest.

Poland’s current laws may or may not prevent abortions, but they certainly make them harder to obtain, and sometimes more dangerous. Just under 1,000 legal abortions were carried out in Poland in 2014. The number of illegal ones is estimated to be many times higher. Some women travel to Germany, where abortion is technically unlawful but tolerated until the 12th week of pregnancy, or to other nearby countries where restrictions are laxer (see chart). In Berlin, some are helped by Ciocia Basia (“Aunt Basia”), a network of activists that introduces Polish women to sympathetic gynaecologists and puts them up at volunteers’ homes.



Others attempt to solve the problem themselves. Some swallow stomach-ulcer pills, hoping the side effects will lead to miscarriage. Janusz Rudzinski, a Polish gynaecologist who runs the abortion department at the hospital in Prenzlau, says he was once phoned by a woman with a critically high fever after she ended her pregnancy with a piece of wire.

The government may yet back away from the measure. Beata Szydlo, the prime minister, first said she supported a tighter ban but later denied that any such measure was being discussed. The church, too, fears over-reaching. Some Catholic women say the bishops’ support for a complete ban has driven a wedge between them and their faith. On the left, many are now calling for the current restrictions, which date from 1993, to be lifted. “Each woman should have the choice,” says Anna, resting against the hospital pillows before her long journey home.





Germans ridicule Turkey’s president

There once was a prickly sultan

Whom Germans were fond of insultin’

Apr 16th 2016 | BERLIN | From the print edition



BEFORE reading a “poem” on German television on March 31st, Jan Böhmermann, a satirist of questionable tact, explained that he wanted to clarify the boundaries of free-speech law. He then declaimed a series of obviously fictional passages (in rhyming verse) depicting Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president of Turkey, engrossed in a series of athletically challenging sexual activities with barnyard animals. By the time the broadcaster took the video off its website a day later, it had caused a diplomatic fracas between Turkey and Germany.

The tension had been a long time brewing. In 2007 the chancellor, Angela Merkel, snubbed Mr Erdogan by opposing Turkish membership of the European Union. As Mr Erdogan’s rule became increasingly autocratic, Mrs Merkel often chided him for nobbling dissidents and the press. But in 2015 refugees started streaming into the EU via Turkey. Suddenly Mrs Merkel needed Mr Erdogan’s help.

The result is the deal that the EU, at Mrs Merkel’s prodding, made with Turkey last month. In return for taking back migrants from Greece and cracking down on people-smugglers, Turkey gets billions in aid and new talks about joining the EU. Its citizens will also be allowed to travel visa-free in Europe. Mrs Merkel is now reluctant to criticise Mr Erdogan.

Basking in its new importance, Turkey has summoned the German ambassador for a dressing-down three times in recent weeks. One complaint was over a mildly satirical song about Mr Erdogan aired on German television on March 17th. At that point Mrs Merkel declared press freedom sacrosanct—prompting Mr Böhmermann to up the ante.

On April 10th Ankara dispatched a formal diplomatic note, invoking an antiquated German law against insulting foreign heads of state. In theory Mr Böhmermann could go to prison for three years, if the German government decides to prosecute. Amid howls of outrage in Germany, Mrs Merkel has yet to rule this out. Mr Erdogan has also filed a personal complaint on the same charges.

Mrs Merkel will need all her diplomatic skill to contain this spat. The stakes are greater than Mr Erdogan’s fragile ego: freedom of speech, the refugee crisis and Syrian policy are all in the mix. Meanwhile, another blow-up is on the horizon. This spring the German Bundestag is set to vote on whether the mass killings of Armenians by Turks a century ago constituted genocide. Expect Turkish tempers to fray.





Italy’s migrant route

Opening back up

Most migrants to Europe once came through Italy. They may again

Apr 16th 2016 | ROME | From the print edition



THE Brenner Pass between Italy and Austria is an Alpine fantasy landscape of sheepfolds and snowy peaks, traversed by a highway crowded with holidaymakers and truckers. On April 12th a European Union spokeswoman declared the pass to be “essential for the freedom of movement within the European Union”. Her words were not celebratory, but foreboding. Earlier, Austrian police had disclosed that construction workers had begun pouring concrete for a registration hall and a 250-metre-wide barrier that would allow the pass to be closed.

This was not just the latest reaction to the more than 1m asylum-seekers who have entered Europe through Greece since last year. Rather, it was in anticipation of a new wave that may be coming. Up to 300,000 migrants could arrive in Italy this year, Austria’s former interior minister, Johanna Mikl-Leitner, said before meeting her Italian counterpart on April 8th. And no one should assume that the pass will stay open if the migrants turn up.

Ms Mikl-Leitner, a member of the centre-right Austrian People’s Party, is a hardliner on immigration. And she is no longer interior minister; she resigned last week to take a senior job in regional government. But her warning is plausible. In the first quarter of this year, while the world’s attention was fixed on events in the Balkans, almost 20,000 migrants arrived in Italy by sea, according to UNHCR, the UN’s refugee agency. That is double the number who came in the same period in 2015, a year in which a total of 150,000 reached Italy. The Austrian ex-minister’s arithmetic, moreover, takes no account of the possibility that the closure of the Greek route in March could push Syrian and other refugees to switch their attention to Italy.



INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers

The vast majority of those currently heading for Italy in boats leaving from Libya, and occasionally Egypt, are not from Syria or Afghanistan, but sub-Saharan Africa. One recent spike saw 2,800 people rescued in a single day. That may have been due to better weather. But it may also have reflected a slight improvement in the security situation in Libya, which has been racked by civil war since the fall of Muammar Qaddafi in 2011. Tunisia has announced that it will reopen its embassy in the capital, Tripoli. Other countries are discussing following suit.

Italy retains a strong interest in Libya, where it had colonies from 1911 until the second world war. On April 12th Italy’s foreign minister, Paolo Gentiloni, flew to Tripoli to show support for a new UN-sponsored unity government launched last month. One of the two rival regimes that had been contesting power has already stepped down in favour of the unity government; the other is due to make its decision on April 18th. America and its allies hope the unity government will help roll back Islamic State fighters who now control a large chunk of Libya.

For Italy, however, pacifying Libya would be a gamble. The chaos has afforded cover for human trafficking, but it also acted as a deterrent to would-be migrants, adding to the considerable perils of crossing first the Sahara and then the Mediterranean. It is unclear whether a restoration of order would encourage migration more than it discouraged trafficking. UNHCR says there are already 100,000 people in Libya waiting to cross the Mediterranean.

A more immediate imponderable is the effect of the blocking of the route through the Balkans. Nicola Carlone, a rear admiral in the Italian coast guard, thinks it probable that traffickers will now try to smuggle Syrian refugees into Europe via North Africa. Others may take aim at Italy’s Adriatic coast. Since the 1990s, when the coast of Puglia in Italy’s south-east was the preferred destination for clandestine migrants from Albania, landings there have been infrequent. In 2015 there were only five, according to a UNHCR spokesperson. But at the end of March 21 people, including Syrians, Palestinians and Somalis, came ashore in a small boat on Italy’s Adriatic coast. They are unlikely to be the last.





The Balkan arms trade

Ask not from whom the AK-47s flow

The answer is often Serbia, Croatia or Bulgaria

Apr 16th 2016 | BELGRADE | From the print edition



THE arsenal discovered in the apartment of Reda Kriket, a suspected terrorist arrested on March 24th near Paris, included explosives, Kalashnikov AK-47 rifles and a machine pistol from Croatia. The terrorists who staged the attacks last November in Paris used Kalashnikov ammunition made in Bosnia. The Kouachi brothers, who attacked the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo the previous January, employed AK-47s made by Zastava, a Serbian manufacturer. Whatever else these terrorists may have shared, one thing they certainly had in common was a fondness for Balkan arms.

The tendency of guns from the Balkans to show up in terrorist attacks in Europe is no surprise. The wars attending the breakup of Yugoslavia in the 1990s, and the near-collapse of the Albanian state in 1997, left a vast supply of small arms in the region. One study estimated the number of firearms in private hands in the Balkans at over 6m, most of them unregistered (see chart). Serbia has the highest concentration of private guns per head in Europe.



On a continent with strict gun laws, Balkan guns have been a blessing for organised crime, too. A study of 26 gang weapons seized in Marseille found nine were Kalashnikovs from the former Yugoslavia. French police report that Albanian gunrunners bring in 20 of the rifles at a time, concealed in the floors of vans. In 2014 Slovakian police stopped an entire lorry full of guns and grenades heading from Bosnia to Sweden.

Helping other regions Balkanise

Yet such shipments into north-western Europe are the small-time “ant trade” of the region’s arms industry, says Ivan Zverzhanovski, co-ordinator of SEESAC, an organisation working on small-arms control in the Balkans. The big customers are foreign governments—many of them Western. In 2014 American, Australian, British and Canadian military cargo planes collected 22m rounds of Kalashnikov ammunition and other arms from Albania and delivered them to Kurdish Peshmerga forces fighting Islamic State (IS) in northern Iraq.

In that case the munitions were free: Albania donated them to earn political credit with Washington, says Evelyn Farkas, a former American defence official. But in most cases the contracts are lucrative. Many of the militias that Western countries back in the Middle East use weapons from the former communist bloc, especially the cheap, reliable, long-lasting AK-47. Since Western countries do not make them, Balkan sources come in handy. America has been buying crates of Kalashnikovs from Serbia’s Zastava since the late 2000s, mainly for Iraqi and Afghan security forces.

Some of these guns leak into local bazaars, or are seized when militias capture government arsenals. A study by Armament Research Services (ARES) of ammunition used by IS in an area of Iraq in 2015 found that 17% of it came from the Balkans. Videos on social media show Syrian militias using Croatian rifles—almost certainly among 10,000 supplied to Iraqi forces as part of a €100m ($120m) deal in 2014-15. In 2012 Croatian arms bought by Saudi Arabia were flown to Jordan for distribution to Syrian rebels in a deal backed by the CIA.

Although most of the Balkan arms business is above-board, some is not. Non-state groups can get the “end-user certificates” needed for international deals through well-connected consultants, says one Serbian source. Another says militias in Yemen, which is under a UN arms embargo, are getting guns through buyers with end-user certificates from Persian Gulf states. Western countries that back the militias, the source says, “turn a blind eye”. Bulgarian arms supposedly destined for the Gulf are turning up in Yemen, Libya and Sudan.

Two decades after the Balkan wars ended, the region’s arms trade does not seem to be slackening. On February 19th an American air strike on an IS base in Libya killed two Serbians associated with the country’s embassy who had been kidnapped in November. Aleksandar Vucic, the Serbian prime minister, said he would rather not discuss the reasons for the kidnapping. It was, he said, “related to certain weapons deals”.





Charlemagne

All quiet on the Aegean front

The migrant deal with Turkey has created breathing space. Europe must use it generously

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



ZIPPING across the choppy Aegean in his powerboat, Nassos Karakitsos, a volunteer with a search-and-rescue NGO called Emergency Response Centre International, scans the horizon for refugees. He spots none. A few months ago the seas around the Greek island of Lesbos were filled with overstuffed rubber dinghies (“balloons with engines”, Mr Karakitsos calls them) carrying Afghans, Iraqis and Syrians from the Turkish coast. Today they are home only to the more forbidding vessels of the Greek coast guard, Frontex (the European Union’s border agency) and NATO, lately arrived to help with maritime surveillance.

The quiet seas are the result of a deal struck between the EU and Turkey to reduce migrant flows, which came into effect on March 20th. It took everyone by surprise, says a European official on Lesbos, and there were teething troubles: the police tailed a Turkish liaison officer stationed on the island, suspecting he was a spy. But for now the migrants have stopped coming. Some of the scrappy volunteer groups that flocked to Lesbos last autumn, when 6,000 refugees might clamber ashore in one day, are closing shop. Larger organisations are moving staff to mainland Greece, where 46,000 refugees have been trapped by the closure of the Macedonian border.

The drama has shifted to Greek ministries, EU agencies and the quasi-prisons on Aegean islands created by the Turkey deal. On Lesbos, all arrivals are taken to Moria, a “hotspot” (processing centre) turned detention camp. Most will face return once their asylum claims have been found inadmissible, on the ground that they reached Greece from Turkey, now considered a safe country for asylum-seekers. (Deportations of migrants who did not claim asylum in Greece have already begun.) Activists consider the deal a shameful abrogation of the EU’s commitment to human rights. The pope, who has attacked Europe’s “anaesthetised conscience” on refugees, will visit Lesbos on April 16th.

Well over 3,000 souls have been stuffed into Moria, a grim place of barbed wire and watchtowers. Through a fence Muhammad, a Syrian refugee, tells Charlemagne of overcrowded shelters and a complete lack of information before a policeman cuts the conversation short. Pakistanis—who, curiously, have been arriving in greater numbers since the deal kicked in—have begun a hunger strike. The NGOs that used to provide services inside Moria have partly withdrawn in protest, leaving it short of infrastructure, expertise and food. Last week Amnesty International, a human-rights watchdog, criticised the “appalling conditions” at Moria and another centre on the island of Chios.

Worse may be to come. All migrants on the island have the right to claim asylum and to appeal if rejected, and 95% have taken this up. The Greeks plan to conclude each case within just 15 days. But there are endless unanswered questions over the process, from the treatment of unaccompanied minors to the provision of legal aid. “It’s an experiment for us, and for Europe,” says Maria Stavropoulou, the director of the Greek asylum service.

Very little about Europe’s handling of the refugee crisis has gone right. This deal is unlikely to be an exception. Refugees who have spent vast sums to flee life-threatening situations may not go willingly. The fate of non-Syrians returned to Turkey is unclear. Legal challenges are certain. The timeline for processing may well slip. In the meantime, if arrivals pick up again, Lesbos could reach its capacity of around 6,000. Officials have already begun offloading migrants from Moria to other camps. Dozens of EU asylum officials have been dispatched to process the claims. Ms Stavropoulou’s service has doubled in number. But she cannot bring herself to say that she is confident the deal will work.

Much of the criticism the deal has attracted is therefore deserved. And yet, as Yannis Mouzalas, the Greek migration minister, notes, by the time it was signed it was the best that could be done. The EU had learned the hard way that it was unable to create a relocation scheme to share the refugee burden, and without one, fences were the only alternative. For those European politicians whose priority was to reduce the flow, the new arrangement looks like a success. New asylum registrations in Germany fell to 21,000 in March, down from over 200,000 in November. Fears that migrants stranded in Greece would find other ways through have not come to pass; instead, they have camped out in wretched conditions near the border, and elsewhere, in the futile hope that it will reopen one day.

Asylum or bust

This has created a tinderbox in Greece—last week Macedonian police tear-gassed migrants who tried to storm the border—but breathing space for politicians. Not long ago pundits speculated that Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, might not see out her term. Now she enjoys rising approval ratings.

That could change if the deal collapses. But there is a bigger concern. There was, despite appearances, a noble idea behind the EU-Turkey deal: stop the irregular migrant flows to make way for regular ones. Europe will probably make good on its minimal commitment to accept one Syrian refugee from Turkey for each one sent back from Greece. But the deal also includes a vague promise of far more substantial resettlements to Europe: optimists have spoken of 200,000 a year or more. On this there is little sign of movement, despite the efforts of German and Dutch politicians to corral their colleagues into making pledges.

Throughout this crisis Europe has been accused of pulling up the drawbridge and shunting its problems onto its neighbours. So far the accusation has not been warranted. But it will be if the EU fails to make good on its resettlement promises. On the wall of Moria the graffiti is still visible behind the whitewash: “EU shame on you.” If Europe does not show that its refugee policy amounts to more than border closures, detention and forced deportation, it will become impossible not to agree.





Britain




David Cameron’s woes: Events, events

Tax transparency: When less is more

Teacher workload: All work and low pay

Railways: Re-coupling

Hospital waiting times: An unhealthy situation

Supermarkets: Dancing in the aisles

Brexit brief: A matter of business

Bagehot: Jeremy Corbyn’s trench warfare





David Cameron’s woes

Events, events

Lessons from an unhappy few weeks for the prime minister

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



SELDOM has there been so striking a confirmation of the old reply by Harold Macmillan, a one-time Tory prime minister, when he was asked what causes governments most trouble: “Events, dear boy, events.” David Cameron, now Tory prime minister, has been buffeted by a series of events, ranging from an ill-received budget to a steel crisis to (this week) a scandal over his culture secretary and a prostitute.

The trickiest, however, was a row over his own taxes that began with the revelation in the “Panama papers” that Mr Cameron’s late father had set up an offshore unit trust called Blairmore from which family members had benefited. Mr Cameron and his advisers handled the news with extraordinary maladroitness, insisting at first that it was a private matter and only slowly dripping out further information. It did not matter that, as the prime minister told the House of Commons on April 11th, he had paid full British taxes on his drawing from Blairmore, that it was set up offshore for administrative reasons rather than to avoid tax, or that he had sold his holdings before taking office. The mere words offshore and trust were enough to evoke images of rich people not paying their fair whack.

Although he seems to have done nothing wrong, Mr Cameron could partly blame himself. Four years ago he criticised Jimmy Carr, a comedian, for equally legal tax avoidance. This came back to haunt him when, after the Blairmore story, he released a summary of his tax returns for the past six years and revealed that his mother had given him £200,000 ($280,000) that is likely to escape inheritance tax. His decision to publish his returns led George Osborne, his chancellor, Boris Johnson, mayor of London, and Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, to do so as well (yielding the discovery that Mr Corbyn was fined £100 for late filing).

The pressure is now on other public figures to follow suit. There is even talk of publishing all tax returns online, as in Norway (see article). One Tory backbencher, Jacob Rees-Mogg, predicted sadly that all MPs would have to publish their tax returns before long. Their reputation for financial chicanery has not recovered from the parliamentary expenses scandal of a few years ago. Another Tory MP, Alan Duncan, spoke crassly when he warned that the House of Commons might soon be filled only by “low achievers”, but the fear that too much transparency could put talented people off public life is real enough.

The political problem for Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne is not really about taxes at all. It is the confirmation of the widespread notion that they are posh boys from privileged and wealthy backgrounds who are out of touch with ordinary folk. Mr Corbyn struck a chord this week when he spoke of one rule for the super-rich and another for everybody else. A common perception ever since the financial crisis is that the government is trying to balance its budget on the backs of the poor, the disabled and the young while protecting the rich and the old. It was borne out when Iain Duncan Smith resigned in March as work and pensions secretary, complaining that Britons were “not all in it together”.

This perception of Mr Cameron as one who seeks always to look after his own is not quite correct: his party conference speech in October was an admirably sincere attack on the deep unfairness and inequalities that disfigure British society. But it is making it harder for him to command support, even among his own backbenchers. Ungrateful Tories seem to have forgotten that it was Mr Cameron who, less than a year ago, pulled off an unexpected election victory and that the economy is steaming ahead, with the employment rate at a record high.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

Underlying almost all Mr Cameron’s political woes is the June 23rd referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union, the official campaigning for which began this week. The combination of a tiny government majority in the Commons, a relatively strong economy and the ineffectiveness of Mr Corbyn as Labour leader (see Bagehot) is giving Eurosceptic Tory backbenchers more freedom to make trouble. They reason that, since the Conservatives are bound to win the next election anyway, there is nothing for the party to fear from splits or rebellions. The talk in Westminster is now of a big cabinet reshuffle or even of a leadership challenge after the referendum. In any event, since Mr Cameron has said he will not run again in 2020, the political agenda will move on to open debate over his successor.

What should be most worrying for the prime minister is that the campaign to remain in the EU seems not to be going well. Matthew Goodwin at the University of Kent, who is part of the academic network “The UK in a Changing Europe”, notes that the poll lead for Remain has narrowed sharply, partly because of rising concerns over immigration. He cites evidence suggesting that turnout will be higher for Brexiteers and concludes that, if overall turnout is 50-55%, Brexit may well win. Another blow is the designation by the Electoral Commission this week of Vote Leave as the official campaign group entitled to state funding. Vote Leave is the more sensible of the two rival pro-Brexit organisations.

Against this background, maintaining voters’ trust in the prime minister is more crucial than ever. The Remain campaign’s silver bullet was always Mr Cameron’s advocacy of its cause. If he is tarnished by the hoohah over his taxes, his own wealth or the random events that afflict prime ministers, the risk of Brexit will rise. When asked this week by Douglas Carswell, the UK Independence Party’s lone MP, if he would stay in office were he to lose the vote on June 23rd, Mr Cameron replied tersely: “Yes”. But few Tories believe him. The irony is that, when he first promised a referendum in early 2013, he did so in hopes of uniting his party. Now it is the referendum that is doing the most to divide it.





Tax transparency

When less is more

The evidence on full tax transparency is thin, and mixed

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



SUNLIGHT may be the best disinfectant, but it can also burn. On April 10th David Cameron, forced into it by revelations in the “Panama papers” on tax havens (see article), became the first British prime minister to publish a summary of his annual tax returns. As the press howled with indignation over his supposed tax dodges, other politicians released their own data. One outraged MP threatened to propose a ban on curtains so that every aspect of private life would be open to public view.

In some countries, however, such disclosures are routine, and not just for politicians. In Sweden, Norway and Finland all tax returns are publicly available. Showing how much everyone contributes to the common coffers is meant to increase social cohesion as well as trust in the government and the tax system. Rather than aimlessly sniping at the rich for not pulling their weight, Norwegians can check to see whether they actually do. Tor Dolvik of Transparency International, a pressure group, says one positive effect is continuous debate about the tax code.

Hard evidence on the specific impact of making tax returns public is scarce, but a Norwegian reform in 2001 provides some clues. Before that date, tax records were available only in paper form. Then the government put them online, enabling people to search painlessly and anonymously for their neighbours’ returns.

The boost in transparency produced benefits. A study by Erlend Bø and Thor Thoreson at Statistics Norway and Joel Slemrod at the University of Michigan found that reported income among business owners rose by around 3%. Another by Ricardo Perez-Truglia of Microsoft Research credited the change with improving people’s awareness of where they really ranked in overall income distribution.

But there were also costs. Mr Perez-Truglia found as well that some at the lower end of the spectrum did not like what they found out: the gap between how happy the rich and poor said they felt widened. There were tales of children bullied because of their parents’ income, low-paid workers shamed and crooks using the information to plan their next hit. And such easy access stimulated snooping. When the authorities later stripped searchers of anonymity, the number of searches fell by more than 90%.

How relevant is Norway’s experience to privacy-loving Britain? Perhaps surprisingly, 51% of respondents in a poll in 2012 by YouGov favoured making all tax returns in Britain public. More recently and more predictably, another YouGov poll this month found that 68% thought senior politicians’ returns should be in plain view.

The argument for holding politicians to a higher standard of transparency than the masses is the public interest in revealing conflicts of interest and rooting out corruption. Around 90% of countries have a disclosure system of some sort, says Larissa Gray of the World Bank, though less than half give access to the public. Some fear that forcing politicians to disclose their tax affairs discourages people from standing for office, but this is now the norm for London mayoral candidates and would-be American presidents, for example.

Evidence on whether greater transparency produces better politics is also a bit thin on the ground. A working paper by Florian Schulz, an economist, and colleagues looked at India, finding that a requirement for political candidates to disclose their assets had deterred some incumbents from running again. Promisingly, in the areas where they dropped out economic growth was higher than before. Another study published in 2010 in the American Economic Journal: Applied Economics looked at 175 countries and discovered a strong relationship between greater financial disclosure on the part of politicians and improved public perception of the quality of governance.

The same study also shows that for politicians to disclose their assets, liabilities, income sources and conflicts of interest mattered more to people than how rich their rulers were. This bodes well for British MPs worried about an explosion of tabloid tax porn if their tax returns are made public. It suggests that the current register of MPs’ interests, which is intended to reveal conflicts of interest rather than total wealth, may be drawn broadly enough.

Mr Cameron has said firmly that he expects only the most senior politicians to publish their tax returns, though this may not be enough to satisfy a distrustful public. More generally, he hails himself as a champion of transparency: later this year he will introduce a public register showing who owns what companies. This could reveal unsuspected conflicts. A similar recent change in Norway has caught out several of its politicians.





Teacher workload

All work and low pay

Teachers in England gripe about long hours—and justly so

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



CLAIRE COLLING has been a teacher for 23 years and has never had to put in the hours she does now. Her work begins at around 7am and sometimes does not end until 10pm, when she finishes marking and preparing lessons slumped in front of the television. Making sure that classes meet the needs of all her pupils—from high-flyers to stragglers—is tough. But it is not as tough as marking, which takes up “an inordinate amount of time”, partly because of rules imposed from above. “I never thought I would be micromanaged to such an extent that I would be told what colour pen to use,” she says.

Ms Colling is not the only Stakhanovite in English schools. Indeed, her hours are not that far from the norm. Teachers in England and Wales are among the busiest in the world (see chart). Each day, they work an hour and a half longer than the average reported by their colleagues in other countries; only Singaporean and Japanese teachers are more dedicated. English teachers also spend an unusually high proportion of their day on marking and administration. Such activities take up 30% more time in English schools than in most of their international equivalents.

At first glance, it seems that English teachers are reasonably well paid for their efforts. According to analysis by The Economist, their salaries, adjusted for hours spent at school and compared with those of similarly-qualified graduates, are around the average for the OECD club of mostly rich countries. But English teaching contracts are flexible: although they state that a full-time teacher must work a relatively puny 1,265 hours a year, teachers must also put in “reasonable additional hours” to plan lessons, assess pupil performance and mark homework. And what may once have been reasonable now looks increasingly unreasonable. According to the Department for Education, which analysed teachers’ diaries, the time teachers spent marking nearly doubled from 2010 to 2013. Altogether, teachers worked seven hours more a week than they did in 2010.

The rise in teachers’ workload is partly a result of the long-running trend to focus on the performance of each pupil rather than that of the class as a whole at the end of the year, says John Howson of Oxford University. The situation has been exacerbated, however, by government tinkering with exams and the curriculum. The move to supervised coursework for GCSEs, the qualifications taken at 16, and to teacher assessment in primary schools has caused difficulties, says Daisy Christodoulou of Ark, a high-performing academy group. Partly for this reason, supervised coursework is to be phased out from this year. Further changes to GCSEs and to A-levels, exams taken at 18, are still to come into effect. “A more consistent approach from government would help,” sighs one primary-school headteacher.

But bad management in schools is also a problem. Many teachers are overwhelmed by poor-quality data-collection, unnecessary marking and formulaic lesson planning. A forthcoming report by the Education Endowment Foundation, a charity, will warn that there is little research to back many popular marking strategies. And teaching fads are still widespread, notes Jonathan Simons of Policy Exchange, a think-tank, with schools often motivated by myths of what inspectors are said to look for.

The intense workload is not just bad news for teachers. Schools are finding it increasingly difficult to recruit them, and shortages are exacerbated by a rise in the number of those leaving the profession. In 2014 10.4% of teachers quit their jobs, up from 9.6% in 2011. It seems that few are moving for more money: according to the National Foundation for Educational Research, a charity, about as many leave to become teaching assistants as to go into the private sector.

Most educationalists reckon the government has grasped the extent of the problem. The Department for Education recently published a series of reports on how to reduce teacher workload, which were pragmatic but offered few concrete solutions. Ofsted, the schools watchdog, has clarified that it focuses on outcomes rather than processes. But rising pupil numbers and a falling schools budget mean that such efforts are likely to be in vain. That is unfortunate: too many teachers currently work like students cramming for final exams. And as many former students can attest, there are better ways to get results.





Railways

Re-coupling

Many railway lines in Britain that were closed in the 1960s are re-opening

Apr 16th 2016 | WISBECH | From the print edition



A MUSEUM in the centre of Wisbech, a Georgian town of 30,000 souls in East Anglia, proudly displays the original manuscript of Charles Dickens’s “Great Expectations”. Those were days in which Wisbech prospered. The frenzy of railway building in the 19th century gave the town three stations. Now it has none. The last passenger train left in 1968, five years after the report by Richard Beeching, chairman of British Railways, on the future of rail, which led to the closure of nearly a third of Britain’s 17,000 miles of track and a third of its 7,000 stations. The town has suffered economically.

Yet Wisbech, like many towns cut off from the rail network, is now expecting great things. In recent years several hundred miles of railways around the country have been restored. As roads clog up and urban house prices climb, commuters, environmentalists and local politicians are pushing for more old lines to be re-opened. Some 200 proposals have been put forward, says Andrew Allen of the Campaign for Better Transport, a lobby group.

It is a remarkable new trend. After the war, many thought that roads would rule and rail would go the way of canals. When Milton Keynes, a new town, was built 55 miles north of London in the 1960s, it was deemed not to need a station. One was at last opened in 1982. In 2015 6.6m journeys started or ended there. Traffic on other restored lines has boomed, too. The track that re-opened in 2015 from Edinburgh to the Borders expected 650,000 journeys in its first year. Half a million were made in the first five months.

The process of re-opening is laborious. Feasibility studies take years. But with rail journeys doubling in the past two decades, Whitehall now realises it may be easier and cheaper to add rail capacity this way than through pharaonic projects such as HS2, a high-speed link north from London, set to cost over £45 billion ($64 billion).

It is the growth of Cambridge, 40 miles to the south and a centre for high-tech, that has provided the impetus for re-connecting Wisbech. A new station is opening at the Cambridge Science Park and it is hoped that the old line to Oxford will be restored by 2024. The Wisbech rail link would halve travel time to 40 minutes. Cambridge has lots of jobs and Wisbech has cheap houses (the average price is around £150,000 compared with £398,000 in Cambridge), with a recent local plan proposing 10,000 more. If the link goes ahead, the government would meet most of the £100m cost.

Devolution has played a role in recent re-connections. Many of the new lines are in Scotland, Wales or the big cities, which have control over local transport and can push and finance them. In the English shires no single body oversees the process, says Chris Austin, a rail expert. Greg Clark, the secretary of state for local government, visited Wisbech in March and insisted that money for the line was not dependent on East Anglia accepting devolution. Some locals, wary of having foisted upon them the regional mayor that was a condition of other devolution deals, still worry.

With government money tight, other areas are tapping different sources for the cash to re-open lines. In the south-west, Kilbride, a developer, is putting £11.5m towards a rail link into Plymouth as part of a deal to build 750 new homes at Tavistock.

Britain is not expecting another Dickensian railway boom. Perhaps 700-800 miles of lines closed by Beeching will be restored in total, says Mr Austin. But sometimes small amounts of investment can make a big difference.





Hospital waiting times

An unhealthy situation

New figures show A&E departments under more pressure than ever

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



IN 2010 a new coalition government set its own target for hospital accident and emergency (A&E) departments: 95% of patients were to be dealt with within four hours of their arrival. Since July 2013 the mark has not been hit. February brought A&E’s worst miss yet (see chart): 18.4% of patients waited more than four hours to be treated, transferred or discharged.

This can be blamed on various bottlenecks, but the worst restricts the passage from hospital to social care. Old people stay longer in hospital than they need because there is no one to look after them at home and no place available in a nursing home. In early 2015 the inability to sort out subsequent social-care arrangements to free hospital beds accounted for around a quarter of the delays in transferring A&E patients. It now accounts for about a third.

Growing demand has not helped. In 2005-06, 18.8m people went to A&E; by 2014-15 the total had risen to 22.4m. Numbers were flat the following year but John Appleby at the King’s Fund, a think-tank, reckons A&E departments had already reached a tipping point. When a hospital has filled almost all its beds, small fluctuations in demand make a big difference.

Solutions seem far off. The current government’s pre-election promise to smooth the path between health and social care has yet to have much effect, says Andrew Haldenby of Reform, a think-tank. The proportion of people struggling to get help from a GP surgery rose from 12% of those surveyed in 2011 to 15% in 2016, making the “worried well”—37% of those turning up at A&E just need advice—harder than ever to shift.

Some ideas show promise. Lakeside Healthcare, a large GP surgery in Northamptonshire, has a new urgent-care centre giving appointments at less than a third of the cost of an equivalent A&E visit. It has cut overnight stays in local A&Es by up to 50%. Such measures are sorely needed: A&E will not cure itself.





Supermarkets

Dancing in the aisles

At last, better news from Britain’s biggest supermarket

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Tesco’s brighter future

SELDOM had a British company fallen quite so far, so fast. As recently as 2010 Tesco, the country’s biggest retailer, was riding high after years of relentless expansion, making pre-tax profits of £3.5 billion ($5.6 billion). Yet last year this same company lost £6.3 billion, by a stretch its own worst result ever and the sixth-largest loss in the country’s corporate history.

So the announcement on April 13th that Tesco has returned to profit, albeit a slender one, was great news, not only for the company itself but also for the rest of Britain’s struggling supermarkets. For the past few years Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Asda and Morrisons, the traditional top four, have been losing market share and pretty much everything else to the German-owned discounters Aldi and Lidl. Now, it seems, their position may be stabilising.

Tesco made a pre-tax profit of £162m in the year to February 27th on sales of £48.4 billion. It was the first time in three years that year-on-year sales had grown in Britain, by 0.9% in the fourth quarter, compared with a drop of 1.5% in the previous three months. None of these figures stack up against Tesco’s performance when it was in its pomp under Sir Terry Leahy, but they are a lot better than last year’s, and slightly ahead of expectations. The turnaround owes much to decisions taken by David Lewis, who became the ailing company’s chief executive 18 months ago.

Most importantly, he has taken on Aldi and Lidl at their own game, lowering prices and cutting costs. In launching its own selection of cheap “Farm Foods”, for example, Tesco has cut the cost of an average shopping basket from £46.98 in August 2014 to £44.73. It has also reduced the number of products it sells.

Mr Lewis has shut 43 unprofitable stores and axed plans to open another 49 supermarkets, mostly the big out-of-town ones that consumers increasingly shun. The fleet of corporate jets has gone, and so have thousands of jobs. Mr Lewis has also been selling off businesses that Tesco accumulated over the years but no longer deems essential. Thus the supermarket’s South Korean Homeplus business was sold for £4.2 billion last year, its loss-making online video business, Blinkbox, went to TalkTalk and on April 12th Tesco sold half of its share in Lazada, an online retailer based in Singapore, to Alibaba, a vast Chinese firm. This raised another £90m. Others will go in due course.

The fact that Tesco’s share price actually fell on the news that it had returned to profit suggests that it is by no means out of intensive care, however. Mr Lewis himself warned that the retail market remains “challenging and uncertain”. Investors will want to see much more progress, albeit in roughly the same direction, before they relax. There will be no let-up in the competition from Aldi and Lidl, for one thing. The discounters are planning to open hundreds of new stores and Lidl, in particular, is targeting Tesco’s backyard in London and the south-east. Both Aldi and Lidl have been tweaking their own retail strategies, by offering more brands, for instance, and selling wine online, to entice Tesco’s more middle-class customers through their spruced-up doors.

Yet as Bryan Roberts, an analyst at TCC Global, a retail consultancy, argues, the Tesco results show that even if the British supermarkets cannot beat the discounters, at least they can come up with ways to co-exist with them successfully. Sainsbury’s has been fighting back by opening its own Netto discount stores. Cost-cutting Morrisons recently reported its first slight lift in sales for four years. The future may not be so bleak after all.





Brexit brief

A matter of business

Most firms want to stay in the European Union, but some are leery of saying so

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



“THE business of business is business,” Milton Friedman once said. Many companies and trade groups follow his dictum, steering well clear of politics. Yet as the official campaign for the June 23rd referendum on Britain’s EU membership kicked off this week, more businesses were making their views known.

Vote Leave, which has just been designated as the official pro-Brexit campaign group, claims that business is evenly divided. Yet most polls by trade associations find big majorities for staying in the EU. A survey by the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) found 80% of members for Remain, with only 5% for Leave. In response to claims that it represents only big companies, the CBI points out that it speaks for 190,000 members, mostly small and medium-sized enterprises, and that 71% of SMEs want to stay. The Institute of Directors and the British Chambers of Commerce, with memberships that have a higher share of SMEs than the CBI, find most in favour. Even a majority of the Federation of Small Businesses narrowly backs Remain.

Specialist trade associations report similar results. TechUK, an IT group, finds 70% for staying in the EU. The EEF manufacturers’ association has 61% (see chart). A survey this week by the UK arm of the International Chamber of Commerce found 86% of international businesses supporting Remain. Groups as diverse as Universities UK, the Food and Drink Federation and the aerospace and defence association also report large support for Remain.



This is not to deny that some businessmen favour Brexit. James Dyson of the eponymous manufacturing firm is one. Like Alan Halsall of Silver Cross, a pram maker, he believes EU rules hamper the export of his products. Many small firms think that, since they do not export at all, they should be exempt from Brussels rules. Yet as Paul Drechsler, president of the CBI, notes, 25 years of single-market integration have created a supply-chain network so dense as to make such compartmentalisation impossible.

A good example of a business that benefits from the EU is the British car industry. Mike Hawes, the chief executive of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), says it was largely moribund in the 1980s and 1990s. But thanks to foreign ownership and investment attracted by a gateway into the EU single market, it has revived strongly. It accounts for 800,000 jobs and 12% of British exports (80% of its output goes abroad). Britain now produces more cars than France. Fully 77% of SMMT members favour Remain, not just because future investment depends on access to the single market but also to retain influence over the industry’s regulation. Mr Hawes cites the case of an exemption that British lobbying secured from EU emission rules for low-volume niche producers like Lotus and McLaren.

It is a similar story for financial services. Mark Boleat, the policy director of the City of London Corporation, says his outfit has come out strongly for Remain in line with the views of the overwhelming majority of City firms. Like many businesses, they complain about the burden of regulation, but Mr Boleat points out that much of this now comes not from the EU but from either domestic or global sources. He says that even hedge funds, several of whose richest bosses favour Brexit, have been unable to point to any benefits from leaving the EU.



In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union

Should business speak out more? Remain campaigners would like it to, as would the government. Mr Drechsler of the CBI says companies should be clear that it is not their job to tell people how to vote. But he says they would be negligent if they failed to spell out to customers, employees and suppliers the damage that Brexit will do to the economy and jobs. He does not want bosses to wake up on June 24th after a vote to leave feeling they had not done enough to spell out the risks.

Still, some business bosses are cautious. Airbus ran into heavy criticism when it wrote to all employees to warn them of the dangers of Brexit. Japanese firms in Britain are careful not to say explicitly that they might switch investment to continental Europe. Several supermarket groups refuse to talk publicly about Brexit for fear of alienating customers. The CBI itself is a favourite target of Brexiteers, who accuse it of being a Brussels puppet and wanting to join the euro. Yet for British businesses the Brexit referendum matters more than any general election. They must nerve themselves to stick their heads above the parapet if Remain is to win.



Labour rejects "Lexit"



The choice of official campaigning group may boost Brexit’s chances



Talk of taking back power may be delusional, but more democracy is not



Most estimates of lost income are small, but the risk of bigger losses is large



Calm and competent, the Remain campaign is haunted by the spectre of indifference





More Brexit coverage





Bagehot

Jeremy Corbyn’s trench warfare

Despite his abysmal performance, Labour’s leader is well dug in

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



IT IS hard to imagine a more benign month for the Labour Party than the past four weeks. George Osborne’s budget quickly unravelled. Then Iain Duncan Smith, the welfare secretary, resigned and accused his party of looking after its rich supporters at the expense of the poor. Next came the news that swathes of Britain’s steel industry might have to shut. To top it off, David Cameron’s wavering response to the Panama papers, which exposed his family’s offshore holdings, put him on the back foot and reminded everyone what a privileged toff he is. All the while the Tories’ battles over Europe rumbled on. Who, in Britain’s opposition, could possibly have failed to profit from these blows?

Jeremy Corbyn, that’s who. Labour’s hard-left leader has honed a precise formula for such moments. First he launches or endorses a petition (in Corbyn-land, objecting to things is tantamount to changing them), which is duly signed by lots of people who already dislike Conservatives. This is typically accompanied by a wildly unrealistic call for a senior Tory to resign. That does not happen. Then comes the grand showdown in the House of Commons, at which—in a convention now so well established it should be written into Erskine May’s handbook on parliamentary practice—Mr Corbyn lets the prime minister off the hook, rattling off the case against the government with all the wit and agility of an automated supermarket checkout.

The coming weeks may prove just as damning. It is telling that Corbyn loyalists are trying to lower expectations before the local elections on May 5th. Getting their excuses in early, they warn that their candidate, Sadiq Khan, may lose the London mayoral race. Most revealingly, they are talking up a projection that the party will lose 150 seats at the elections taking place in towns like Milton Keynes, Gloucester and Rugby that decide national elections. As Marcus Roberts of YouGov, a polling firm, notes, the party should be aiming for around 300 gains. Any net loss of seats would be a “truly extraordinary event”, he adds.

Combined with Mr Corbyn’s absence from the Europe debate (as The Economist went to press Labour’s instinctively Eurosceptic leader was about to give a speech—at last—on the subject), all of this is nudging Labour legislators towards the “regicide” button. Some have already shown their colours, two calling for Mr Corbyn to go and Labour First, a group on Labour’s right, pushing for a change to the electoral rules that enabled him to win the leadership last autumn. If the party’s results in the local elections are bad, critics will initially hold their tongues and concentrate on the Europe debate. But already there is talk of public denunciation of Labour’s leader—and perhaps even a leadership challenge—on June 24th, the day after the referendum.

Other threats to Mr Corbyn’s leadership are less overt. Dan Jarvis, a much-fancied MP and former soldier, gave a leader-like speech on the party’s future on March 10th, while a “shadow shadow cabinet” of moderates offers the sort of incisive opposition from the backbenches that Mr Corbyn and his team fail to offer from the front. Local Labour branches are passing resolutions against anti-Semitism: a pointed objection to the spread of that virus since Mr Corbyn (whose criticism of Israel seems to be attracting all the wrong people) became leader.

Yet he is well dug in. In December he faced down his shadow cabinet over British air strikes in Syria. In January he fired Michael Dugher, a shadow minister who was critical of him, and clipped the wings of Hilary Benn, the shadow foreign secretary who had dared to speak out against his peacenikery. Tom Watson, his otherwise-rambunctious deputy, now seems cowed. Much of this betokens what Atul Hatwal, a Labour commentator, calls the victory of the “Stalinists” (cynical but capable fixers like Seumas Milne, Mr Corbyn’s Richelieu) over the “Trotskyists” (airy idealists like Jon Lansman, an ally of Labour’s leader who advocates bottom-up control of the party). In other words, Mr Corbyn’s operation has decided it needs to ditch the flowery stuff and nobble its enemies.

At the same time, Mr Corbyn is consolidating his grip on Labour’s membership, his last line of defence. Thousands of lefties joined last summer to vote for him. Many have been absorbed by Momentum, the party-within-a-party set up to defend Labour’s leader from the challenge he will eventually face. Without a drastic influx of moderate members and supporters, Mr Corbyn or his designated heir will win any new leadership election.

Breaking out of the bunker

So he is holding his ground. But that is not the same as going over the top: initiating the great battle, yet to be fought, over the soul and mission of the Labour Party. It looks as if the coming debate over the renewal of Trident, Britain’s nuclear deterrent, will prove to be that moment. Whenever he has the chance, Mr Corbyn talks about the case for unilateralism. Labour insiders suggest that he plans to go over the heads of his (mostly pro-Trident) MPs by holding a vote of party members and supporters and then taking the (probably anti-Trident) result as his position. Eager to foment discord, Mr Cameron seems willing to oblige, planning a vote on renewal for the weeks following the EU referendum.

All that might just be a dry run for a bigger confrontation: a new leadership election triggered not by the moderates (who are many months off feeling ready to take on Mr Corbyn and his thousands of idealistic supporters) but by the Labour leader himself. He is almost 67. Rumours swirl about his health. Supporters and critics alike suggest that he could step down, perhaps in 2018, and make way for John McDonnell, his shadow chancellor. Mr McDonnell is a decent media performer with vast ambitions and close links to Momentum; he is popular among the grassroots and has been touring Labour branches seeking their support. In other words: Mr Corbyn may be hapless, but Corbynism is not going to disappear. Mr Cameron is luckier than he looks today.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot





International




The trade in wild-animal parts (1): Last chance to see?

The trade in wild-animal parts (2): Prescription for extinction

The trade in wild-animal parts (2): Internship





The trade in wild-animal parts (1)

Last chance to see?

In the first of two articles, we look at how poachers, smugglers and lax law enforcement combine to threaten rare species with extinction

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



THE Jim Corbett National Park in the foothills of the Himalayas has perhaps the world’s highest concentration of wild tigers. Not even there are they safe. Last month Indian police arrested one of a gang of poachers operating from nearby Kotkhadar. They also seized 125kg of tiger bones and claws, and five skins.

A tiger’s stripes are as unique as a human’s fingerprints. Authorities in India keep a database of more than 1,500 stripe patterns taken from camera-trap images. It showed that at least four of the skins were from animals in the park. The discovery would “embarrass us in front of the entire world”, a forest department official feared.

The trade in wild-tiger parts starts with poachers, usually poor locals, and ends with customers, mostly Chinese. In between are Tibetan, Indian and Nepalese traffickers. Because several have been arrested in recent years, some poachers are now dealing directly with Chinese retailers. But, says Debbie Banks of the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA), an NGO based in Britain, “Lhasa is still a trade hub for tiger and leopard parts. The bones are used for medical purposes, the teeth as amulets.” Chinese officers in Tibet are particularly keen buyers. Indian and Nepalese police are getting better at working together, but they are still getting limited co-operation from China, says Ms Banks.

In 2010, with tiger bones retailing at up to $1,200 per kilo, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) put the annual turnover of the traffic in tiger parts at around $5m. Wild-tiger parts became more valuable as the wild population declined (encouragingly, the latest tally by the World Wildlife Fund shows a rebound, from 3,200 in 2010 to 3,890 today, though that could just reflect improved counting). Less welcome is a rise in the number of farmed animals: Laos’s biggest breeding facility, near Thakhek, reportedly holds around 400 tigers. Many are bred solely for their parts. The skins are prized as decorations.

Farmed-tiger parts mostly move to China through the unruly Golden Triangle where Myanmar, Thailand and Laos converge. The region is a hotspot for trade in protected species: an EIA team that visited the Golden Triangle Special Economic Zone in Laos, popular with Chinese tourists, found tiger-bone wine, bear-bile pills, pangolin scales and carvings from the beaks of helmeted hornbills openly on sale. Outside the God of Fortune restaurant was a caged bear-cub that could be killed and cooked to order.

Laos also offers a link to the most lucrative of all illegal wildlife enterprises: the trade in rhinoceros horn, which UNODC estimated six years ago was worth $8m a year. Since then the number of rhinos slaughtered annually by poachers in Africa has more than tripled (the poaching of Asia’s depleted stock of rhinos is modest). Poachers are sometimes caught; those higher up the chain rarely are. The only high-level trafficker in jail is a Thai, Chumlong Lemtongthai, who is serving a 13-year sentence in South Africa. He was charged in 2011 with bringing Thai prostitutes to South Africa so they could claim they had shot rhinos on legal hunts and were thus entitled under South African law to export horns as trophies. It was the most bizarre of several methods used to get hold of a substance that can fetch up to $70,000 a kilo—almost twice the price of gold.

Mr Chumlong has been linked to a man who has been described as the Pablo Escobar of wildlife-trafficking, Vixay Keosavang, a former soldier in the Lao People’s Army who operates from a walled compound far off the beaten track in the central province of Bolikhamxay. In 2013 the American government offered $1m for information that would help dismantle the network it believes that Mr Vixay heads, which it suspects of trading wild-animal parts across several countries. Mr Vixay has denied wrongdoing.

A killing cure

Some experts believe that the surge inrhino-poaching, which has cut the world’s population by a fifth since 2008, has been driven by a surge in demand in Vietnam. There, rhino-horn shavings are a supposed cure for hangovers; entire horns are given as gifts and displayed as ornaments. Others believe that much of the rhino-horn taken to Vietnam ends up in China.

As their country opened up in recent decades, “some enterprising Vietnamese citizens got residential status in South Africa and very quietly began trading,” says Tom Milliken of Traffic, an NGO. In at least two cases, professional South African hunters have been caught shooting rhino for Vietnamese clients and, in two others, Vietnamese nationals have been arrested trying to smuggle rhino-horns out of South Africa by air. Hunts have been arranged for citizens of the Czech Republic, which has had a large Vietnamese community since the cold war. Since that ruse was discovered, Slovaks, Poles, Ukrainians and Russians have been enlisted as bogus trophy-hunters. “Some Vietnamese residents have bought their own game ranches, so they are now able to buy rhinos at auction and organise sports hunts,” says Mr Milliken.

The international nature of the trade poses big problems for law-enforcement. Documents that would prove decisive in a prosecution for rhino-horn trafficking can sit in a South African office for months awaiting translation, says Mr Milliken; the situation is no better for other animal parts. “None of what we do for drugs do we do for wildlife trafficking,” an international official involved in the fight against organised crime laments. “Extraditions are rare. There are no controlled deliveries. Sophisticated investigative techniques are seldom deployed. We’re not doing any of the things we could be doing to stop it.”





The trade in wild-animal parts (2)

Prescription for extinction

Misuse of traditional Asian medicine fuels demand for endangered beasts

Apr 16th 2016 | SINGAPORE | From the print edition

An ignoble end

TUAN BENDIXSEN needs a new barber. The man who has cut his hair for years in Hanoi, Vietnam’s capital, knows what Mr Bendixsen’s job is: he runs the local operation of Animals Asia, a charity campaigning against the trade in products from endangered animals. Yet the hairdresser, as he was snipping, confided that he had used rhino-horn powder just recently.

A downside of the East Asian economic miracle is that millions more people can afford to buy products made from endangered species. Not just rhinos, but some types of tiger, bear, alligator, sea turtle, water buffalo, scaly anteater, manta ray, musk deer and others are at risk. Many are in theory protected under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). But on occasion the governments and medical bodies of some signatory countries—including China’s—portray it as a conspiracy against them.

In March, 14 members of a high-profile committee that advises China’s parliament, the National People’s Congress, argued that China’s wildlife-protection law should be relaxed. Competition from Western medicine meant traditional Chinese medicine had “suffered vilification and attack”, they claimed. “We mustn’t ignore our cultural background and blindly adopt Western values.”

The 14 were not calling for unfettered poaching: they want to be allowed to use products from farmed animals. Bears have long been caged with tubes attached to their gall bladders to “milk” their bile. Rhinos and tigers are now also farmed: some 6,000 tigers, 50% more than survive in the wild, are on Chinese farms. China is said to have stocks of 100 tonnes of tiger bones against annual medical-industry demand of around 22 tonnes (about 1,000 tigers).

Why not allow the sale of farmed products, rendering poaching redundant? There is also pressure to allow the sale of poached material seized by governments. South Africa is to ask CITES, at its conference this September in Johannesburg, to permit the sale of some of its stocks of seized rhino horn. The snag: nothing suggests that legal trade cuts poaching at all. On the contrary, it makes it easier to launder illegal goods. It also destigmatises the consumption of endangered body parts, thus raising demand for them. And it can raise the value of the wild product, which is believed by many fans of Chinese medicine to be more potent.

Western activists therefore argue that the way to save wild animals is not to increase the supply of farmed ones but to cut demand. Much of the industry supports them. In 2007 the World Federation of Chinese Medicine Societies, a trade group, arranged a tour of China for some Chinese doctors to preach against the use of tiger products. Many involved in Chinese medicine, such as Richard Eu, the boss of Eu Yan Sang (EYS), a Singapore-listed company, regard the link with ecological crime as an embarrassment.

EYS makes traditional treatments, runs clinics and has 272 retail outlets in China, Hong Kong, Macau, Malaysia and Australia as well as Singapore. Among its bestsellers are cordyceps, or caterpillar fungus, and birds’ nests for soup. The fungus, harvested wild in Tibet, is highly prized in China as a “Himalayan Viagra”. EYS, which sells both wild and (cheaper) cultivated strains, advertises instead the boost it supposedly gives to the respiratory system. The birds’ nests are made from the solidified saliva of swifts and swallows. Some of the priciest come from deep in the Indonesian rainforest, where birds are provided with lavish new towers with protruding chutes for their nests.

As birds’ nest soup shows, Chinese medicine is not far removed from Chinese cuisine. Many of EYS’s products are supplements and tonics, rather than cures. So it should be possible, with public-education campaigns and the respectable parts of the industry, to cut demand for products that threaten endangered species. Just as shark’s fin soup has stopped being a fixture on Chinese-wedding menus since the danger to sharks’ survival caused by the harvesting of the fins became widely known, so consumers could be convinced that they do not need those “medicines”.

Some traditional Chinese medicines contain real active ingredients—in the case of bear bile, ursodeoxycholic acid—that can be synthesised cheaply. Many others are useless, so any alternative would be as good. Rhino horn is supposedly good for fevers and rheumatism. Though Mr Bendixsen’s barber says he uses it as a hangover cure, he might as well use the hair he sweeps up from his floor. A Vietnamese superstition that it cures cancer does not even have roots in traditional belief, but is a modern invention.

Tiger-bone wine, rhino horn and the like are the platinum-label whiskies of the Asian wellness industry: pricey, prestigious and useful for lubricating business deals. Demand is driven not by medical professionals who nurture millennia-old traditions, but by the networks that feed supply—poachers, holders of stocks of banned items, farmers and their allies in some governments.

It may be too late for some species. On rhinos, Mr Bendixsen laments, “we are losing the battle.” If there is hope, says Judith Mills, the author of “Blood of the Tiger”, it may lie with Xi Jinping, China’s powerful president. Many activists attribute a recent sharp drop in the price of ivory to an agreement last year between China and America to end legal sales. Other endangered species, too, might be saved by a pledge that the trade ban will stay and be enforced—not as an anti-China or anti-Asia conspiracy, but as a duty to the planet.





Internship

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Internship: We are seeking a summer intern to write about foreign affairs for The Economist. The pay is £2,000 per month. Anyone is welcome to apply. Applicants should send an original unpublished article of up to 600 words on any subject, a c.v. and a cover letter to foreignintern@economist.com. We are looking for originality, wit, crisp writing and clarity of thought. The deadline is May 6th. For more details, see www.economist.com/foreignintern





Special report: Business in Africa




Business in Africa: 1.2 billion opportunities

The middle class: A matter of definition

Manufacturing: Not making it

Exporting flowers: Coming up roses

Trade: Obstacle course

Diasporas: Settled strangers

Financial technology: On the move

E-commerce: Virtual headaches

Prospects: Fortune favours the brave





Business in Africa

1.2 billion opportunities

The commodity boom may be over, and barriers to doing business are everywhere. But Africa’s market of 1.2 billion people still holds huge promise, says Daniel Knowles

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



FOR A LOOK at the African boom at its peak, do as a multitude of foreign investors have done and fly into Abidjan, the capital of Ivory Coast. Visitors arrive in an air-conditioned hall where a French-style café sells beers, snacks and magazines. There is advertising everywhere, for mobile-phone companies, first-class airline tickets and a new Burger King. The taxi into the city smoothly crosses over a six-lane toll bridge. On the way to the Plateau, the city’s commercial core, cranes, new buildings and billboards jostle for space on the skyline. In the lagoon, red earth piles up where yet another new bridge is under construction.

Just five years ago, Ivory Coast seemed like a lost cause. Having been defeated in an election at the end of 2010, the then president, Laurent Gbagbo, refused to leave office. The victorious opposition leader and now president, Alassane Ouattara, mounted a military offensive to force Mr Gbagbo out. French troops seized the airport to evacuate their citizens (the country used to be a French colony). Protesters were gunned down by troops, foreign businesses were looted and human-rights activists gave warning about mass graves being dug.

Ivory Coast still has problems, as shown by a terrorist attack in March that killed 22 people. But its economy is the second-fastest-growing in Africa (after Ethiopia, which is much poorer), expanding by almost 9% per year. Foreign investment is pouring in. As well as the Burger King, Abidjan now has a Carrefour supermarket, a new Heineken brewery, a Paul bakery and plenty of new infrastructure. Sharp-suited, French-educated ministers explain in perfect English what they are doing to “open up”, “improve the ease of doing business” and “sustainably grow the middle class”. Expensive hotels, such as the reopened $300-a-night Ivoire, are booked up; their bars are full of affluent people striking deals. The country’s three port terminals, the biggest of which is being expanded by Bolloré, a French industrial firm, are working at full capacity, importing cars and electronics and exporting cocoa, coffee and cashew nuts.

This is the Africa of business magazines and bank ads: a continent that is rising at a prodigious pace and creating profitable new markets for multinational firms. But Abidjan also has plenty of reminders that it has been here before. For all of the new buildings springing up, its impressive skyline is still dominated by crumbling 1960s and 1970s concrete modernism. The roads may be new, but the orange taxis that ply them are still ancient fume-spewing Toyota Corollas, remnants of an earlier boom. For the two decades after independence from France in 1960, Ivory Coast enjoyed an economic miracle. Then, quite suddenly, the price of cocoa and coffee plunged and the boom faded as quickly as it had begun.

Reasons to worry

The deepest fear of today’s investors in Africa is that it may be happening again. In Ivory Coast’s neighbour, Ghana, thousands of government workers have been marching in the streets in the past few months to protest against their rising cost of living. Ghana relies on oil and gold, both of which have fallen in price, as well as cocoa. That, plus prodigious government borrowing, has caused a crisis. One US dollar now buys 4 cedi, the local currency; in 2012, it bought not quite two. Growth has halved since 2014, and Ghana is running a budget deficit of 9% of GDP and a current-account deficit of 13%.

According to the World Bank, in the year to April last year the terms of trade deteriorated in 36 out of 48 sub-Saharan African countries as the price of their commodity exports fell relative to the cost of their imports, mostly manufactured goods. Those 36 countries account for 80% of the continent’s population and 70% of its GDP. Eight countries, including two giants, Angola and Nigeria, derive more than 90% of their export revenues from oil, which has recently plummeted far below the price needed to draw in new investors. Growth across sub-Saharan Africa dropped to 3.7% in 2015, far below East Asia’s 6.4% and nowhere near enough to create enough jobs for the continent with the world’s youngest and fastest-growing population. The World Bank expects it to tick up again, but only to 4.8% in 2017.



Countries that happily borrowed from international investors over the past few years have now found themselves shut out of the markets. The stock of outstanding sovereign bonds in the region had risen from less than $1 billion in 2009 to over $18 billion in 2014. If growth continues at a decent clip, that should be manageable. But if it stops, interest rates of 10% or more on dollar-denominated bonds will make refinancing difficult.



The continent’s two biggest economies, Nigeria and South Africa, are already in deep distress. The reasons are different, but both have suffered from commodity-price falls as well as from atrocious economic management. The IMF, although loathed in much of Africa, is back, providing a $ 1billion loan to Ghana and preparing another for Zambia. Some fear a return to 2000, when this newspaper described Africa as the “hopeless continent”.

Yet despite that, Nairobi’s thriving malls and Abidjan’s humming ports show that there are plenty of reasons to stay optimistic. The economic conditions have got worse, but this is a very different continent from two decades ago, when troops from eight African countries were fighting in Congo alone. Wars still rage in South Sudan, Somalia, Mali and northern Nigeria, and violence bubbles in places like eastern Congo, the Central African Republic and Burundi. But broadly speaking, most of sub-Saharan Africa is now peaceful. Elections seem increasingly less likely to result in strife, even if they still generally return incumbents, and more and more often for unconstitutional third terms. The governments that come to power are still often corrupt and inefficient, but far less brazenly so than those of cold war despots such as Mobutu Sese Seko of Congo or Jean-Bedel Bokassa of the Central African Republic.

Africa’s 1.2 billion people also hold plenty of promise. They are young: south of the Sahara, their median age is below 25 everywhere except in South Africa. They are better educated than ever before: literacy rates among the young now exceed 70% everywhere other than in a band of desert countries across the Sahara. They are richer: in sub-Saharan Africa, the proportion of people living on less than $1.90 a day fell from 56% in 1990 to 35% in 2015, according to the World Bank. And diseases that have ravaged life expectancy and productivity are being defeated—gradually for HIV and AIDS, but spectacularly for malaria. Some of the gains may seem modest, but given that living standards across Africa declined during the 30 years after independence they are sufficiently established to prove lasting.

And for all that oil and metals have come to dominate economies such as Nigeria’s and Congo’s, the boom broadened beyond natural resources. Mobile telephones have transformed commerce across Africa, and now smartphones and feature phones (which are halfway between dumb and smart) are taking hold. In 2014, the latest year for which figures are available, 27% of Nigerians owned a smartphone. In many African countries 4G mobile-phone infrastructure is the only thing that works well, but it works at least as well as in much richer countries, and a lot can be built on it. What began with mobile-money systems such as Kenya’s M-Pesa is now branching into bank accounts, savings accounts, loans and insurance. That in turn is helping people rise out of poverty and invest in their future.

This special report will argue that despite some deep and entrenched problems, African businesses offer hope too. It is clearly risky to make sweeping judgments about an entire continent with 54 countries and 2,000 languages. This report draws on visits to various countries in sub-Saharan Africa, but four in particular: South Africa, Nigeria, Kenya and Ivory Coast, all coastal, urbanised and relatively rich. They certainly do not represent the whole of Africa, but your correspondent picked them because they each illustrate a different aspect of business across Africa as a whole. The businesses covered have not yet transformed the continent, but they show that African firms are capable of extraordinary innovation—if only they can be set free.





The middle class

A matter of definition

Who are Africa’s affluent consumers?

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Enough customers to go round

NAIROBI IS MANY cities in one. In tourist brochures, it is a pleasant, laid-back colonial city where you can see giraffes and lions in the national park before relaxing with a gin and tonic on a verandah. In the literature produced by NGOs and charities, it suffers from overcrowded slums and brutal crime. But in investors’ pamphlets it is a city of malls and highways. The latest temple to consumerism, Garden City, just off a new eight-lane motorway, opened in May last year. Inside, well-dressed Kenyans enjoy fast food and buy jewellery. The view from the roof-top car park, where SUVs wait under solar-panelled shades, is of terracotta-tiled new suburban houses in all directions.

The mall is the signature investment of Actis, one of Africa’s biggest private-equity firms. At one end a branch of Game, a South African chain now part-owned by Walmart, sells refrigerators, televisions and everything else needed to furnish those new semi-detached houses. At the other, an enormous supermarket, Nakumatt, sells food to put in the freezers. Duplex apartments built alongside it sell for as much as $600,000. It is a powerful symbol of investors’ confidence in the emergence of a large middle class in Africa.

And yet across the continent that confidence has taken a knock over the past year or so. Following the collapse in commodity prices, some are beginning to wonder whether much of the apparent growth of a consuming class was simply a product of oil and metals money flowing into the economy. In a part of the world where statistics are scarce, and those that exist are often suspect, investors are now trying to decide whether a new, affluent class of consumers really is emerging.

The fried-chicken test

The idea of such an African middle class, as distinct from the super-rich, has captured businesspeople’s imagination for at least a decade. In 2011 the African Development Bank (AfDB) published a report claiming that the middle class at that time numbered 350m people, or 34% of Africa’s population. In the intervening five years, businesspeople across the continent have used that figure to talk up their prospects.

However, the definition used by the AfDB is very broad. To reach its figure of 350m, it defined the middle class to include a “floating class” of people earning between $2 and $4 a day. Its definition of the middle class proper was of people earning $4 to $20 a day. The sort of people who make the Garden City mall profitable—the sort who can afford to spend $10 on a fried-chicken lunch, or $200,000 on a new apartment—would come from the top end of what the AfDB called its “rich” category. They made up less than 5% of the total African population.



Other studies that have appeared since the AfDB report have been more sceptical. In 2014 South Africa’s Standard Bank surveyed 110m households in 11 African countries and concluded that “Africa’s middle class is rising swiftly,” but came up with far more modest numbers. Using a South African measure of living standards that defines middle-class households as those with annual incomes of $5,500 or more, it found that only 14% fell into that category. It also found that by far the fastest growth had been in oil-rich Nigeria and Angola, where it may well tail off now. Another survey published last year by Pew, an American polling firm, found that although poverty in Africa had fallen dramatically, “few countries had much of an increase in the share of middle-income earners” in the decade to 2011.

Such figures help explain why some of the most exuberant boosterism about Africa has deflated. Indeed, some now wonder whether African consumers will ever become a profitable market. “We thought this would be the next Asia, but we have realised the middle class here in the region is extremely small and it is not really growing,” said Cornel Krummenacher, a Nestlé executive, in an interview with the Financial Times last year. In 2014 Cadbury closed its chocolate factory in Nairobi, importing its products from Egypt and South Africa instead. Last September Diageo, a big drinks firm, announced it was investing in selling more Guinness beer in Nigeria, quietly giving up on a plan to push its expensive vodka and whisky. And even those sales of Guinness are falling short of its hopes.

Yet many investors plough on. Koome Gikunda, a director of Actis, the private-equity firm that built Garden City (pictured), says that there most definitely is a middle class affluent enough to shop at the mall. In the absence of good census data, the company conducted its own rough market research to gauge its size. “We hired a firm who flew over the area in a plane and literally counted TV satellite dishes,” he explains. They concluded that perhaps as much as a third of their catchment area of 1m people could afford to shop at the mall. So far, the firm’s hopes seem to have been vindicated. The 220 flats they built alongside the mall sold out in four months. And even on a weekday afternoon the shops are far from deserted.

The Mara Group, a conglomerate founded by Ashish Thakkar, a British-born Asian-African businessman (see article), is also investing in African malls. CFAO, a French firm, plans to construct dozens of malls in eight African countries over the next decade; it has just opened the first in Abidjan. And in many African capitals new housing estates are going up to cater for families with two children and one car. Though in most African countries it is mainly ancient secondhand Toyotas and Peugeots that ply the roads, car dealerships are full of newer models, and radio stations advertise loans to buy them with. Are all these firms holding their hopes too high?

One plausible explanation for their enthusiasm is that Africa’s population is so large, and its middle class was so miniscule to begin with, that even modest growth is providing enormous investment opportunities. In Ethiopia, where according to Standard Bank 99% of the population are still poor, the middle class has nonetheless grown tenfold over the past decade or so. That means a lot more people who buy beer, so in 2014 Heineken opened a new brewery there, its third in the country. Another possibility is that there has always been money around but it was going abroad. Sir Paul Collier, an academic at Oxford university, estimates that in 1990 about 40% of Africa’s wealth was held outside the continent. Thanks to the relative political stability of the past two decades, much of that wealth is now returning, and being invested in property and African businesses.

Africa’s population is so large, and its middle class was so miniscule to begin with, that even modest growth is providing enormous investment opportunities

But the most probable cause of the optimism is that although Africa’s middle class may be small as a proportion of the total population, it really is growing fast in the big cities, which is where the foreign investors are putting their money. The World Bank reckons that by 2050 well over half of the continent’s population will live in urban areas. Nairobi’s population, which was about 3m at the most recent census in 2009, is growing at 5% per year, half as fast again as that of Kenya as a whole. The city’s middle-class population needs to grow only slightly faster than the average to need a big new mall every year. And even the poor spend money. They may not shop at malls but they do buy things like washing powder, processed food and mobile-phone credit.

In a report published last year PricewaterhouseCoopers, a big consultancy, argued that the best opportunities in Africa are in cities, because that is where the infrastructure spending goes. In big cities, the report said, there is a “constant rise in discretionary spending of a kind that did not exist even a decade or two ago…we can safely say it is the result of Africa’s rapidly expanding urban middle classes.” Such cities concentrate consumers; they also attract returning diaspora Africans.

What would make them expand even faster is industrialisation. This could replace some imports, as well as provide the foreign exchange needed to pay for the rest. Unlike mining, making basic things needs lots of people, so the wealth generated would be spread widely. But manufacturing in Africa has never been easy, and in some places it is getting harder.





Manufacturing

Not making it

A successful manufacturing sector requires many things that Africa lacks

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

This on the ground

BASHIR DANYARO STANDS in dismay in his shoe factory in Kano, northern Nigeria’s biggest city. In its heyday, around 15 years ago, up to 200 women operated rows of sewing machines producing footwear for soldiers and schoolchildren. Now the place is silent and covered in a layer of dust. It has been almost two years since the last decent contract came in, Mr Danyaro says. Dozens of his local competitors have closed up shop; his flailing business is flanked by a deserted leather tannery and a shuttered ceramics plant.

Nigeria’s deindustrialisation is perhaps more visible in this part of the country than anywhere else. The Sahelian north has fine leather and agricultural supplies, but its factories are falling into disrepair. A once-thriving textile industry is all but extinct. “It’s not profitable. But what else will I do?” asks Mr Danyaro. “This is the only business I know.”

Three thousand miles to the south, in a suburb of Pretoria, South Africa’s capital, things seem better. At the Nissan factory near Rosslyn, workers in grey overalls and white face masks assemble pickup trucks. This factory is probably more sophisticated than anything else on the continent, yet it, too, is struggling. It currently produces around 185 pickup trucks a day, mostly for the stagnant South African domestic market. With another shift it could more than double its output, but managers at the factory grumble that their bosses in Japan do not want to make full use of their investment.



Manufacturing in Africa is only for the brave. In Nigeria it makes up about 10% of GDP, according to official statistics, which may not be reliable. In South Africa, a far more developed economy, it accounts for 13% of GDP, down from a fifth in 1990. In Thailand the equivalent figure is 28%. Between 1970 and 2013, says the Brookings Institution, an American think-tank, Africa’s share of global manufacturing output fell from 3% to 2%; as a share of sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP, manufacturing has shrunk from almost 20% to about half that. Almost the entire output is for domestic consumption, not export.

Even though labour is generally cheap, making stuff can be more expensive than in parts of Europe because of poor infrastructure, powerful trade unions (in South Africa) and pervasive corruption. There is almost nothing like China’s electronics factories or Bangladesh’s textile sweatshops. Everything from cornflakes to kettles is imported from Europe or Asia.

Africa boosters say that the fall in commodity prices is a dose of nasty but necessary medicine. The way they see it, falling currencies will drive up the cost of imports, and governments will have to open up to investment and reduce regulation and corruption in order to increase tax revenue. Yet this scenario is far too rosy. South Africa and Nigeria are not entirely representative of the rest of Africa, but together they make up roughly half of sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP and give some idea of the challenges the region faces.

Powerless

The biggest immediate problem is power. Nigeria, which alone accounts for a third of sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP, has just 3,000MW of on-grid power-generating capacity, less than North Korea. Mr Danyaro says he gets four hours of power a day at most. Most factories have to rely on diesel generators to keep going. A new tomato-processing facility belonging to the Dangote Group, a huge Nigerian conglomerate owned by Africa’s richest man, has had to import two enormous generators which together produce about 2MW of electricity. “Every hour they use 400 litres of diesel,” says Alhaji Keita, who manages the plant. “It’s by far our biggest overhead.” Even the diesel is mostly imported: despite its oil wealth, Nigeria has very little refining capacity.

World Bank figures show that the amount of power consumed per person in Africa has fallen in recent decades because generating capacity has not kept up with population growth. With 1.2 billion people, the continent has a sixth of the world’s population but only 3% of its generating capacity, which is heavily concentrated in just a few countries. In places like Zambia and Malawi, most of the existing capacity comes from hydroelectric plants built in colonial times or shortly after independence, which often do not run in the dry season. South Africa has many crumbling power stations from the 1960s that have not been upgraded or replaced, so people in its big cities suffer blackouts and factories often come to a halt.

Poor roads are another problem. Suleiman Umar owns a factory in Kano that makes relief blankets on ancient-looking looms. But only ten of the 68 machines are currently working, and that is not bad for a textile business in Nigeria, he says. It costs him more to transport a container from coastal Lagos than it does to ship one all the way from China. Even in South Africa, where rail and road connections are generally good, the vast distances make it expensive to move anything across the country.

But fixing these fundamental problems is hard, so many African countries have tried to foster manufacturing through protectionism. In Nigeria the new government of Muhammadu Buhari has tried to stimulate local production by banning the use of foreign exchange for a list of items including toothpicks and glass. That comes on top of total import bans on products such as cloth from China and punitive tariffs on imports of new cars. In South Africa, the car industry is sheltered by a 20% tariff on imports of new cars and an outright ban on importing used cars.

In some ways, this has spurred production. Without the tariffs, South Africa’s car industry would have had a harder time. Nigeria became self-sufficient in cement after the government ruled that only manufacturers could ship it in. At the Dangote group’s biggest cement plant, an enormous site looming over the scrubland of the central Kogi state, managers admit that they would never have been able to compete under less sheltered conditions. And the profits have allowed Mr Dangote to invest in other businesses, such as his new tomato-canning factory.

But the main industry that thrives thanks to Nigeria’s trade barriers is corruption. In a Kano hotel, a gap-toothed smuggler explains that his syndicate has spent a decade manoeuvring fabric, rice, pasta and vegetable oil to huge warehouses in Kano via Benin and Niger. “The official process is tedious and expensive. You have to deal with customs, immigration, security, and it takes so long,” he says in the local Hausa language. “We organise the illegal route so the products come successfully.” Up to 50 containers might cross the Jibia border post at once, he says, each yielding a profit of up to 5 million naira ($15,000). In Lagos’s markets, “west African” fabric is invariably imported from China. The cars on its roads often arrive after being “lost” in transit to Niger, without payment of Nigeria’s hefty duties on imported cars.

And although trade barriers are helpful for those who are protected, they hurt other businesses. Mr Dangote has more than 60% of Nigeria’s cement market, a near-monopoly. “He has cornered the market. He has access to the limestone deposits. He is a friend of every government, he gets cheaper loans and he gets tax holidays. Which other business gets that?” says Oluseun Onigbinde, founder of BudgIT, a Lagos-based fiscal-analysis group. Last year Dangote, which makes one of the world’s most basic products, had a profit margin of 53%.

In South Africa smuggling is less of a problem, but policy is little better. The Nissan car factory is one of seven in the country. Broadly defined, the car industry makes up 30% of manufacturing output. Demand for cars of all sorts is soaring across the continent, yet South Africa’s huge potential is being wasted by a toxic combination of power cuts and poor labour relations. At the Nissan factory, stickers plastered all over the machinery encourage workers to vote for “strong shop stewards to confront the bosses”. Last year a strike shut the plant down for two months. For historical reasons, managers in the car factories tend to be white and workers black. Disputes are politicised, confrontational and frequent. Relative to their productivity, South African industrial workers are some of the most expensive in the world. A cheap rand should help, by lowering the cost of labour (although it may also raise inflation, which could induce more strikes). But it would take a fundamental change in South Africa’s rigid labour laws to create jobs for the one in four South African adults who are unemployed.

A local flavour

In the meantime, the best hope comes from locals, who know how the system works, and from products sold locally rather than across borders. At Wilson’s Juice, a new factory at the edge of Lagos, lemonade is being bottled on an assembly line manned by 16 people. On the other side of the room workers chop up pineapples. The business was started by Seun and Seyi Abolaji, two brothers who were raised and educated in America and returned to Nigeria, to the bemusement of their families. The margins are good and the firm is expanding quickly. The only materials that have to be imported from outside Africa are for the bottles and the labels, so the shortage of foreign exchange has not hurt too much. “A lot of people are apprehensive, but we are super-excited. For people who source their own materials locally, now is a great time to grow,” says Seyi.

Growth could be speeded up if foreign investors were building factories, too. If this were done on a large scale, as in Asia, it could create millions of export-related jobs. Huge obstacles need to be overcome before that can happen. But efforts to improve Africa’s dire trade links should help.





Exporting flowers

Coming up roses

Kenya’s flower-export business is a rare success

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Heading for a Russian wedding

AROUND THE EDGES of Lake Naivasha, under the shadow of a dormant volcano, Mt Longonot, one of Kenya’s most successful export businesses of recent years has become established. All around the lake, and off dirt roads that lead from it, are acres and acres of plastic tenting in which flowers of all sorts, but especially roses, are grown for export. At the biggest operators, thousands of workers go in each day to water, feed, pick and prepare the crop. On average, 360 tonnes of flowers are flown out of Nairobi airport every day, mostly to Europe but also to Asia and the Middle East. Kenya is the world’s third-largest producer of cut flowers; the crop is its second-largest export, after tea. Since 1988 the industry has grown more than tenfold.

Africa’s global share of agricultural exports, as of manufactured exports, has declined in the decades since independence, from over 8% in the 1970s to just 2% in 2009. Nigeria used to be the world’s biggest producer of palm oil; Ghana of cocoa; and Kenya and Ethiopia of coffee. All have now been overtaken by other regions. Yet the plastic-roofed greenhouses of Kenya’s flower farms are the closest thing the country has to an Asian-style high-tech manufacturing cluster.

Growing flowers and vegetables is a competitive business, says Mark Low, the boss of Groove Flowers, one of the smaller outfits around Lake Naivasha. “The margins are getting smaller and smaller.” Colombia, Ecuador and Ethiopia are all chasing the same customers. But many of Kenya’s growers are hoping to do better by running a highly sophisticated operation. Mr Low, an earthy white Kenyan, mostly grows roses, bouvardia and delphiniums. He does not sell to supermarket suppliers because the prices they pay do not give him a decent margin. Instead, he goes to a lot of trade fairs to find out what Russian oligarchs will order for their daughters’ weddings.

Fashions keep changing, so Mr Low experiments a great deal. Walking through a greenhouse full of spray roses, with several flowers growing on one stem, he explains that these are much harder to grow than the single-flower variety but can fetch higher prices from florists. Sadly, so far they have not done as well as he had hoped because the drop in the rouble is making for less lavish wedding budgets. A lot of other factors also have to be taken into account. For example, if a flower is particularly heavy, it may not be worth growing even if it fetches good prices, because air freight is very expensive. Fragile flowers are no good either, because they will get shaken up on his rutted dirt roads.

Flower farming, then, is a bit like fast-fashion manufacturing. To thrive, it needs an educated workforce; effective, but not onerous, regulation; good access; a decent airport nearby; and plenty of electricity. Indeed, after air freight and labour, power is the main cost: flowers need plenty of light and carefully controlled air and water supplies. The industry has settled around Naivasha because the area’s volcanic terrain is home to several geothermal power stations, the lake provides water and the airport is not far away. Other parts of Kenya are not so well provided for.

Africa’s agricultural productivity has improved immensely over the past decade. Between 2000 and 2013, output of cereals grew by 3.3% a year, faster than in any other region. But turning farming into a thriving export business and a big employer providing well-paid jobs is harder. In Kenya, flowers may have bloomed, but production of coffee, a more traditional export, has collapsed, falling from almost 100,000 tonnes a year in 2000 to below 40,000 in 2013. Many coffee farms have succumbed to foreign competition or been swallowed up by housing development. The success of Kenya’s flower farms will not easily be replicated by other crops.





Trade

Obstacle course

Africa’s trade suffers from dismal infrastructure, lack of investment and corruption

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

The potholes did for it

IT WAS MIDDAY when the lorry on which your correspondent had hitched a ride pulled out of the factory yard in Yopougon, an industrial suburb of Abidjan, Ivory Coast’s commercial capital. By 7pm, when it reached Bouaké, the second-biggest city, the driver had been stopped by police nine times and paid seven bribes. And that was the easy part of the six-day journey taking a cargo of carpets across bumpy, bandit-infested roads to Ouagadougou, capital of next-door Burkina Faso.

Ivorian ministers give the impression that trade in west Africa should be going swimmingly. “We want Ivory Coast to be a hub for the region, we want our goods to go through the country to Burkina Faso, to Mali, to all of our neighbours,” says Abdourahmane Cissé, the country’s budget minister and a former Goldman Sachs banker. On the face of it, the region seems well integrated. Ivory Coast shares its currency, the CFA franc, with its northern neighbours. It belongs to a customs union, UEMOA, that is older than the European Union. Yet according to IMF figures, in 2014 trade between Ivory Coast and Burkina Faso was worth just €376m, or a mere 2% of Ivory Coast’s total trade.



What is true of Ivory Coast is true of much of the continent. Last year 26 African countries signed an agreement to create a “Tripartite Free Trade Area”, combining the existing eastern and southern African trade blocs into one. That ought to be a huge boon for a continent divided by arbitrary colonial borders. Yet the trade figures suggest that African cities are mostly not hubs; rather, they are islands with ports. According to the United Nations, merchandise trade within the continent made up just 11% of Africa’s total trade between 2007 and 2011. In Asia, intra-continental trade was 50%; in Europe, 70%.

This lack of internal trade helps explain why Africa remains poor, and why it has failed to create big firms that straddle national boundaries. Even though the sub-Saharan part of the continent contains over a billion potential customers, in reality it is made up of lots of small markets, each of which has to be conquered individually. That is what prompted The Economist to hitch a ride with a lorry driver and his brother to get a sense of the true barriers to trade, going north from Abidjan via Ferkessédougou, a rough Ivorian border town, towards Ouagadougou.

After a couple of hours of waiting for paperwork, with Michael Jackson blaring through the speakers, the lorry pulled out onto a new, wide, fast-moving road. At the end of 2013 a new toll road opened that goes all the way from Abidjan to Yamoussoukro, the grandiose official capital that Ivory Coast’s post-independence president, Félix Houphouët-Boigny, built around his home town in the 1980s. The road was, as an expat businessman had predicted, “like driving in Europe”. As the driver, Sounkalo Ouattara, revved the engine, he explained that only a few years ago the 220km journey to Yamoussoukro could take six or seven hours. Now, on the six-lane highway, even a heavily laden lorry can do it in three.

The good road comes at a cost, though. The official tolls are fairly modest: 5,000 CFA francs, or about $10, for a lorry to travel all the way. But that is only the start. “You have to pay everyone, even the national-park rangers, you have to pay,” says Sounkalo. “Everyone who has a gun, you have to pay.” His lorry was travelling on a Saturday afternoon, a particularly bad time. “At weekends, all of the senior police officers are not working, so that is when the junior ones make their money.” At 1.22pm a police officer gestured the lorry over with his gun. The lorry stopped while Fousseni, Sounkalo’s brother, got out and handed him 1,000 francs (about $2). At 1.29pm, another road block and another bribe. Then again at 2.21pm, 2.31pm and 3.32pm. Overall, the bribes add up to more than the tolls.

And Yamoussoukro is not much of a destination, even though it offers one of the world’s most egregiously expensive churches and one five-star hotel with “presidential” suites for $420 a night. After stopping briefly to admire the church, your correspondent squeezed back into the cab for the 100km stretch to Bouaké, which has a customs checkpoint. From there, the distance to Ferkessédougou, the second night’s stop, is about 200km, yet it took the Ouattaras’ lorry the best part of ten hours to get there. Just a few miles out of Bouaké the tarmac starts to develop potholes several metres long. At each, the vehicle has to slow down almost to a standstill to cross it, and then gradually regain speed. Some go faster, but they take a big risk. At one point the lorry passed a group of about 30 people and their luggage, waiting by their crashed bus. A smear of rubber led from a particularly large pothole off the road and into a tree.

As the roads deteriorate, so does the security. Though there are police checkpoints every 10km or so—generally a couple of men and a piece of a string or a log blocking the road—they mostly go home at sunset. Vehicles travelling after that are often held up by robbers wielding AK-47s. Even in the day, there is a risk. Luckily the Ouattaras’ lorry was not robbed, but Bright Gowonu, a Ghanaian analyst for Borderless Alliance, an NGO which tries to promote more trade, was less fortunate. Travelling from Ouagadougou to Abidjan on the same route, the lorry he was on came across an armed robbery of a bus, and was stopped at gunpoint. When Mr Gowonu and his driver reached a police checkpoint, somewhat lighter on cash, they were told that there was nothing that could be done. But they were still asked for money for tea and mobile-phone credit.

In the middle of nowhere

According to a study by Saana Consulting, a development-economics firm, carried out on behalf of the Danish government, the cost of moving a container from a port in west Africa inland is roughly 2.5 times what it would be in America. Bribery generally makes up about 10% of that (although for perishable goods such as fruit it can be much more). But the biggest cost is the sheer amount of time swallowed up by poor roads. Just one-third of Africans in rural areas live within 2km of an all-season road, compared with two-thirds of those in other developing regions of the world. Some of the statistics are astonishing. The Democratic Republic of Congo, a country four times the size of France, has fewer miles of paved road than Luxembourg.

The costs of this mount up quickly. A study in 2010 by Africa Country Infrastructure Diagnostic, a research project led by the World Bank, found that farmers four hours by road from a city of 100,000 people produced only 45% of what their land ought to yield. Those six hours away produced just 20%, and those eight hours away produced a mere 5%. Not only do they find it hard to sell their produce, they cannot easily buy fertilisers and equipment or get credit, because doing any of this requires access to a reasonably sized city. And what is true for farmers is true for everyone: being unable to move around means that children do not get educated, job opportunities are missed and businesses are not started.



Things are improving, but not nearly fast enough. In 2009 the World Bank estimated that Africa needed an extra $93 billion a year in infrastructure spending. Last year the Brookings Institution argued in a report that a large chunk of this has now materialised. New ports, roads, railways and power stations are springing up across the continent. Some rely on private finance, others on soft Chinese loans. Next year Kenya will open a new railway line going from Mombasa, its main port, to Nairobi, its capital. Ethiopia has recently opened a new line from Djibouti to Addis Ababa. Both are Chinese-funded.

But progress would be much faster if governments were willing to let private investors build. Too many African politicians favour projects that create opportunities for kickbacks, or which mostly help favoured groups. Governments’ unwillingness to pay the bills for power generated by private companies puts investors off. The projects that do get built are either so profitable that they can accommodate these risks, or else they are funded by the World Bank or China. Sovereign-wealth funds are desperate to invest in long-term projects, but cannot find nearly enough opportunities for reasonably safe investments to soak up the available capital.

Meanwhile smaller fixes could help boost trade. One would be better customs arrangements and more containerisation. At the moment, coastal countries such as Ivory Coast repeatedly check lorries travelling inland to try to stop tax evasion. Duties provide much of the government’s revenues. As Nigeria’s smugglers know, a common ruse to avoid them is for goods “in transit” to a landlocked country to go missing en route. But those checks also slow things down and provide opportunities for bribery. If Burkina Faso were able to collect its import duties at Ivorian ports, lorries could move inland more quickly.

At the final customs checkpoint at Ouangolodougou the crew had to negotiate the lorry’s passage into Burkina Faso with an officious man in a khaki uniform who was adamant that their paperwork was not in order. It seemed ominous, but within a few hours the official was back and the truck was moving again. Within half an hour the lorry was at the border itself—a thin river, with the final barrier a simple gate guarded by a couple of sleepy soldiers, where your correspondent descended.

A decade ago, this was rebel-held territory and there was no trade at all, so those carpets crossing the border represent an improvement. Yet barriers to trade in goods are only part of the story. If Africa is going to become more prosperous, cross-border investment, too, will have to become a lot easier—and that still seems a long way off.





Diasporas

Settled strangers

Why some diasporas are so successful

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

LIFE HAS NOT always been easy for Ashish Thakkar, founder of the Mara Group, a conglomerate that invests across Africa. He was born in 1981 in Leicester, about a decade after his family settled in Britain after being kicked out of Uganda (where his forebears had moved from India in the 1880s) by Idi Amin. The family worked hard and saved, and in 1993 they moved back to Africa.

Ashish was sent to school in Nairobi; the family started a new business in Kigali, Rwanda’s capital. The day after he returned home for the Easter holidays in 1994, the Rwandan genocide started. “Cutting a long story short, we came out alive but we lost everything again,” he recalls.

Undeterred, the Thakkars went back to Kampala, Uganda’s capital, and started all over yet again. In 1995 the teenage Mr Thakkar left school, raised a $5,000 loan and set up an IT hardware business. After that he moved to Dubai. Now the Mara Group operates in 25 African countries. Many African-Gujarati businessmen in east Africa have similar tales to tell. Doing business in Africa may be difficult, but some groups—Gujaratis in east Africa, Lebanese in west Africa—seem to be particularly good at it.

East Africa’s biggest supermarket chain, Nakumatt, is mostly owned by the Shah family, who also have their origins in Gujarat. In Uganda, the leading sugar manufacturer, Kakira Sugar, is owned by the Madhvani family, who bought their business back after it went bankrupt when they were expelled from the country. In Ivory Coast the biggest retail firm is Prosuma, which is Lebanese-owned. Lebanese Ivorians claim that Lebanese families control around 40% of the Ivory Coasts’s economy.

What is it about these diasporas that allows them to succeed in business? Large numbers of Indians came to Kenya and Uganda in Victorian times, drawn by the new British-built Mombasa-Kampala railway. With the Lebanese, the story goes that they got lost in Ivory Coast on their way to Brazil and decided to stay. Both groups have become “settled strangers”, a label used by Gijsbert Oonk, a Dutch historian who has studied Asian diasporas in east Africa. That quality may explain their business success. “It’s a marriage of global ability with local knowledge,” says Aly Khan Satchu, a Kenyan financier whose family arrived in east Africa in 1884. “These families use their international relations like a multinational corporation would do,” notes Mr Oonk.

Chadi Srour, a Lebanese property developer in Abidjan, moved to Ivory Coast from Washington, DC, on a recommendation from his brother. Lebanese people, he says, “are not afraid of dangerous places as long as they are making money”. Ivory Coast’s two wars this century were profitable opportunities, he jokes, since many long-established French expats sold up “and the Lebanese took over.”

Asian businesses are no longer as dominant in Kenya as they were at independence. Avaricious governments after independence hurt some; poor succession planning others. In Ivory Coast, Lebanese businesspeople complain that they are being squeezed by corrupt politicians. Yet the declining importance of Africa’s business diasporas may be a sign of success. Asians did well because they had strong families and easy access to education and international capital. These days, such privileges are also enjoyed by plenty of Africans.





Financial technology

On the move

Much hangs on mobile money

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Mobiles are a must

FROM HIS SHACK in Kangemi, a slum at the western edge of Nairobi, Gilbert Onduko sells bare essentials to his neighbours. A blackboard above the hatch lists prices for ugali (maize cooked into a sort of porridge), farina (similar to semolina) and cooking oil. On the roof of the shack is a small solar panel, about the size of a tea tray, which powers two lights inside and a mobile phone. Since he got it, about a month before your correspondent visited, Mr Onduko has been able to keep his shop open until midnight rather than just in the daytime. He has also cut down his kerosene bill by 100 shillings (about $1) a day—a hefty saving in a Nairobi slum. “And now my phone is always charged,” he grins.

Mr Onduko’s story shows how electricity can improve Africans’ lives. But it also shows what access to credit can do. It was not technology that was stopping shopkeepers in Nairobi’s slums from having electricity. Indeed, power lines run within sight of Mr Onduko’s shop. The problem has been that connecting to the grid, and paying the bills, is beyond the means of most slum-dwellers. To get his solar panel, all Mr Onduko needed was a mobile phone and a deposit of about 3,500 shillings. The rest he can pay for on tick. Each day he sends 50 shillings via his mobile to M-Kopa, the firm that provides the solar panels. That keeps the machinery going, and within about a year he will own it. M-Kopa, which means “to borrow” in Swahili, has made its name selling solar panels, but it is rapidly becoming one of east Africa’s most innovative financial companies.

Mobile and internet technology is transforming industries across the world, but Africa has more potential than most because the existing infrastructure falls so far short of people’s needs. Executives talk exuberantly about how the continent is “leapfrogging” the West through technology. A lot of this is wishful thinking. Drones, for instance, seem unlikely to become a substitute for roads. But the revolution in finance is real. According to the World Bank, between 2011 and 2014 the proportion of adults in sub-Saharan Africa who have a mobile-money account increased from 24% to 34%.

East Africa is one of the most developed markets. Some 58% of Kenyans use mobile-money services, overwhelmingly M-Pesa. And as M-Kopa shows, such mobile services offer more than just a means to transfer money. Mobile phones can provide an address book, a credit rating and a distribution network all in one. Together, those things can allow even very poor people to acquire assets with their earnings, setting them on the path to becoming middle-class.



M-Kopa’s offices in Nairobi show all the signs of a tech startup. Table-football and table-tennis sets glow in the equatorial sun. The adjacent call centre is alive with the sound of employees touting for new business. When customers are reaching the end of their loan terms, M-Kopa agents call them to see if there is anything else the company can sell them. If customers wish, they can extend their loans and upgrade their solar set to a bigger one that can support a television.

M-Kopa also sells fuel-efficient cooking pots and smartphones, and would like to supply a small refrigerator, too. It has sold around 325,000 solar panels so far, and 50,000 of their buyers have already paid off their loan and then bought a cooking pot, a television or a smartphone. The customers’ repayments records offer an effective way of judging their creditworthiness. Pay off your solar panel quickly and you are probably worth lending more to, explains Jesse Moore, the firm’s American founder.

M-Kopa is far and away the most successful of the African firms innovating on top of mobile technology, but it is not the only one. Insurance is one promising area. Milvik, a multinational microfinance firm, now sells life insurance in four African countries, Tanzania, Uganda, Ghana and Senegal, partnering with insurance businesses and telecoms providers. Agents sign up customers, and the premiums—typically about 2 US cents per day—are taken automatically from mobile-phone top-ups. Over 95% of customers earn less than $10 a day. The policies promise a $1,000 payout in the event of an unexpected death.

The mobile-telecoms operators are not doing much to promote innovation. Though most Africans now own mobile phones, these are generally cheap and dumb, and since most Africans are poor, they do not spend much on accessing the internet. Unlike in the West, therefore, it is hard to reach a mass market with a good app. Instead, mobile operators load apps directly onto SIM cards and keep the data they generate in-house.

By far the most successful is Safaricom. It has a loans service called M-Shwari, and has worked with Kenyan banks to try to integrate its service. But even the firm’s executives admit there is far more it could do. Safaricom has declined to turn itself into a bank, but says it is opening up M-Pesa to other developers. It wants to become a “platform” rather than just a mobile-telecoms provider, but it has a long way to go, and its monopoly does not provide the best incentive.

Keep innovating



In the meantime the best hope is any innovation that gets around M-Pesa’s monopoly power. The rise of smartphones and feature phones (which can be preloaded with apps) will help. By 2020 over half of Africans will have access to smartphones with mobile broadband, reckons the GSMA, which represents mobile-phone operators worldwide. But given the right technology, even dumb phones can be useful. Counterintuitively, a promising source of innovation could be the banking sector, which has a strong interest in not letting mobile-telecoms operators steal its actual or potential customers.

In the Democratic Republic of Congo, one of Africa’s largest and least functional countries, the number of people with bank accounts has increased from just 50,000 in 2005 to over 3m in a population of about 80m. A government programme to pay state employees by bank transfer instead of in cash has helped. But so too has innovation. Trust Merchant Bank (TMB), the country’s biggest, has developed a voice app for its customers that works a little like telephone banking in the West: customers can carry out a mobile transaction by making a phone call or sending a text message, avoiding the need for an app. In Congo, unlike in much of east Africa, mobile-money transfers have not so far taken off, probably because the infrastructure is missing. TMB is hoping that it can beat the telecoms firms to the chase.

Another innovator is Equity Bank, a Kenyan firm with operations across east Africa. In Kenya it has launched its own mobile-phone company, Equitel, which uses the network of Airtel, another mobile operator, but exists mainly to provide banking services. It offers a “thin SIM” which can be overlaid onto an existing SIM card so that a phone can access two networks at once. That allows banking to be carried out through a dumb-phone SIM app without giving up the benefits of making phone calls and sending text messages through the dominant provider.

So far, this innovation looks better on paper than in practice. The reason why Equitel’s thin SIM has not been taken up in huge numbers, observers of the bank reckon, is probably that it costs 500 shillings to buy, which for most Kenyans is a hefty sum. But Equitel now has some 1.5m subscribers, all of whom also have a bank account with Equity. TMB has not released numbers for users of its app. But increasing access to banking—not just to mobile money—will be key to opening up other businesses such as M-Kopa.

There are other areas that phone companies could usefully tackle. For example, mobile money has not yet made much progress in international money transfers, where it could lower the cost of remittances. And even money-transfer services within national borders are still very expensive. Few in the West would use Safaricom’s M-Pesa to send money to relatives and friends: the transaction fee can eat up as much as 10% of the value of the transfer. The only place where mobile money is often preferred to cash for small transactions is Somaliland, the autonomous and peaceful northern part of Somalia. The main system there is on a network run by Dahabshiil, a firm that started as a remittances business and bank rather than as a telecoms provider. In contrast to almost everywhere else in Africa, making payments in Somaliland is free.

Mobile money has been one of east Africa’s great successes over the past decade. Not only has it created business opportunities, it is a big revenue generator for government: in Kenya, Safaricom pays more taxes than any other firm. But if growth is to continue, telecoms firms will either have to open up voluntarily or have their monopolies broken. Most Africans still do not have access to proper loans, insurance or savings facilities. Even the wealthy keep their money in cash and property; the poor rely on buying physical assets. Firms such as M-Kopa have made a start, but there is plenty more to do.





E-commerce

Virtual headaches

E-commerce firms like Jumia have to beat multiple handicaps

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

IN A DIRTY warehouse in an industrial district of Abidjan, a few entrepreneurs are trying to create a version of Amazon for Africans. At one end, dozens of workers sit at desks making phone calls and confirming orders. At the other end sit boxes and boxes of deliveries, waiting to go out. Televisions, washing machines, laptops and clothes pile up. The idea is that getting something delivered to your home should be as cheap and easy in Ivory Coast as it is in America. But in a country with no proper address database, a barely functional postal service and hardly any credit cards, that is an ambitious goal.

Investors chasing the African middle class like to build malls, as Actis has done in Nairobi, but a growing number are getting interested in e-commerce too. The warehouse in Abidjan is run by a firm called Jumia, which started in Lagos but now has operations in ten other African countries, including Kenya, Ghana, Cameroon and Tanzania. Much of its funding comes from Rocket Internet, a German firm that tries to replicate successful Western internet businesses in countries that do not have them yet. Rocket Internet also owns Hellofood, a food delivery app similar to Seamless, and Easy Taxi, rather like Uber.

Jumia is having to learn to adapt to local conditions. Importing its own goods and supplying them directly, as Amazon does in the West, would mean dealing with customs officials and facing delays and demands for bribes. So instead Jumia sets prices, takes payment and arranges delivery, but gets local firms to provide the products as they are ordered and send them to Jumia’s warehouse. This means they take a few days to arrive.

Jumia started out using private delivery firms in Ivory Coast, but they were not reliable enough, so now it has its own contractors. Processing payments is another headache. The firm would like to take mobile money, but many customers prefer to pay cash on delivery. All new online orders are confirmed from a call centre, but even so perhaps a fifth of deliveries end up back at the warehouse, estimates Francis Dufay, the firm’s director in Ivory Coast.

It is perhaps unsurprising that so far Jumia is not profitable. It has high fixed costs and has to sell things more cheaply than shops to compete. But there are reasons to be optimistic: on a continent where proper shopping centres are still rare and traffic jams are ubiquitous, ordering things online ought to hold wide appeal. And Amazon itself, after all, still only barely turns a profit.





Prospects

Fortune favours the brave

Doing business in Africa is risky, but potentially highly rewarding

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



ON THE EDGE of Kinshasa, the capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo, is the Marché de la Liberté, a big wholesale market. Kinshasa is Africa’s third-largest city and has a population of at least 8m, and perhaps as large as 12m (that nobody knows for sure tells you much about Congo). And even here, in the capital of one of the poorest countries on the planet, there is clearly money flowing. At the market’s centre, deafening noise blares from enormous speakers mounted onto cars, which double up as stalls selling mobile phones. You can buy anything here, from fried fish to Premier League football shirts. People flash cash as they negotiate, and everyone is haggling.

The irony of investing in Africa is that it is both one of the world’s most difficult regions in which to do business and also perhaps its most entrepreneurial. In no other part of the world does such a large share of the population rely on their wits and their trading abilities to get by. Even the most modest stallholders are smartly dressed and juggle mobile phones, shouting prices and striking deals. Yet they also tell stories of hardship. “Life is expensive!” exclaims James, who sells plumbing equipment. Cops demand bribes. Transporting his goods to the market costs a fortune. And in the neighbourhood where he lives, there is always the risk of a riot.

What is true for stallholders is also true for the world’s biggest multinationals. Africa holds promise like no other region. For the first time ever, hundreds of millions of people are buying beer, washing powder, mobile-phone credit, fast food, insurance and electricity. But it is also a place to lose your shirt. Too much of Africa’s growth over the past two decades has been sustained by commodities and little else. It seems perverse that in many African capitals where most people earn a few dollars a day, it is still impossible to find a clean hotel room for anything less than $200 a night, or a good Western meal for less than $30. Optimists see this as evidence of a spectacular opportunity to enter the market and make a profit. Pessimists reckon it shows just how difficult it is to do business here—because if it were easy, somebody would have done it.

The receding commodities boom has made this conundrum clear. Nigeria, the continent’s most populous country and many investors’ biggest hope over the past decade, now looks somewhat less appealing. Yet not every country is like Nigeria, and not all the money that used to flow so easily has been wasted. A decade of investment has given Africa lots of new roads, power stations and telephone towers. The next decade will still see new railways, ports and motorways being built, often with Chinese money. Even in Kinshasa, a new highway runs through the centre of the city. Many African countries have taken on large amounts of debt, which may prove a problem in the future. But they are also acquiring assets, which are already generating new sources of growth.

Build on what you have

Over the next decade, the businesses that succeed in Africa will be those that can capitalise on this without the help of cheap money and expensive oil—those that can build a genuine middle class of consumers. Over the past decade, the seeds for this have been planted. It is a hopeful sign that African emigrants are returning to invest the money they earned overseas. In Kenya last year they injected $1.5 billion into an economy that generated only $63 billion in all. In Somalia remittance money is rebuilding war-torn Mogadishu.

From the mobile-phone masts that have spread all over every big city to the soaring apartment blocks, the desire to change things is evident. The question for the next decade is whether governments can live up to those hopes. In Nigeria, the drop in oil revenues may force the country’s leaders to face up to the fact that for decades they have systematically mismanaged their economy. Their attempts to protect the exchange rate and increase manufacturing by diktat are doomed to fail. Ghana and Zambia, which have spent their windfalls on public-sector salaries rather than growth-generating investment, will have to make tough decisions about the best use of their revenues. Not all these countries will do well.

Africa has something that it lacked a generation ago: stability

Yet with a number of exceptions, Africa has something that it lacked a generation ago: stability. When commodity prices fell in the 1980s, the result was a series of coups and a generation of war, much of it paid for by superpowers competing with each other. Between 1966 and 1993 Nigeria was ruled almost entirely by military leaders and suffered six coups. That seems unlikely to happen again. The leader of one of those Nigerian coups, Muhammadu Buhari, is now Nigeria’s president again. But this time he won an election in which his incumbent opponent, Goodluck Jonathan, stepped down with far more grace than he ever showed in office. In Burkina Faso, a coup led by the presidential guard was overturned after days of protests in the streets.

Mobile phones do not just create consumers. They also link people up and help them share information. A generation ago politicians could suppress dissent just by controlling the radio stations. Now stories of corruption spread quickly by text message and on WhatsApp. Protest movements can organise far faster and more easily than in the past.

In some places that may be destabilising. In Burundi, opposition to Pierre Nkurunziza’s attempt to hold on to power is being led by just the young urban and educated people that Western companies most want to sell to. But elsewhere, politicians may come under increased pressure to shape up or stand down. For decades, the most corrupt African leaders have tried to resist urbanisation lest it threaten their rule. They are failing.

Even so, the next decade will be more testing than the last. With less money to distribute from the proceeds of oil, copper or gold, it will be harder for patronage politicians to convince their populations that the future is bright. Tanzania’s new president, John Magufuli, has delighted Western diplomats since his election in October by prosecuting corrupt officials and requiring government employees actually to do their jobs. But he has also stoked up xenophobia, expelled foreign workers and shut out imports.

It is only the pluckiest investors who will brave such choppy waters. Revealingly, the biggest private foreign investments recently have been in malls and mobile-phone masts, which are relatively cheap—not roads and railways, which cost billions. But the potential rewards are extraordinary. Africa’s population is expected to more than double by 2050, to nearly 2.5 billion. Many of these people will still be poor, and some will still live in countries torn apart by war. But even if only a small proportion of them thrive, that will still be a market worth going for.





Business




Solar energy: Follow the sun

Peabody Energy: The pits

Digital media: Mail’s got you

The music industry: Scales dropped

The Yukos affair: Baiting the bear

Etsy’s growing pains: Knitty gritty

India’s defence industry: Opportunity strikes

Schumpeter: Keeping it under your hat





Solar energy

Follow the sun

Solar power is reshaping energy production in the developing world

Apr 16th 2016 | Ma’an | From the print edition



RAED KHADER, a Jordanian driver, has an alarming habit of thumbing his mobile phone while at the wheel—albeit on a straight road cutting across the desert. But after scrolling back through almost two years of photos, he finds a picture that tickles him: of camels against a sandy backdrop. Today that same spot outside Ma’an, a poverty-stricken city in south Jordan, is crawling with workers in the final stages of installing five square kilometres (almost two square miles) of solar panels.

He is enraptured by the photovoltaic (PV) modules that shimmer in the desert sunshine. “It’s amazing. I love it. It’s good to see my country develop its own source of energy,” he says. “We have such good sun here. It’s free. Why don’t we use more of it?” In his enthusiasm, he has convinced his daughter to become one of the first Jordanian women to study for a solar-energy engineering degree.

The 160-megawatt (MW) solar park, which is scheduled to open this summer, will mark the launch of Jordan’s effort to reduce its fossil-fuel imports, which generated 96% of its energy last year and cost about 10% of GDP. In a restive neighbourhood, it has good reason to become more self-reliant. Its liking for solar intensified after Egypt temporarily cut natural-gas supplies during the Arab spring in 2011.

The small steps sanctioned by Jordan’s cautious bureaucracy pale in comparison with the growth of solar energy in some other countries. But they illustrate the allure of the technology, as well as some of its teething problems.

Across the developing world, solar power is hitting its stride. Rather than the rooftop panels popular in Germany, countries where solar irradiance is much stronger than northern Europe are creating vast parks with tens of thousands of flexible PV panels supplying power to their national grids. Some countries, such as China, provide generous subsidies (though these are sometimes years overdue). But in other countries solar PV is becoming competitive even without financial support.

In 2015 China surged past Germany to become the biggest producer of solar energy, benefiting from its dominance of solar-panel manufacturing and policies to reduce dependence on dirtier fuels, such as coal. Solar power accounts for just 3% of the electricity mix, but China is now building its biggest plant, in the Gobi desert. Analysts expect the country to install 12 gigawatts (GW) of solar in the first half of this year. That would be one-third more than the record amount America plans to build for the full year. Coal, meanwhile, is in growing trouble (see article).

India is determined to keep up. Its government is targeting a 20-fold increase in solar-power capacity by 2022, to 100GW. Though this might be over-ambitious, KPMG, a consultancy, expects solar’s share of India’s energy mix to rise to 12.5% by 2025, from less than 1% today. It thinks solar in India will be cheaper than coal by 2020. (Even Coal India, a mostly state-owned entity, plans to contract 1GW of solar power to cut energy bills.) Such is the frenzy that officials in sunny Punjab are urging farmers to lease their land to solar developers rather than till it.

Led by big projects in these two countries, global solar-energy capacity rose by 26% last year. More remarkable is the decline in its cost. Studies of the “levelised cost” of electricity, which estimate the net present value of the costs of a generating system divided by the expected output over its lifetime, show solar getting close to gas and coal as an attractively cheap source of power. Auctions of long-term contracts to purchase solar power in developing countries such as South Africa, the United Arab Emirates, Peru and Mexico provide real-world evidence that such assumptions may even prove to be conservative (see chart).



In sunny places solar power is now “shoulder to shoulder” with gas, coal and wind, says Cédric Philibert of the International Energy Agency, a prominent forecaster. He notes that since November 2014, when Dubai awarded a project to build 200MW of solar power at less than $60 a megawatt hour (MWh), auctions have become increasingly competitive.

Some renewable-energy developers are gaining global reputations as record-breakers. The Dubai bid was won by Acwa Power, a Saudi company that is taking big strides across the Middle East and Africa, despite the oil-rich kingdom’s own half-hearted plans for solar development. In Morocco it has built the first phase of the world’s largest solar-thermal plant, which is using mirrors to generate heat to drive electricity turbines. Moody’s, a rating agency, says the completed plant will cut Morocco’s oil-import bills by 0.3% of GDP.

Let the sunshine in

Italy’s Enel Green Power (EGP) is also attracting attention. In February it won a tender to provide Peru with 20 years of power from solar PV at just under $48 a MWh. Just over a month later Mexico awarded it a similarly lengthy contract to generate solar power in the arid northern state of Coahuila at a price of about $40 per MWh. Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF), a research firm, called it “the lowest subsidy-free solar contract we have ever seen”. EGP’s head of business development, Antonio Cammisecra, says there is a clear trend of falling prices. “We are trying to drive it,” he says.

The main factor behind the price drop is an 80% fall in the cost of solar panels since 2010, according to the International Renewable Energy Agency, an industry body. But Mr Cammisecra says that may now be close to ending. He travelled to China this week to persuade panel manufacturers to invest more in technological improvements, in order to increase the amount of solar energy that can be converted into electricity.

Analysts are also concerned that some providers’ auction bids may be over-aggressive, though companies can incur stiff penalties if they fail to complete a contract. Mr Philibert notes that some contracts may collapse because bidders are unable to raise finance.

Jenny Chase of BNEF says that in some cases “the model is being pushed to the absolute limit”. Indian firms, for example, are calculating development costs well below comparable global benchmarks. “I struggle to see how they will do this without cutting corners,” she says.

Jordan is a case in point. A Greek developer, Sunrise, last year agreed to charge $61 per MWh to build a 50MW solar plant north of Amman, which rival developers thought too cheap because of relatively high financing costs in Jordan. Last month Acwa Power bought the Jordanian unit in order to rescue the contract. Analysts say it is hard to see how Acwa will make money from it, but the gesture may help it win solar contracts in the future.

The kingdom offers more lessons on potential pitfalls. Like many developing countries, its national electricity company, NEPCO, has failed to expand its grid as quickly as private firms can erect solar parks, though it now has funding to build high-voltage transmission lines to connect the solar plants to Amman, the capital, where most electricity is consumed. (This problem is shared with China, which sometimes forces solar and wind plants to “curtail” their electricity output because the grid lacks the capacity to absorb it.)

But Jordan is blessed with geographical features that will let it expand its solar capacity once it has ironed out its problems. Engineers say that the area around Ma’an, with about 330 sunny days a year, has some of the best solar irradiance in the region. They add that, because of its altitude and terrain, heat and dust do not substantially lower the efficiency of the PV panels, as they do in neighbouring Saudi Arabia.

Support also comes from the top. King Abdullah has ordered solar panels to be installed on palaces and mosques, businessmen say. His most senior ministers drive Tesla electric vehicles. With more solar energy, the economic future of Jordan would be brighter and the country less at risk in a volatile region. All it needs is for the sun to energise its bureaucrats.





Peabody Energy

The pits

The world’s biggest coal miner goes bust

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Marching on

“MAKE No Mistake: The Age of Coal Marches On”. So reads a headline on the website of “Advanced Energy for Life”, an advertising campaign led by Peabody Energy, the world’s largest private coal company, whose flair for public-relations guff looks boundless. No amount of image-scrubbing could help it on April 13th, though. The American firm, with debts of $6 billion, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Its boss, Glenn Kellow, blamed a “historically challenged industry backdrop”.

The industry is indeed in a hole, beset by pricing and pollution problems, plus NGO pressure on creditors and investors to pull out their money. But Peabody’s problems are also of its own making. It raised big debts to buy an Australian firm, Macarthur Coal, for $5.2 billion in 2011, aiming to bolster sales of metallurgical coal to China just before that country’s steel industry plunged into crisis. As prices of metallurgical and thermal coal (used in power stations) tumbled, it lost $2 billion last year, writing off almost $1 billion of its Australian assets.

Since the start of 2015, five big American coal miners have declared bankruptcy, including Arch Coal and Alpha Natural Resources. A former Australian coal billionaire, Nathan Tinkler, was declared bankrupt this year after losing a fortune in coal. Some companies in America use bankruptcy protection to buy time to salvage themselves, much as car firms and airlines have done; Peabody, too, said it would emerge stronger.

But sooty clouds are unlikely to blow over—coal has not joined a recent commodities rally. The shale revolution in America meant that for much of last year, for the first time, natural gas replaced coal as the country’s main fuel for generating electricity. Britain plans to close all its coal-fired power stations by 2025, and on one day last week even that rainy island produced more power from solar than coal. In China coal use for its power supply fell in 2015 for the second year. On April 13th Greenpeace, an NGO, said China’s National Energy Administration had ordered 28 of 31 mainland provinces to suspend approval of new coal-fired power plants.

India and China will keep using coal for decades, as they rely on it to generate about 70% of electricity. “Let’s not kid ourselves. Had prices of gas and oil not fallen...you would not have seen such a reduction in use of thermal coal,” says Hunter Hillcoat of Investec, a bank. The efforts to resuscitate Peabody may come off. Nonetheless the firm has just added a new lump of evidence to suggest a dark future for coal.





Digital media

Mail’s got you

A potential bid by the Daily Mail for Yahoo may make sense

Apr 16th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

Paywalls have never really worked

KIM KARDASHIAN, a famous woman, has declared her love for it. Kris Jenner, her mother, uses it as a “baby monitor” to track her celebrity children. In the space of a few years DailyMail.com, the American website of the Daily Mail, a British tabloid, has captured the digital zeitgeist of the market it most covets. By churning out a free flow of everything Kardashian, Trump and more (with 1,200 stories and 10,000 photos daily), the site attracted 66.7m unique visitors in February—only a mite less popular than the New York Times and the Washington Post.

The strategy of the Daily Mail runs against conventional wisdom in digital media. Home pages of websites matter less than before. Many news sites have ceded the job of distributing content to Facebook, Snapchat, Twitter and other platforms. But organisations that let Facebook and others publish their stories risk losing their ability to profit from them. The Mail uses its home page as a distribution hub, helped along by its titillating “sidebar of shame”, which features celebrity gossip and racy photos on continuous refresh. Since 2012 it has claimed the title of the world’s most-visited English language news site. It now attracts an estimated 220m monthly unique visitors to its various sites around the world, including Mail Online in Britain.

The Daily Mail and General Trust (DMGT), which owns the site, isn’t satisfied. It says it is thinking about joining a bid for a much larger business: Yahoo. (Bigger companies, such as Verizon, are also interested in bidding.) The portal, which lost the global battle for eyeballs, advertisers and technology talent to Google and Facebook, is still a force in America, where it drew 204m visitors in February. Excluding its Asian assets, such as a stake in Alibaba, the Chinese online giant, Yahoo is estimated to be worth less than $8 billion—perhaps far less.

Advertising buyers gravitate to websites with the highest traffic, leaving smaller sites to struggle to sell their inventories. By getting big, the Daily Mail websites have already done a fair job of selling ads. Digital advertising revenues grew from £10m ($15.4m) in 2010 to £73m in 2015, though will fall short of a target of £100m in digital-ad revenues for this year.

But the Mail needs to increase advertising business in America, where revenues were just £18m last year, well short of earnings from Britain of £46m. Though online ads in America are now rising fast (they grew by 66% in the first quarter of this financial year), acquiring Yahoo would reinforce that growth. The portal has offerings in sports and finance where the British tabloid is lacking; and Yahoo has its own popular, if not exactly sexy, home page.

DMGT does well from operations such as risk modelling, but would not have the means to buy Yahoo outright. But private-equity firms see in Yahoo a popular media property failing to make the most of its potential. A joint bid by these funds and the Mail may sound like an unlikely tabloid tale. But Yahoo could yet be in line for a Kardashian-style makeover.





The music industry

Scales dropped

More people are paying to stream music, but the industry is still wobbly

Apr 16th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition



ONCE upon a time record-industry executives could all but weigh their profits on scales. Each pallet of compact discs (CDs) they sold translated into predictable quantities of cash for them and, second, for singers and songwriters. In 1999, the year the music-sharing service Napster was founded, wholesale revenues in the industry peaked at $23.7 billion. Then they began a slide that has since continued almost without interruption.

Until now. Growth in the digital streaming of music helped industry revenues to expand by 3.2%, to $15 billion, last year. That was the fastest rate since 1998, according to IFPI, a trade body (revenues also increased by a smidgen in 2012; see chart). The largest piece of the market was digital, with 45% of the total, whereas demand for those CDs continued to fall: physical goods accounted for just 39% of sales. Subscription-based streaming services like Spotify, Deezer and Apple Music proved especially successful, as the fastest-growing category: last year revenues from these rose by 59%, to more than $2.3 billion. Digital downloads on services like iTunes (which slice up albums into 99-cent individual tracks) accounted for $3 billion of sales, though that represented a decline of 10.5% on the year before. The music industry looks increasingly likely to be defined by services like Spotify, weightless but not cashless.



So much for the good news. The gloom for music bosses and artists, however, remains far greater than any cheer. The total market remains 36% smaller than it was at its pre-Napster peak. Nor has a perennial problem with piracy abated. Illegal downloads have declined, at least in America, but piracy takes various forms, such as when people rip music from digital sources. Smartphone apps make this easy. MusicWatch, a market-research company, estimates that in America the number of “streamrippers”—those who copy music from streaming services, including YouTube—rose by half to about 20m, between the end of 2013 and early last year.

Another big concern for the industry is how easy it is to access free music legally. Watching online music videos is the most popular way to get music for nothing. Licensed clips often come bundled with an advert, but their popularity does not yet produce big revenues. IFPI estimates that 900m people got music from ad-supported user-upload services like YouTube, but that these generated only $634m in revenues globally—barely 4% of the total.

That is largely because much of the music streamed on YouTube and similar sites is not properly licensed. In a report IFPI argues that songs and videos uploaded by users let YouTube and similar services “build their business without fairly remunerating rights holders”. In America the Digital Millennium Copyright Act protects the sites from prosecution over unlicensed content uploaded by users, as long as they comply with takedown requests.

YouTube has made fortunes for a few performers who got started on the platform, and the site’s defenders say there is great potential for established artists to earn more. But Peter Mensch, manager of Metallica, Red Hot Chili Peppers and Foals, says, “I don’t know anybody who is getting rich off YouTube spins.”

The IFPI report shows that there are still far fewer users who pay directly for digital music than who listen to it for nothing, but the paying portion is at least growing rapidly. Streaming services had 68m paid subscribers in 2015, up from 41m a year earlier. Spotify has 30m paying customers. Perhaps, given time, revenues from such subscribers and from advertisers will grow sufficiently to let more bands and firms prosper, even in an era of digital music. Mr Mensch reckons that his clients will do “fine” from Spotify. But none of them will earn two dollars a record, as in the days when music could be sold by the pallet.





The Yukos affair

Baiting the bear

Russia is trying to impede enforcement of a massive damages award

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Out of Khontrol

A DECADE on from Vladimir Putin’s expropriation and dismemberment of Yukos, things are not going quite to plan. The Russian oil company was seized from its owners, then bankrupted and broken up after being accused, on flimsy evidence, of tax evasion. Its boss, Mikhail Khodorkovsky (pictured), was jailed. Yukos’s livid shareholders sued the government, and after years of legal wrangling began to score victories. The biggest came in 2014: a $50 billion award against Russia by a court in The Hague, a record for an international arbitration. The judges ruled unanimously that Russia had breached the terms of an international charter that protects cross-border investment. Moscow refused to pay up, sending Yukos’s well-resourced former owners into a hunt to seize assets—and creating a headache for the Kremlin. On April 20th a Dutch court is expected to hand down another ruling in the case.

Under an international convention, arbitration rulings are enforceable in any of the 156 signatory countries. The former majority owners’ holding company, GML (which is 70%-owned by Israel-based Leonid Nevzlin), has sought court orders to grab Russian state assets in America, Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, India and the Netherlands. Some have already been frozen in France and Belgium, including assets in France worth €1 billion ($1.13 billion)—among them buildings, money held by the French arm of a Russian bank, and a firm’s debt to a Russian satellite operator.

Any state asset is fair game, as long as it is not diplomatic. Several properties have been targeted, only for a plaque to be affixed to the building a day or two later, announcing it to be an annexe of the Russian embassy. The asset-hunters are careful to take photographs of facades before applying for asset-freezes, so they can provide before-and-after pictures as evidence.

Having reluctantly taken part in the arbitration, Russia is now trying to get the ruling set aside with help from a blue-chip American law firm, White & Case. It says the tribunal lacked jurisdiction because Russia signed, but did not ratify, the energy charter. And it claims the charter was designed to protect foreign investments, not those made by Russians. (The tribunal rejected both arguments; the relevant corporate entities were registered outside Russia.) Moscow also accuses the arbitrators of committing “gross violations”: it alleges that an assistant at the three-person tribunal acted improperly as a fourth arbitrator, basing its conclusions on an analysis of the large number of hours he worked and the ruling’s writing style. It is on these matters that the Dutch court will rule on April 20th.

A Russian state investigative committee recently said it was close to amassing “proof” that Mr Khodorkovsky and his associates got their shares in Yukos through an elaborate theft, hid them in a web of shell companies, and therefore have no right to compensation. Now they are employing “another scam using international courts”, said a committee spokesman.

This is part of a pattern of Russia changing its line of argument as it has grown more desperate, says Tim Osborne, a lawyer for the former majority shareholders. It is now “grasping at an ‘unclean hands’ argument” that it did not focus on in the past, he argues, referring to the allegation that Yukos was acquired by theft.

Moscow has supplemented its arguments with threats. It has told America, Belgium and France that any action against Russian property will be considered grounds for retaliation against not only their governments, but their citizens and companies too. Russia’s Duma has passed legislation permitting tit-for-tat seizures.

Much as this may show disregard for the rule of international law, some of those at whom the bear has shown its claws appear unready to fight. In February the Belgian foreign ministry intervened in enforcement proceedings at Russia’s request, threatening a bailiff involved in auctioning a seized building in Brussels used by a Russian news agency. The mandarins feared that going ahead with the sale could provoke a “major diplomatic incident”.

Don’t need no money

As the game of cat-and-mouse continues, the dispossessed shareholders will go after more stuff. They say they may set their sights on the assets of Rosneft and Gazprom, two state energy giants. Russia, meanwhile, is fighting to get blocked assets unfrozen. This week a $700m payment to its space agency was released after a court deemed it to be separate from the state.

Expect this to turn into a legal ultra-marathon. The upcoming ruling in The Hague is subject to appeal, all the way to the Dutch Supreme Court. That could take five years. Assuming there is no settlement, the enforcement process could last another ten. An estimated $300m-400m has already been spent on lawyers, with Russia outspending its gadflies two to one.

Mr Khodorkovsky—now the Kremlin’s leading critic-in-exile—is not directly involved in the case, having sold his stake long ago. (“I don’t need the $50 billion,” he says.) But he is not without an opinion. As the battle rumbles on, it could “expose the weakness” of Mr Putin’s regime, he believes, because it “feeds the perception that they can’t deal with me.”





Etsy’s growing pains

Knitty gritty

A do-good company tests investors’ need for speed

Apr 16th 2016 | NEW YORK | From the print edition

From Brooklyn, with love

ETSY, an online marketplace for all things artisan, from dog soap to Bernie Sanders dolls, seems to be on a roll. In February the firm was recertified as a “B Corporation”, which meets certain social and environmental standards, and reported good results, with sales last year reaching $2.4 billion, up by 24%. On April 5th the firm’s executives, flanked by succulents and a yarn bouquet at their headquarters in Brooklyn, announced a new service to help sellers build their own websites. On April 16th Etsy will celebrate the one-year anniversary of its initial public offering.

All this appears to add up to what Etsy aims for: “sustainable growth”. The company wants to make everybody involved richer: not just shareholders, but buyers, sellers and manufacturers. It does not give quarterly guidance. It works for the long term. “We are really focused on building a business that can grow consistently year after year,” says Chad Dickerson, Etsy’s chief executive.

Yet this sunny vision confronts a glum fact. In its year as a listed company, Etsy’s share price has plunged by nearly three-quarters. Investors are happy for the firm’s goods to be produced slowly. Sales are another matter.

The firm has a big market to tap. Americans spend about $35 billion each year on handmade and vintage jewellery and other crafts, reckons Rohit Kulkarni of RBC Capital Markets, a bank. Globally, that figure rises to $70 billion. Etsy fits consumer trends like a crocheted glove. Shoppers trust about one-fifth of brands in North America and one-third in Europe, according to Havas, a marketing agency. They crave “authenticity”—none more so than Brooklyn’s prairie-booted yuppies.

Etsy offers authenticity by the gigabyte. Consumers can buy all sorts of unusual products, whether handmade or vintage. For sellers, Etsy is an alternative to craft fairs and trunk shows. The firm owns no inventory. It charges 20 cents to list a product and a 3.5% commission for each sale, as well as optional services such as shipping labels. By the end of last year Etsy had 24m buyers and 1.6m sellers on its site.

Etsy’s share price has plummeted mainly because the firm is not growing quickly enough to satisfy investors. Sales may have climbed by 24% last year, but this is down from expansion of 43% in 2014. Growth of revenue, active buyers and sellers slowed last year, too. For a regular e-commerce site Etsy’s numbers may still be good, but for an online marketplace they suggest a slowing of the virtuous cycle by which more sellers attract more buyers, which brings higher sales, which in turn lures more sellers.

When this flywheel is losing speed, “it limits the company’s ability to reinvest,” says Brian Nowak of Morgan Stanley, another bank. He expects Etsy’s revenues—from commissions and fees—to grow at about the same pace as Amazon’s this year, but expects sales on the online giant’s website to rise twice as fast. As Etsy’s share price has sunk, Amazon’s has jumped by more than 50%.

Being a “B corporation”, which does not bind Etsy legally, distinguishes the firm from rivals. But Etsy’s do-good culture is not what is holding it back. It is facing more fundamental problems, says Mr Kulkarni of RBC: people will spend only so much on artisan goods, so it may be hard to coax more sales from existing buyers; and Etsy’s sellers, most of whom work from home, may have trouble making more products.

Etsy is not sticking to its knitting to boost sales. It is spending more on marketing to lure new buyers, though this has widened losses. It is helping sellers to grow. Its new website service lets them reach more buyers. And a programme launched last year connects sellers with vetted manufacturers. But the competition is not sitting still either: Amazon has introduced its own crafts site, called “Handmade”. Etsy’s second year as a listed company could be even more tricky than its first.





India’s defence industry

Opportunity strikes

The country’s conglomerates are throwing themselves into arms-making

Apr 16th 2016 | TALEGAON | From the print edition

This one looks sub standard

VISITORS to the Talegaon plant of Larsen & Toubro (L&T), an Indian engineering company, might confuse it for the props department of a film studio. Half-a-dozen hangars spread over 50 acres near Pune, a city in western India, are filled with enough weaponry to thrill a Bond villain: camouflaged track-mounted howitzers, anti-submarine rocket launchers and, particularly appealing should Blofeld share Indians’ fondness for trains, a contraption to turn a humble carriage into a ballistic-missile-launcher.

The missile itself is a dummy, but the rest of the kit speaks of India’s ambitions to breed world-class makers of defence equipment. Although India now has the world’s fourth-biggest military budget, it has been the single biggest arms importer for seven of the past ten years, says SIPRI, a research institute (see chart). The government, tired of this unwanted accolade—and convinced indigenous weapons production can provide jobs, budget savings and technological know-how—puts defence at the heart of its drive to boost domestic manufacturing.



Local conglomerates are salivating at an opportunity they expect could be worth $150 billion-200 billion in the coming decade. Tata, Mahindra and Godrej—as well as L&T—are among those that have piled into weapons manufacturing in recent years. But to succeed they will have to take on foreign importers (which snap up about two-thirds of all procurement by value), a crowd of state-owned companies and the country’s bloated defence bureaucracy.

Impatience with familiar suppliers opened the first breach for private contractors over a decade ago. An unconvincing victory in a skirmish with Pakistan, in Kashmir in 1999, exposed the Indian army’s lack of capability. Insiders blamed a plethora of corruption scandals, involving foreign firms as well as flabby state-owned arms-makers, for leaving forces ill-equipped. But private-sector enthusiasm faded when promises of contracts did not materialise.

The latest sally slightly preceded the arrival of Narendra Modi in power in May 2014, and has been reinforced by his team’s energetic drumming of a “Make in India” theme. Mr Modi has spoken of having 70% indigenous weapons procurement by 2020, roughly double today’s figure (the defence ministry is a bit less ambitious), with more of it produced by the private sector. To achieve this, procurement rules overtly favour stuff made locally. Some of the red tape entangling all things industrial has been done away with: for example, foreign groups may now own as much as 49% in Indian ventures, up from 26%.

Bosses at private Indian firms are delighted by the new rhetoric: Tata, India’s largest conglomerate, identifies defence as one of four core growth areas. Groups with a background in cars (Mahindra) or precision engineering (L&T) have recast themselves as arms-makers, often with the help of Western partners such as Airbus, Boeing or Lockheed Martin.

The pipeline for new defence systems looks appealing. The military budget, some $50 billion a year, is expected to track long-term economic-growth rates of around 7% a year. Press reports suggest the armed forces are short of some 300 fighter jets, at least a dozen submarines, over 1,000 combat helicopters, seven frigates and perhaps 3,000 artillery guns. What gear it has is often of cold-war vintage and from Russia, India’s traditional supplier. Even ammunition is in short supply.

Yet in practice the armed forces are lousy customers. Defence bureaucrats are risk-averse. Military spending is growing, but much new money goes towards salaries and pensions. The share of funds for procurement, research, development and testing has slumped from 34% in 2005 to 25% today, says IHS Jane’s, a research outfit.

Worse, a fifth of the capital budget typically goes unspent because, in the run up to year-end, the finance ministry usually begs generals to shelve projects so that overall public-spending targets can be met. That leaves just $11 billion-12 billion for procurement, says IHS. And much of this is committed to existing projects, often in the hands of state-run companies good at lobbying for their share.

So those in charge of India’s putative defence groups are waiting to see if the opportunity is really as big as it appears. Official rhetoric was enough for investment plans to be drawn up, but not quite enough for big amounts to be spent. “We like the policy; we await the execution,” says one firm’s defence-division boss. A bureaucrat who misinterprets a single word in a regulation could stymie a billion-dollar project, he adds.

Foreign firms will also seek a chance to profit. Nearly 500 attended a recent defence jamboree in Goa. Some are still hoping to do deals to deliver equipment outright. Dassault has been in talks to sell its Rafale fighter jets for over 15 years (“We are getting closer...we are in the final phase,” its chairman said last month, redefining optimism). But if it comes off, this deal would probably be one of many contracts to have the first batch of a weapons system made overseas before shifting manufacturing—and some technology—to India for later orders, assuming the local partner could cope with production demands.

The past year has seen the weaving of a tangled web connecting big Western defence groups and Indian manufacturing counterparts. A recent deal for BAE Systems to supply howitzers uses Mahindra as the local assembler. A track-mounted artillery gun at L&T’s facility (part of which is a joint venture with Airbus Defence) was designed by Samsung. Boeing and Tata have a partnership to produce Apache helicopter fuselages, among other things.

Sceptics wonder whether local groups do much more than give existing foreign weapons systems an Indian veneer just thick enough to get contracts. Systems developed abroad (often some time ago) can be assembled in an Indian plant, with both sides claiming the gear has been extensively adapted for the Indian market.

Assembly work is not the lucrative bit of the weapons industry—just as the iPhone brings more profits to Apple (its designer) than to Foxconn (its contract manufacturer). For now, India mostly makes the cheaper bits, especially parts that can benefit from lower labour costs. Pricier systems, which require long development lead-times, are hampered by higher capital costs for Indian firms compared with Western rivals.

All that could change if Indian companies develop expertise to design, not just assemble, equipment. Last month the government said it would give priority to weapons designed and made in India. It should also let firms export their wares—which, in the long term, is the only way investments in arms-making pay, says Deba Mohanty of Indicia, a consultancy. Countries that spend heavily on armed forces typically have successful arms-making companies. India’s ambition, one day, is to stop being an exception to this rule.





Schumpeter

Keeping it under your hat

An old management idea gets a new lease of life

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



APPLE and Tesla are two of the world’s most talked-about companies. They are also two of the most vertically integrated. Apple not only writes much of its own software, but designs its own chips and runs its own shops. Tesla makes 80% of its electric cars and sells them directly to its customers. It is also constructing a network of service stations and building the world’s biggest battery factory, in the Nevada desert.

A century ago this sort of vertical integration was the rule: companies integrated “backwards”, by buying sources for raw materials and suppliers, and “forwards”, by buying distributors. Standard Oil owned delivery wagons and refineries in addition to oil wells. Carnegie owned iron-ore deposits and rail carriages as well as blast furnaces. In his 1926 book “Today and Tomorrow” Henry Ford wrote that vertical integration was the key to his success: “If you want it done right, do it yourself.” He claimed he could extract ore in Minnesota from his own mines, ship it to his River Rouge facility in Detroit and have it sitting as a Model T in a Chicago driveway—in no more than 84 hours.

Today this sort of bundling is rare: for the past 30 years firms have been focusing on their core business and contracting out everything else to specialists. Steelmakers sold their mining operations and carmakers spun off their parts suppliers. Controlling it all made sense, the argument went, when markets were rudimentary: when supplies of vital materials were limited or contractors could cheat you. As markets became more sophisticated these justifications fell away. Thanks to globalisation, companies could always find new resources and better suppliers.

Yet a growing number of companies are having second thoughts. This is most visible in information technology. The industry’s leaders were at the heart of the contracting-out revolution. Vertically integrated companies such as IBM outsourced as much as possible in order to lower costs. Upstarts such as Microsoft prospered by focusing on a narrow—but exceptionally valuable—slice of the pie: the operating system of personal computers. Now many startups in Silicon Valley pride themselves for being “full stack”. But re-bundling can be found everywhere, from fashion to manufacturing.

Reasons for the reversal abound, but five stand out. The most important is simplicity. Consumers are willing to pay a premium for well-integrated products that do not force them to deal with different suppliers or land them with components that do not talk to each other. They want to be able simply to press a button and let the machine do the rest. This is largely why Apple opted for integration, as did Nest, a maker of wireless thermostats.

A second reason is that firms operating on the technological frontier often find it more efficient to do things in-house. Companies that are inventing the future frequently have no choice but to pour money into new ventures rather than buy components off the shelf. This explains Tesla’s “gigafactory” for batteries: their availability is the biggest constraint on the firm’s growth. Boeing tried to cut its production costs by outsourcing 70% of the production of its 787 Dreamliner to hundreds of different suppliers—more than any airliner before. The result was a disaster: parts came in late; bits didn’t fit together; deadlines were missed. The firm reversed course, bringing manufacturing back in house and buying a factory.

A third reason is choice: the more the market has to offer, the more important it is to build a relationship with customers. Netflix and Amazon now create their own television shows in order to keep their viewers from buying more generic content elsewhere. Harry’s, an American company that sends its subscribers a regular supply of razors and shaving cream, spent $100m to buy a German razor-blade factory.

Choice is reinforced by speed: fashion brands such as Spain’s Zara have resisted contracting out everything. Instead, they operate their own clothes factories, employ their own designers and run their own shops. This gives them a big advantage: they can turn the latest trend into new product, often in small batches, and have it in stores in a couple of weeks. Less vertically integrated brands such as Gap and American Apparel find they are stuck with yesterday’s creations because they cannot get supply chains to produce new wares quickly.

And then there is a combination of old worries about geopolitical uncertainty and new worries about the environment. In 2014 Ferrero, an Italian confectionary-maker, bought Oltan Gida, which produces one-third of Turkey’s hazelnuts, the vital ingredient in Nutella. In 2015 IKEA, a Swedish furniture company, bought nearly 100,000 acres of forests in Romania and the Baltic region. Earlier this year ChemChina, a state-owned company, purchased Syngenta, a Swiss seeds and pesticides group, for $43 billion, driven by the government’s quest for food security. Cruise companies such as Costa Cruises and Disney have bought islands in the Caribbean and the Bahamas so that they can guarantee that their passengers will have somewhere empty and unspoiled to visit when they sail past.

Core complexities

The renewed fashion for vertical integration will not sweep all before it. For the most mundane products the logic of contracting out still reigns supreme. And today’s bundling is less ambitious than Henry Ford’s: Apple, for instance, contracts out a lot of production to contract manufacturers such as Foxconn (though it keeps them on a tight leash). Integration is also hard to pull off: Tesla lost some of its shine on April 11th when it recalled 2,700 of its sport-utility vehicles because of a glitch. That said, striking the right balance between doing things in-house and contracting things out is clearly much more complicated than it was in the days when Tom Peters and his fellow gurus told companies to focus on what they do best and outsource the rest.





Finance and economics




Russia’s central-bank governor: Putin’s right-hand woman

After the Panama papers: Who next?

Unlocking Mossack Fonseca: The key’s in Sin City

Italian banks: A heavy load

Rehabilitating Argentina: The green light

The world economy: System says slow

Agriculture and demography: The toll of tariffs

Free exchange: Terms of enlargement





Russia’s central-bank governor

Putin’s right-hand woman

The Russian economy is in a bad way, but Elvira Nabiullina has saved it from worse

Apr 16th 2016 | MOSCOW | From the print edition



ELVIRA NABIULLINA’S first encounter with capitalism came during her university days, when she enrolled in a course called “Critique of Western Economic Theory”. It was an unusual start for a modern central banker. These days she embodies another contradiction. Russia’s economy has been held back for years by corruption and rent-seeking, and more recently by Western sanctions and the low price of oil and gas, the country’s main exports. Yet the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) is a model of competent, technocratic policymaking. Since Ms Nabiullina became governor in 2013, the CBR has kept Russia’s economy, awful though it is, out of worse trouble.

The soft-spoken Ms Nabiullina has humble roots. Her mother worked in a factory; her father was a chauffeur. For years she has been at the centre of Russia’s turbulent transition to a market economy. When Vladimir Putin became president in 2000, he proclaimed a break with the chaos of the 1990s. But when it came to economics “Putin didn’t have clear ideas,” says Yevgeny Yasin, a former economy minister. He thus entrusted economic policy to a cadre of professionals with orthodox views, including Ms Nabiullina, who became deputy economy minister in 2000 and minister in 2007, an experience she calls “the most influential” on her approach to economics.



The crisis of 2008-09, when oil prices fell and the world economy stagnated, revealed that the Russian economy was dependent on flighty foreign hedge funds and retail investors. As they pulled money out, the CBR tried to prop up the value of the rouble, losing over $200 billion of foreign-exchange reserves in a matter of months (see chart). Lending shrivelled across the economy. In 2009 GDP shrank by 8%.



That prompted Russia to enact two sets of reforms, in preparation for the inevitable next oil-price crash. First, it diversified its sources of funding. In 2013, for instance, Russian regulators made it possible for Euroclear and Clearstream, two international securities depositories, to begin handling certain Russian bonds. That helped to attract institutional investors, who tend to shrug off market gyrations and like to buy assets when they are cheap, says Jan Dehn of Ashmore, a fund manager.

On Ms Nabiullina’s watch Russia’s domestic investment market, another source of stable funding, has also deepened. The share of Russia’s public debt in domestic hands rose from 66% to 70% in 2013 alone. Goldman Sachs, a bank, reckons that the assets of Russian pension funds, which are regulated by the CBR, will increase from about $60 billion today to about $200 billion by 2020.

This diversification of funding, Mr Dehn says, has left the Russian economy less starved of capital than it would otherwise have been. Relative to the size of the economy, private-sector capital flight was smaller in 2014-15 than in 2008-09. In 2015 GDP shrank by 4%, a better performance than in 2008-09, despite a bigger drop in the oil price.

The second big change in policy since 2008-09 concerns Russia’s international reserves. They grew by $140 billion in 2009-13 to more than $500 billion (about a fifth of Russian GDP), thanks to high oil prices. This big cushion is one reason why Russia has been able to pursue an aggressive, anti-Western foreign policy, since it has not needed to turn to the IMF for a bail-out, as it did in 1998. Ultimately that will not work to Russians’ advantage. But it also gave Ms Nabiullina room for manoeuvre.

To maintain reserves when the oil price began to fall, Ms Nabiullina accelerated a plan to allow the rouble to float. It fell by 40% against the dollar in 2015 alone. Propping up the rouble would have been popular, since it would have preserved ordinary Russians’ purchasing power, but it would have meant burning through the country’s reserves again. Instead the CBR channelled dollars to sanction-hit banks and energy companies, to help them repay external debt. Reserves have also been used to finance the budget deficit. As oil prices recover, so the CBR is again accumulating reserves, with a view to hitting the $500 billion mark once again.

The rouble’s fall has stoked inflation, as imports have become more expensive. As a result, real (ie, adjusted for inflation) wages have fallen by more than 10% since 2014. (They are still triple what they were when Mr Putin took office in 2000.) Interest rates, which in 2014 were jacked up to 17%, have been the only tool the CBR has used to stem the rouble’s fall. High rates also help to bring down inflation, currently 7%, towards the CBR’s target of 4%. These decisions have “reflected the capacity of the institution to do what is right for the country regardless of the political situation”, says Birgit Hansl of the World Bank.

Such steps have been “painful, but necessary”, in Ms Nabiullina’s words. To ease the pain, the government is spending 3% of GDP recapitalising well-managed banks and compensating Russians with savings in bad ones. In addition, banks were temporarily allowed to revalue foreign-exchange liabilities at a pre-crisis exchange rate, making their balance-sheets seem healthier than they really were, and thus allowing them to lend more. The CBR also allowed banks to offer forbearance on souring debts, a move cautiously welcomed by the IMF. All these measures may be paying off: non-performing loans remain at a lower level than in 2008-09. Credit is inching up.

At the same time Ms Nabiullina has tightened supervision. “She received carte blanche from the president to go after those banks that were earlier untouchable,” says Oleg Vyugin, chairman of MDM Bank and a former deputy governor of the central bank. About 200 banking licences have been rescinded since 2014, roughly one-fifth of the total.

Nonetheless, the long-term economic outlook is poor. Ms Nabiullina’s critics say the CBR’s tight monetary policy is the culprit, since it cripples investment. But corporate profits rose by 50% last year as the rouble value of foreign earnings jumped; companies have plenty of cash to invest. In regular surveys, manufacturers cite policy uncertainty, not high interest rates, as a big constraint. Ms Nabiullina agrees. “Our economic downturn is mostly the result of structural factors,” she says. What worries her most is not protracted low oil prices, but “how quickly and dynamically” Russia can improve its business environment. Until then, the CBR will have an outsize role in keeping the Russian economy going.





After the Panama papers

Who next?

Mossack Fonseca and its homeland are not alone in facing closer scrutiny

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Even paradise has its laws

THE travails of Mossack Fonseca, the Panamanian law firm from which a trove of documents about offshore firms it had helped create was recently leaked, intensified on April 12th, when prosecutors raided its head office. But as the firm defends itself, campaigners for financial transparency are already looking for other Mossacks and other Panamas.

Mossack was an outlier, rivals claim. “Everyone knew that if you wanted that bit more secrecy, you’d go to them,” says a lawyer who investigates offshore fraud. “We were lucky to get beneficial-ownership data from them 30% of the time.” Nevertheless, other incorporation mills face more scrutiny too, among them Panama’s other big law firms, such as Morgan & Morgan, and OIL, part of Hong-Kong-based Vistra, which caters primarily to Chinese customers. Like Mossack, these are wholesalers. They sell shell companies in blocks to law firms and banks, which sell them on to the end client, sometimes via other retailers. Mossack has dealt with 14,000 such intermediaries.

In many of the cases highlighted in the Panama papers, there was a clear breakdown of due diligence along this chain. Retailers who were supposed to check clients’ identities and store the information were not doing so. Mossack was doing little—and may not have been obliged to—to know its customers’ customers.



Explore the data behind The Panama Papers

Also likely to come under the spotlight are the giants of corporate services, such as TMF and Intertrust, both based in the Netherlands, although forming companies is just a small part of their business. The global market for offshore company formation and ancillary services is not huge: annual revenues are perhaps $6 billion. But it is very profitable (pre-tax margins are often 30-40%) and growing by 7% a year. The typical offshore company has an average life of 8-10 years, meaning that clients offer “a nice, annuity-like earnings stream”, says one operator. This has attracted some savvy investors: Blackstone has a stake in Intertrust; Doughty Hanson owns TMF.

Other jurisdictions are also coming under scrutiny, although Panama is genuinely different. Among sizeable offshore financial centres, it alone has firmly resisted the move to greater tax transparency—a stance which it may now abandon. Apart from Panama itself, the most heat is on Britain and its offshore territories—particularly the British Virgin Islands (BVI), home to roughly half of the 214,000 companies mentioned in the Panama papers.



A dozen of the world’s 50-60 active offshore financial centres are current or former British possessions. Perennially derided as dens of financial iniquity, these islands have in fact cleaned up a lot since the first sustained attacks on them in the 1990s. They now do as well as many bigger places in reviews by the OECD (see chart) and the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), which set tax-transparency and anti-money-laundering standards.

But David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, is under pressure to extract another pound of flesh from them. He is likely to renew a push for them to adopt public registers of company ownership, as Britain has. Those territories that have no central registers readily available to the taxman and law enforcers, as Bermuda and Jersey already do, have agreed to set them up. This will put them ahead of FATF standards, which do not require centralised data collection. This week they pledged to speed up response times to requests from British authorities, from weeks or months to a day or less—though they will still resist the idea of making their registers public.

The BVI, which is home to 450,000 companies in all, hopes to deflect criticism with its new requirements on corporate agents. One of these, which kicks in this year, will force them to collect and verify beneficial-ownership information on clients. Until now this has often been left to “introducers” in the client’s home country, who often fail to do it.

Some worry that if the British outposts are squeezed too hard, business will flow to less tightly regulated places with shell-company-friendly laws, such as the Seychelles and Samoa. Hong Kong, already a giant peddler of offshore firms, could also benefit, as could the numerous American states with lax regulation of registration agents and ironclad corporate anonymity, like Delaware and Nevada (see box).

And then there is Britain itself. Oversight of its company-formation industry is poor. Many embarrassing links have been established between British shell companies and criminals, such as those behind a $1 billion swindle in Moldova involving Scottish limited partnerships. Fraudsters use Britain and America because they are “cheap, anonymous and good names”, says Martin Kenney, an offshore investigator. “Since compliance departments don’t count them as high-risk, they are often subjected to less due diligence.” That gives the transparency-loving Mr Cameron lots to ponder as he prepares to host a global anti-corruption summit, set for May 12th.





Unlocking Mossack Fonseca

The key’s in Sin City

Thinking of investigating a firm mentioned in the Panama papers? Read on

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

WITH numerous governments already announcing probes into the “Panama papers” and others preparing to do so, Mossack Fonseca, the law firm from which the hoard of documents about offshore companies was leaked, will be receiving lots of inquiries in the coming months. Until now, getting information on clients of law firms in Panama has been about as common as ice-skating on the Canal. But sleuths may soon find it a lot easier, thanks to a court ruling in, of all places, Las Vegas.

In 2014 Elliott, a fund that owned debt on which Argentina had defaulted, sued in Nevada to compel Mossack’s local affiliate to provide information on shell companies, in the hope of discovering Argentine assets to seize. The affiliate, MF Nevada, claimed—implausibly—that it was independent of Mossack. In a series of legal skirmishes, Elliott and its lawyers from Dechert LLP established numerous links between the two: for instance, that the employment contract of MF’s sole employee was signed by Mossack partners. E-mails among the Panama papers are said to show that the firm tried to hide evidence of its control over MF Nevada, and wanted its local representative to lie about the relationship. (Mossack has denied this.) One manager reportedly worried that “it could easily become clear that we are hiding something.”

A judge in Las Vegas ruled in March 2015 that Mossack and MF Nevada were one and the same. That put a crack in the wall of secrecy around American shell companies. But its full significance is only now becoming apparent: it means that, under an American law about assisting with foreign legal proceedings, any investigator anywhere in the world can subpoena Mossack, through the Nevada subsidiary, for information that could be relevant to cases in any country. (Mossack plans to appeal.)

In short, the little-noticed ruling is the key that unlocks the door for investigators everywhere. Faced with the power of American subpoenas, Mossack’s head office will find it much harder to stonewall foreign requests for information. Ignoring them could mean being found in contempt of court. That would leave it open to penalties designed to compel it to comply, including asset seizures, in other countries where it operates.

The firm could, of course, slam the door shut by closing its American business. But it is contractually obliged to provide services for thousands of companies there, and cannot disentangle itself from them overnight. Still, those looking to take advantage of the trail Elliott has blazed shouldn’t hang around.





Italian banks

A heavy load

Italy’s latest attempt to stabilise its banking system

Apr 16th 2016 | Milan | From the print edition



IN CLASSICAL mythology, Atlas was the god condemned to hold up the sky for all eternity. In Italy on April 11th a clutch of banks and other financial institutions agreed to create a fund called Atlante (Atlas in Italian) to bail out troubled rivals and thus allay fears of a systemic crisis in Italian banking. The scheme should help bolster confidence, but will not live up to its superhuman billing.

Italian bank shares have lost 31% on average since the start of the year (see chart). Italy’s long recession, only now abating, has taken its toll, leaving €360 billion ($405 billion) of bad debts. Two banks—Veneto Banca and Banco Popolare di Vicenza—are in especially dire straits: the European Central Bank wants them to raise €1 billion and €1.5 billion respectively in extra capital. Given how much investors have soured on the sector, there was a risk that this pair would not have found enough buyers for their share offerings, increasing jitters and leaving the banks that are underwriting the issues with their own capital shortfalls.

The political stakes are particularly high because of the danger that ordinary Italians could be ruined by a cascade of bank failures. Italy’s banks have long indulged in the pernicious habit of selling their riskiest debt to their own customers: retail investors hold around half their €67 billion of subordinated bonds. Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, was vilified after a public bail-out of four small banks last year led to losses for small investors.

Enter Atlante. Its immediate purpose is to provide a backstop for the upcoming cash calls. Details are still being ironed out, but the rescue fund is expected to amount to around €5.5 billion. Investors will include banks, insurance companies and several foundations that own big stakes in banks, as well as the Cassa Depositi e Prestiti (CDP), a state-controlled bank that invests Italy’s postal savings.

In the longer term the fund is expected to buy some of the industry’s mountain of bad debts. In January the government reached agreement with the European Commission on a scheme intended to speed sales of non-performing loans (NPLs) by allowing the CDP to guarantee senior tranches of securitised bundles of them. But investors were unenthusiastic, leaving a wide gap between the price at which banks are prepared to sell (roughly 40% of face value) and the amount buyers are willing to pay (20%).

The hope is that sales of NPLs will accelerate as a result of the third element of the scheme: a government decree to speed up bankruptcy proceedings. Atlante is, in theory, a private undertaking, but the government, says Pier Carlo Padoan, the finance minister, was “the facilitator”. The meetings to clinch the deal were held in the finance ministry with the governor of the central bank, Ignazio Visco, on hand.

The government has already passed a reform aimed at jollying the bankruptcy courts along. It has also quietly introduced a measure that reduces stamp duty for those who buy property pledged as collateral—a step that should make the NPLs more valuable. Now, says Fabrizio Pagani, the official who oversaw the birth of Atlante, what is needed is a greater sense of urgency among judges and lawyers. That is an understatement. According to Mediobanca, an investment bank, bankruptcy proceedings in Italy average almost eight years; the norm in Europe is two years. Making it easier to realise the value of the collateral that banks hold against their NPLs would also make it much easier to agree terms with distressed-debt funds.

Yet vowing to speed up Italy’s notoriously sluggish legal procedures is easier than actually doing so. Some also ask if the involvement of the CDP, which is said to be investing €500m-600m, breaches European rules on subsidies to business, although Mr Padoan insists it does not. Another issue is how Atlante’s governance will work. It will be managed by Quaestio Capital Management, and no single shareholder will be allowed to hold a majority. That may lead to squabbling (and political pressure) over which banks are to be saved and which loans bought. Worse, good banks are in effect exposing themselves to the mistakes of badly managed ones. Bank stocks, which rallied at first on news of Atlante’s creation, soon fell back again.





Rehabilitating Argentina

The green light

A ruling in New York paves the way for a return to international bond markets

Apr 16th 2016 | Buenos Aires | From the print edition

Vulture on a high

ARGENTINA’S exit from default is finally in sight. On April 13th, more than 14 years on from a catastrophic $82 billion sovereign default, a federal appeals court in New York upheld a ruling that allows the country to pay its “holdout” creditors, holders of its defaulted debt who rejected restructurings in 2005 and 2010. That paves the way for Argentina’s long-awaited return to international credit markets. The decision marks another important victory for Mauricio Macri, who reopened formal negotiations with the holdouts after becoming president in December.

The appeals court upheld a decision taken on February 19th by Thomas Griesa, a lower-court judge, to lift an injunction blocking Argentina’s access to international credit markets. Mr Griesa agreed to remove the bar on two conditions: that Argentina repeal laws barring payments to the holdouts, whom the previous government had dismissed as “vultures”, and that it pay those of them who agreed to a deal promptly. The move infuriated the holdouts, who had used the injunction as leverage in their negotiations. While they took their case to the appeals court, Argentina fulfilled its end of the bargain: last month its Congress voted to repeal the relevant laws.

Argentina now plans to raise up to $15 billion through a bond issue, which is set to begin on April 18th. It will use $10.5 billion-12.5 billion of that to pay the 90% of holdouts with whom it has reached an agreement. The remainder of the cash will be used to finance the budget deficit, which amounted to 5.8% of GDP last year. The bonds will be issued under New York law, in tenors of 5, 10 and 30 years; the government expects to pay interest of 7.5-8.5%.

Argentine officials think demand will be high. Although Argentina has defaulted eight times since independence in 1816, Mr Macri’s government has been applauded around the world for its efforts to restore the country’s standing and revive its economy (see article). His lieutenants say he will keep a better grip on the country’s finances than his predecessor, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. Investors seem willing to give him the benefit of the doubt.

Argentina’s stockmarket responded positively to the news of the appeals-court decision, jumping by 4% to a five-week high. The same cannot be said of those bondholders who have yet to reach an agreement with Argentina. Some are retail investors, who bought bonds with their savings, rather than speculative hedge funds. They now have little alternative but to accept Argentina’s formal offer, made on February 5th, of 72 cents on the dollar. They will feel aggrieved; Mr Macri, ecstatic.





The world economy

System says slow

The IMF sees political danger in the economic doldrums

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



IS THERE a global economic crisis on the horizon? Probably not. Is the world in danger of falling into recession? Not soon. Yet the IMF’s latest update of its forecasts is nevertheless resolutely downbeat. Speaking this week in Washington, DC, its chief economist, Maurice Obstfeld, outlined yet another downward revision to its prediction for global GDP growth. It is likely that the next revision will again be down. One of the big threats to the world economy, he said, is from “non-economic risks”—fund-speak for grubby politics. A world economy stuck in the doldrums, he cautioned, may be a perilous place politically.



The actual forecasts are far from horrible. The fund nudged down its estimate of global growth for 2016 from 3.4% to 3.2%. That is still a shade faster than in 2015. The revisions are broad-based: America, Europe and the emerging world as a bloc all saw similar downgrades (see chart). The forecast for sub-Saharan Africa was pared back the most, in large part because of a gloomier outlook for oil-rich Nigeria, the continent’s bigest economy. The recent recovery in crude prices will take some pressure off oil producers, but “we won’t be seeing prices at the $100 a barrel level for some time, if ever,” said Mr Obstfeld. Of biggish economies, only China escaped a downgrade. The fund is more confident than it was in January that stimulus measures there will work. But there is a concern about the quality of China’s growth, said Mr Obstfeld, as fresh credit is directed towards sputtering industries.

The scenario the fund seems most concerned about is a steady slide in global GDP growth that feeds on itself by discouraging investment, thereby exacerbating political tensions, which in turn make fixing the economy even harder. Brazil shows how a bad economy can be made worse by political paralysis. Low growth might add to the “rising tide of inward-looking nationalism” in the rich world, said Mr Obstfeld. Politics in America is moving against free trade. And there are various threats to Europe beyond the perennial problem of Greece. The refugee crisis has already put pressure on the European Union’s open-borders policy and there is a “real possibility” that Britain might leave the EU.

The IMF has some familiar remedies for the global economy: keep monetary policy loose, augment it with fiscal stimulus where possible and add some pro-growth reforms to the mix. Such action is needed to insure against the risks the fund identifies. But the world should also be making contingency plans for a co-ordinated response if a financial shock hits. “There is no longer much room for error,” said Mr Obstfeld, with a certain weariness.





Agriculture and demography

The toll of tariffs

Historians find yet another way protectionism harms development

Apr 16th 2016 | CAMBRIDGE | From the print edition

Too much rolling in the hay

ECONOMISTS have long argued that tariffs are bad for a country’s development in the long run. They raise prices for consumers, steer capital away from the most productive investments and breed inefficiency and rent-seeking by limiting competition from abroad. To that long list add another baleful consequence: by coddling farmers, agricultural tariffs encourage them to have more children and to educate them less, hampering economic growth for decades into the future.

So, at any rate, suggests a paper presented at the conference of Britain’s Economic History Society in Cambridge earlier this month. The authors, Vincent Bignon of the Bank of France and Cecilia García-Peñalosa of Aix-Marseille School of Economics, look at the relationship between agricultural tariffs and demography in France in the 1890s. In particular, they look at how the Méline tariff on grain, which was introduced in 1892, affected France’s demographic transition.

A demographic transition is a country’s gradual shift from high fertility and mortality to lower rates of both. Economists see it as an important factor in development. If a greater proportion of children survive, parents tend to have fewer of them and to invest more in their health and education. That, in turn, increases a country’s human capital and thus its growth prospects.

The paper shows that this process can be delayed by agricultural tariffs. The Méline tariff raised food prices by more than a quarter, as well as boosting agricultural wages. The authors found that fertility rates rose and primary-school attendance fell in the districts that benefited most from the tariff. This was because higher farm wages enabled parents in rural areas to have more children. It also reduced the relative return to education by increasing wages for (uneducated) agricultural labourers, thereby discouraging parents from sending their children to school.

As a result, Mr Bignon and Ms García-Peñalosa argue, the tariff strongly reduced human-capital formation in late-19th-century France. Their results show that in areas with the most employment in agriculture, the Méline tariff halted a century-long decline in the birth rate and set educational development back 15 years. This may go some way to explaining why the economy of Britain, which did not protect agriculture at all at the time, outperformed France’s during the early 20th century.

There is some evidence of a similar relationship in the modern world. Studies of the impact of agricultural tariffs in sub-Saharan Africa suggest that they encourage subsistence farming rather than prompting export industries to grow. Just as in France, that is likely to boost fertility and dent enrolment rates in schools. Farmers may like the sound of agricultural protectionism, but it does not do their children any good at all.





Free exchange

Terms of enlargement

Clever reforms can reduce the power of NIMBYs and cut housing costs

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



THE world’s great cities are engines of wealth creation. Places like London and San Francisco account for a disproportionate share of economic output. They are the combustion chambers in which ideas and capital are combined to generate new riches.

To an alarming extent, such cities are also playgrounds for the rich—and only the rich. The soaring cost of housing in these places pushes those of more modest means away, toward spots where homes are cheaper but opportunity is more limited. That pressure has serious consequences. A recent paper* reckons that over the past 50 years this dispersing effect left American output 13.5% below the level it would otherwise have reached. Poor Americans living in rich cities survive longer than their counterparts in poor ones. Finding more effective ways to reduce housing costs would thus not only save money but prolong lives.

Economics is all about supply and demand, and high housing costs are the product of too little of the former in the face of lots of the latter. Strict planning rules in pricey cities make building new homes a nightmare for developers. In London, for example, they face myriad rules about what they can build where, including one that states that nothing should impede the view of the dome of St Paul’s Cathedral from a gap in a hedge ten miles away. By the same token, a thicket of environmental rules in California has given NIMBYs (short for “not in my backyard”) a host of ways to stall, shrink or stop new projects.

Most onerous planning restrictions reflect the difficult political economy underlying urban growth. Would-be migrants to rich cities stand to benefit handsomely from access to lucrative jobs, but lack a political say in the places that are building too little. Within cities the balance of costs and benefits favours NIMBYs. Everyone in the city stands to gain from growth; productivity in skilled cities rises with population, so when more people move in, all workers’ incomes should rise. But the gains from any particular property development are relatively small and thinly spread, whereas the costs are highly concentrated.

Those in the immediate vicinity of a big new project must put up with noise and other inconveniences during construction, and increased competition for parking spaces and places in good schools after it, not to mention blocked views. Because affected residents live near each other and often share local-government representatives, the cost of organising opposition to new projects is low (and the motivation to do so is high). Even those who see urban growth as a positive have strong incentives to oppose development in their own backyards. Since almost every part of a city is someone’s backyard, far too little construction takes place.

Clever policy, however, can help balance the concerns of NIMBYs with the broad benefits of growth in productive places. One approach is simply to neutralise local opposition to development by compensating neighbours for the costs they bear when new construction is approved—to bribe, them, in effect. David Schleicher, a professor of land-use law at Yale Law School, has proposed the use of “tax increment local transfers”, or TILTs. New buildings normally generate extra property-tax revenue for the city once they have been completed. Some portion of the expected rise in the tax take associated with a proposed new development (the tax increment) could be promised to nearby residents in the form of a temporary property-tax rebate, scheduled to last ten years, say, if the development went ahead. As Mr Schleicher notes, TILTs would enhance the signalling value of local opposition to new projects: residents who fight against a proposed development despite the prospect of direct financial gain from it are more likely to have reservations worth addressing.

An alternative to buying NIMBYs’ silence would be to reform planning procedures to balance NIMBY voices with those seeking more development. Most city-dwellers are not reflexively anti-growth; they merely prefer that building occur in other parts of their city, giving them the benefits of growth while sparing them many of the costs. But when battles over building unfold at the neighbourhood level, the affected residents have little reason to prioritise the citywide benefits over the local costs.

Shifting the debate about new construction to the level of the city as a whole would change this dynamic. Representatives charged with thinking about the citywide loss from forgone development still have an incentive to push for limited development in their own neck of the woods. But it would be to their advantage to ensure that at least some building does in fact take place. In another recent paper Mr Schleicher and Roderick Hills of New York University reckon such dealmaking could be encouraged by using city plans as binding development “budgets”: one area could curb construction below the planned level only if a deal was reached to boost building in another part of the city.

Build me up, buttercup

If cities fail to act, regional or central governments can take matters into their own hands. Evidence from America suggests that where state governments help to set building guidelines, NIMBYs have less influence. The government of Washington state is more involved in planning than that of California. Partly as a result, the housing stock in Seattle grew at twice the rate of the San Francisco Bay area in the 2000s; house prices correspondingly grew less.

Other governments are beginning to heed the lesson. A bill in the Massachusetts state legislature would require cities to designate areas in which dense building can occur without a fight—a measure targeted at expensive, restrictive Boston. More experimentation would be welcome. Though NIMBYs deserve their say, they ought not to dominate the conversation.



Sources:

"Why do cities matter? Local growth and aggregate growth", Chang-Tai Hsieh and Enrico Moretti, NBER Working Paper, May 2015.

"The association between income and life expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014", Raj Chetty et al, Journal of the American Medical Association, April 2016.

"City unplanning", David Schleicher, Yale Law Journal, May 2013.

"Planning an affordable city", Roderick Hills Jr and David Schleicher, Iowa Law Review, November 2015.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog





Science and technology




High-definition maps: The autonomous car’s reality check

Space travel: Starchip enterprise

Bird strikes on aircraft: Sonic scarecrow

Surviving inherited diseases: Genetic superheroes





High-definition maps

The autonomous car’s reality check

Building highly detailed maps for robotic vehicles

Apr 16th 2016 | BERKELEY | From the print edition



A CAR sprouting a dome containing a spinning laser sensor and festooned with cameras barely draws a second glance as it edges through the crowded streets of Berkeley. Self-driving cars are no longer a rare sight on Californian roads. Over 100 autonomous vehicles from a dozen manufacturers are now being tested in public, covering hundreds of thousands of kilometres each year.

But this car is different: its human driver keeps his hands firmly on the wheel. The vehicle, nicknamed “George” by HERE, a Berlin-based mapping company owned by BMW, Audi and Daimler, is not driving itself but collecting data that enable other cars to do so.

By George

For every second of its journey, a high-precision GPS receiver on George’s roof collects the car’s latitude, longitude and elevation ten times over; a motion-tracking inertial system records its yaw, pitch and roll 100 times; and the laser scanner calculates its distance from some 600,000 different points, such as trees, kerbs and buildings. At the same time, four cameras also shoot a 96-megapixel, 360-degree panoramic image for every 6 metres the vehicle moves along the road.

A day’s driving can accumulate 100 gigabytes or more of data. Together, these allow HERE to build up an extremely detailed three-dimensional image of George’s route—what digital cartographers call a high definition (HD) map.

A few years ago, some carmakers hoped that autonomous vehicles might be able to position themselves using the low-definition maps found in today’s turn-by-turn navigation devices and apps. Sensors would do the rest. With clear road markings, for instance, visual sensors can already keep cars safely within their lanes, and even spot the solid or dotted lines that indicate stop signs and exits.

The trouble is, a fully driverless car needs to operate safely in all environments. “You don’t really need a map to do simple lane-keeping,” says John Ristevski, HERE’s grandiosely named vice-president of reality capture. “But if you’re on a five-lane freeway, you need to know which of those five lanes you’re in, which are safe to traverse, and at what exact point that exit ramp is coming up.”

The trouble is road markings can wear away or disappear under snow. And modern laser-surveying sensor systems (called LIDARs, after light detection and ranging) may not be accurate in those conditions. LIDARS calculate distances by illuminating a target with laser light and measuring the time it takes for the light to bounce back to the source. Radar does much the same thing with radio waves. In cars, LIDARS and radars have an effective range of around 50 metres, but that can shrink significantly in rain or when objects are obscured by vehicles ahead. Even the smartest car travelling at motorway speeds can “see” only around a second and a half ahead. What HD maps give self-driving cars is the ability to anticipate turns and junctions far beyond sensors’ horizons.

Even more important for an autonomous vehicle is the ability to locate itself precisely; an error of a couple of metres could place a car on the wrong side of the road. Commercial GPS systems are accurate only to around 5 metres, but can be wrong by 50 metres in urban canyons and fail completely in tunnels. HD maps, however, can include a so-called localisation layer that works with a variety of sensors to position a car within centimetres.

HERE is experimenting with several such layers. One involves extracting features like bridges, road signs and guard rails from images shot by the mapping vehicle, and then comparing them to what the car sees through its own cameras.

TomTom, a mapping firm based in the Netherlands, rejected this process as too unreliable. “We found that trying to model reality down to every single bridge pillar and then triangulating it is too sensitive to change,” says Pieter Gillegot-Vergauwen, one of the firm’s vice-presidents. Problems can arise if, for instance, a tree is cut down or a street scene alters from summer to winter. “There are too many visual changes,” he adds.

Instead, TomTom captures a “depth map” using its mapping vehicles’ LIDARS. This system continuously records the distinctive shapes and distances of roadside scenery, without trying to identify what the individual things are. By considering the whole stretch of road it is possible to correlate the output from the autonomous car’s own LIDAR unit with the pattern of the depth map and calculate its location even if, say, a tree grows or a lorry is in the way, says Mr Gillegot-Vergauwen.

Google, which has long been testing autonomous cars, builds its localisation layer in a similar fashion. HERE is also trying out a system that uses artificial intelligence to identify features from cameras and LIDARs. Whatever the approach, all three companies claim that they can now position a self-driving car on the road to an accuracy of within 10-20cm.

Some car firms, including Nissan, Ford, Kia and Tesla, think self-driving technology will be ready by 2020. Volvo plans to offer fully autonomous cars to 100 drivers as early as next year. All this increases the pressure to map the world in high definition before cars begin to drive themselves out of showrooms. HERE has several hundred vehicles like George mapping millions of kilometres of roads annually in 32 countries. TomTom has 70 on motorways and major roads in Europe and North America. Zenrin, a Japanese mapping firm partly owned by Toyota, is particularly active in Asia.

Analysing and processing data from so many vehicles is one of the biggest challenges. HERE originally had people inspecting the raw LIDAR data and turning it into a digital model using editing software—rather like “Minecraft for maps”, says Mr Ristevski. But manually extracting the data was painfully slow, and the company has now developed machine-learning algorithms to find automatically such things as lane markings and the edges of pavements. HERE’s AI systems can identify road signs and traffic lights from George’s still photos. Humans then modify and tweak the results, and check for errors.

Yet George’s data begin to age as soon as they are collected. Subsequent construction, roadworks or altered speed limits could lead to a self-driving car working from a dangerously outdated map. Maps will never be completely up-to-date, admits Mr Ristevski. “Our goal will be to keep the map as fresh and accurate as possible but vehicle sensors must be robust enough to handle discrepancies.”

Mapping vehicles are sent back to big cities like San Francisco regularly, but the vast majority of the roads they capture might be revisited annually, at best. A partial solution is to use what Mr Ristevski euphemistically calls “probe data”: the digital traces of millions of people using smartphones and connected in-car systems for navigation. HERE receives around 2 billion individual pieces of such data daily, comprising a car’s location, speed and heading, some of it from Windows devices (a hangover from when HERE was owned by Nokia, now part of Microsoft).

These data are aggregated and anonymised to preserve privacy, and allow HERE quickly to detect major changes such as road closures. As cars become more sophisticated, these data should become richer. Ultimately, reckons Mr Ristevski, self-driving cars will help to maintain their own maps. This is already the case with Google’s self-driving cars, which can detect and report traffic cones and construction workers in high-visibility vests. Not only does Google have more autonomous vehicles on the roads than any other carmaker, it has access to navigation and traffic data from the estimated 1.5 billion Android phones and devices active globally. (Google says it is currently concentrating its HD-mapping efforts on just its self-driving test locations in Mountain View, California; Austin, Texas; Kirkland, Washington, and Phoenix, Arizona.)

As more new cars are fitted with smart-driving features, such as automatic braking, lane control and overtaking, technology will continue to lead vehicles towards full autonomy. And HD maps will extend beyond the road. Both HERE and TomTom include low-level aerial information, such as utility wires, bridges, trees and, in some cases, details of buildings up to 15 storeys. Such data could be used for navigation by another type of robotic vehicle—drones—which is why one company with drone-delivery ambitions, Amazon, is in talks to buy a stake in HERE.





Space travel

Starchip enterprise

Flying to the stars means thinking both very big and very small

Apr 16th 2016 | COLORADO SPRINGS | From the print edition

Power to the stars

SPACEX and Blue Origin, two American space companies, can now return their rockets to Earth and reuse them, which promises to reduce launch costs. But what if, instead of bringing the boosters back to Earth, you could build one that never leaves it? Your propulsion system could be arbitrarily large and powerful, since you wouldn’t have to lift it; your spacecraft, no longer needing engines or fuel, could be stripped down to its barest essentials.

Such a split sounds impractical, but beams of light could make it work. One of the counterintuitive implications of the theory of relativity is that, although light has no mass, it still has momentum. Thus when light bounces off a mirror it exerts a tiny pressure; if the light is bright enough, and the mirror light enough, the mirror will start moving.

In the 1970s Robert Forward, a physicist, showed that very powerful lasers could push a spacecraft with a reflecting “sail” to a tenth the speed of light or more. Moving thousands of times faster than rockets can, such probes might reach planets round other stars in decades, rather than in hundreds of thousands of years. But the incredible technical challenges of such a scheme meant that Forward’s ideas were never developed in any practical way.

That could be about to change. On April 12th, the 55th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s first flight into space, Yuri Milner, a Russian physicist and billionaire investor, announced a plan to develop the technologies such interstellar flight would need. Mr Milner—who was named after Gagarin—is devoting himself to the challenges of deep space. Last year he said he would spend $100m to bring recent advances in computing to bear on the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI).

When he first looked at laser-powered interstellar travel, Mr Milner says, the idea triggered both his scepticism as a physicist and his cynicism as a businessman. But he has concluded that, as in the case of SETI, technological capacities developed for other reasons will be a boon. Given current trends in microelectronics, nanotechnology and lasers, he thinks that within a generation attempts at interstellar flight might be no more costly than today’s most ambitious scientific programmes. So he is going to spend $100m on a “Breakthrough Starshot” research programme aimed at making that dream possible.

Beam me up

The basic problem with using light to drive a spacecraft is low efficiency. A gigawatt laser beam—1GW being a billion watts, roughly the power output of a large nuclear plant—provides a bit less than seven newtons of thrust: a force equivalent to that required to lift a glass of beer. For such thimblefuls of thrust to amount to anything much, they have to be applied to a very light spacecraft indeed: ideally one with a mass not much larger than a gram.

It is a measure of the outlandishness of this endeavour that fashioning such a nanoscale spacecraft almost seems like the easy bit. Zac Manchester, a Harvard researcher involved in Mr Milner’s scheme, has already crowdfunded a project that produces satellites the size of postage stamps. In the fairly near future a camera, a decent computer, a communications laser and a tiny speck of plutonium for on-board power—all capable, like the electronics in “smart” artillery shells, of surviving extraordinary accelerations—might plausibly sit on a single silicon “starchip”.

Building a similarly low-mass sail may prove a much taller order: perfect mirrors typically weigh quite a lot. But Philip Lubin of the University of California, Santa Barbara, one of the researchers who inspired Mr Milner’s enthusiasm, says the sail only needs to reflect one wavelength of light: that of the laser. It could be transparent to all other wavelengths. That makes things simpler. With coatings engineered on an atomic scale, a layer of glass just a few tens of atoms thick might be able to do the job.

The propulsion system Mr Milner sees as the final goal would consist of perhaps 10m lasers, each delivering 10 kilowatts or so, spread over a square kilometre of otherwise empty desert. For a launch their output would be combined into a single 100GW beam focused on a sail just a few metres across up in space. If that sail and its starchip were to have a mass of just five grams, then after ten minutes of the array’s 670-newton attention the probe would be a third of the way to the orbit of Mars and travelling at a quarter of the speed of light—fast enough to get to the nearest stars in less than 20 years. After flashing by its target planets—there is no possibility of braking—it would send back data with its on-board laser. No current observatory could pick up such a signal—but the kilometre-wide launch array should be able to. The optical systems used to meld the output of the lasers could be used in reverse as a vast and sensitive telescope.

Far fetched as all this sounds, purely in terms of energy it is not that much grander than everyday space flight. Rockets deliver many gigawatts of power, but to big objects. Dr Lubin points out that a space-shuttle’s motors produced a stonking 45GW at lift-off and in a bit less than ten minutes were capable of giving their 100-tonne spacecraft a kinetic energy only a few times smaller than that of a starchip travelling at a fifth the speed of light.

Still, a dozen or more technologies will need to improve by orders of magnitude for a starshot to be feasible. Or, rather, a series of starshots: the array could be used again and again, and if starchips can be made they can surely be mass produced.

In some areas a lot of improvement is likely. Laser power is getting cheaper, as are the storage systems needed to suck up many gigawatt-hours of energy and disgorge them in minutes. Advances are also steadily being made in the sort of solar-power systems needed to supply the necessary gigawatts to the desert array and the computers needed to operate it.

Other advances will be more challenging and, being more specific to a starshot, less likely to be developed for other purposes. One such is how to protect a piece of microelectronics from impacts with specks of interstellar dust at a relative speed of 80,000km/sec. Perhaps the most daunting task is “shaping” the output of millions of lasers into a 100GW beam focused on a spot thousands of kilometres distant, all the time taking the turbulence of the atmosphere into account.

That will require subtle fine tuning of the output of millions of lasers. For comparison, the biggest telescope on the drawing board today has 798 separate mirror elements —and the challenges for telescopes focusing light from elsewhere are much less extreme than those facing arrays that emit light by the gigawatt. Those challenges may prove insurmountable.

Enthusiasts might say that the problems were similarly immense in the early days of rocketry, but less than 25 years after the first V-2 flight, men arrived on the Moon. Inspiring, perhaps; perturbing, too. Rocketry was a military discipline, from its origins in China to the modified ballistic missile that sent Gagarin on his way. And although lasers have lots of civilian uses, the military has a keen interest in them. Much of the recent progress in combining separate lasers into a single coherent beam and making them more powerful as a potential weapon can be traced to the Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Pentagon’s funder of far-out tech.

A 100GW array could be quite a weapon. The energy in one of the mooted ten-minute blasts needed for a starchip is equal to that unleashed in the bombing of Hiroshima. If a mirror in orbit were used to reflect the beam back to Earth it would be impossible to defend against.

This means that just as Mr Milner’s team has a lot of technology to sort out, it faces other potentially show-stopping challenges. His project leader, Pete Worden, is a retired Air Force general with experience in space weapons and arms control as well as an astronomer. That should help. Like his boss he accepts that such powerful technologies might need to be under some sort of international control. Were such oversight possible, it might be fitting as well as prudent. If humans are to stand on the threshold of the stars, it would be nice if they could do so together.





Bird strikes on aircraft

Sonic scarecrow

A new way to shoo birds away from airports

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



BIRDS were an inspiration for early aviators, but they are a pilot’s nightmare. Collisions with birds are reckoned to cost America’s airlines almost $1 billion in repairs and flight delays annually. When a multiple bird-strike knocked out both engines of a US Airways Airbus A320 taking off from LaGuardia Airport, New York, in 2009 all 155 passengers and crew survived only after the pilots carefully glided the aircraft to a splashdown on the Hudson River. Airports have tried all sorts of ways to shoo away birds but few work for any length of time. Now an ornithologist has come up with a bird scarer that might be the answer.

John Swaddle and his colleagues at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, think the trick is to blanket the area around a runway with a noise that makes it difficult for birds to communicate. Sound is already used to scare off birds: examples include the boom of propane cannons and recordings of predatory hawks. But birds soon get used to such ruses.

Dr Swaddle knew that noise from traffic and machinery at a certain frequency could disturb birds. To explore this, the researchers decided to investigate how European starlings, a species notorious for ending up in aircraft engines, responded when feeding areas in an aviary were placed next to speakers playing a noise that overlapped with the frequency of their calls. The noise reduced foraging by half over several days.

The group then tested the idea at an airstrip near Newport News, Virginia. They placed speakers on a patch of grass and for four weeks before the speakers were turned on carried out regular bird counts on the site and on two others nearby without any speakers present. Bird numbers were much the same.

Then the speakers started pumping out a noise of 2-10kHz, which overlapped with the birds’ call frequencies. Just as with the aviary experiment, the result was dramatic. As the team report in Ecological Applications, bird numbers plummeted by 82% within a zone 50 metres from the speakers—where noise levels were over 80 decibels, a similar volume to a passing freight train—and by 65% farther out, at noise levels of 65-80 decibels. Crucially, the reductions within the zone persisted for the four-week period the speakers were on, suggesting that the birds were not becoming accustomed to the racket. At the sites with no noise, bird numbers remained constant.

The researchers believe the noise pattern may make birds believe an area is too risky to inhabit because their ability to detect alarm calls is compromised. If the system can be effective over even longer periods and is capable of being scaled up to cover an entire airport, it could save a lot of money and lives.





Surviving inherited diseases

Genetic superheroes

A study finds rare individuals resistant to inherited fatal diseases

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



SUPERHEROES with powers that come from mutations in their genomes are, like the X-Men, a staple of comic books and movies. Now an extensive study of the genetics of more than 500,000 people has revealed a different kind of mutant superhero: a small number of individuals who seem to be perfectly healthy despite carrying in their DNA a mutation linked to a severe childhood disorder.

The 13 adults identified were found to have faulty genes associated with one of eight different inherited conditions. These included cystic fibrosis, a disease that interferes with breathing, and atelosteogenesis, which affects bone and limb development. People with the eight different genetic faults can die at birth or shortly after.

Eric Schadt of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, and Stephen Friend of Sage Bionetworks, a non-profit organisation based in Seattle that promotes open science, began their investigation by collecting genetic data from 12 studies carried out by other groups. The data, from European, Asian and American sources that included 23andMe, a biotechnology company, and the Beijing Genomics Institute, yielded an initial pool of DNA sequences from 589,306 people. Of these, full genome sequences were only available for 3,524 individuals. The remainder of the data came from medical screens that identified mutations in a selection of genes, or from exome studies that only looked at the genes that code for proteins—about 1% of the total.

Dr Schadt, Dr Friend and their colleagues then winnowed these down by selecting sequences containing mutations known to cause severe diseases in childhood. They focused on Mendelian disorders, diseases caused by a mutation in a single gene and named after Gregor Mendel, an Augustinian friar who founded modern genetics. The researchers chose only mutations that were believed always to result in the individual developing the disease. That took the number down to 15,597 people, each carrying at least one mutation for one of 163 different diseases.

Next, they checked the sequences and discarded any that they suspected may have contained errors. They also excluded those carrying mutations that occurred in more than 0.5% of the population: relatively common mutations are unlikely to result in severe forms of a disease. That left 303 candidates whose sequences and medical records were scrutinised to ensure that the individuals concerned were healthy and that the mutations they carried had been identified in the scientific literature as giving rise to a disease that would be likely to prevent them surviving to adulthood. The research team also obtained original biological samples, where possible, to verify the DNA sequences.

At that point, as the team report in Nature Biotechnology, they were left with just 13 people whose medical records indicated they were healthy, despite carrying a mutation for one of the eight severe diseases. Unfortunately, only partial DNA sequences were available for the 13. Ideally, the next step would be to sequence these individuals’ entire genomes to discover why they were able to carry, with seemingly no ill-effects, mutations that are deadly in others. Any genes thought to confer protection could be spliced into the genomes of diseased cells grown in a laboratory to test their effects. Such work might provide a step towards the discovery of new treatments. Frustratingly, the researchers could not do that because the consent forms used by the subjects did not provide permission for them to be recontacted.

The team, however, have not given up on identifying genetic superheroes and finding out what accounts for their ability to resist inherited diseases. Together with Jason Bobe, also of the Icahn School of Medicine, they have launched the Resilience Project. The idea is cheaply to screen the DNA of well over 100,000 healthy people for a wide range of genetic disorders. This time, the consent forms will allow the researchers to recontact any potential survivors so that their genomes can be fully sequenced. Such folk may not have the ability to take on comic-book villains, but have an even more extraordinary power fortuitously hidden in their genes.





Books and arts




Single women: Why put a ring on it?

Artistic judgment: Everyone’s a critic

The Holy Roman Empire: Neither holy nor a failure

Seamus Heaney’s “Aeneid”: Music from the underworld

Chinese contemporary art: Fountainheads





Single women

Why put a ring on it?

Single women are reshaping America from marriage to politics to the economy

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



All the Single Ladies: Unmarried Women and the Rise of an Independent Nation. By Rebecca Traister. Simon & Schuster; 352 pages; $27 and £16.99.

Enter Helen: Helen Gurley Brown and the Rise of the Modern Single Woman. By Brooke Hauser. Harper; 480 pages; $28.99 and £20.

Spinster. By Kate Bolick.Crown; 336 pages; $26.

“I MARRIED for the first time at 37. I got the man I wanted,” crowed Helen Gurley Brown on the first page of “Sex and the Single Girl”, a runaway bestseller in 1962. She snagged a brainy, sexy, fabulously successful beau despite being neither “bosomy” nor brilliant, she added. But by the time they met, she was worldly enough to beguile him, having spent almost two decades living by her wits as a single woman, sharpening her skills in the office and the bedroom. “Marriage is insurance for the worst years of your life,” she quipped. “During your best years you don’t need a husband.”

As Brooke Hauser writes in “Enter Helen”, a colourful new biography, Brown cunningly sold a brand of empowerment in terms that would please men. As editor of Cosmopolitan from 1965 to 1997, she transformed a family-friendly magazine into a titillating and wildly successful glossy for women not yet ready to be wives or mothers, but craving male attention all the same. Feminists balked at the busty cover-girls and articles about losing weight and wearing false eyelashes to bed, but countless women also learned how to avoid pregnancy and secure a loan. Before Betty Friedan exploded the myth of the happy housewife in “The Feminine Mystique” in 1963, Brown was already telling women to live a little before settling down.

Brown was prescient. As Rebecca Traister writes in “All the Single Ladies”, on the rise of single women in America, women are waiting longer to wed than ever, and many are choosing not to do so at all. The freedom to pursue high-powered careers and sexually diverse lives without fear of pregnancy or stigma has turned marriage into a choice, not destiny. By 2009 nearly half of all American adults younger than 34 had never married, a rise of 12 percentage points in less than a decade. Unmarried women outnumber married ones for the first time ever.

Single women are reshaping politics. As women tend to worry more about reproductive rights and fair pay, they have favoured Democrats for president since 1988. But the overall women’s vote hides a divide: in 2012 Mitt Romney narrowly carried married women, while the unmarried rushed to Barack Obama in their millions, giving him a 36-point margin. Single women cast almost a quarter of the votes, nearly guaranteeing his re-election. They may be even more important this year: a recent poll shows Hillary Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, leading Donald Trump, the Republican front-runner, by 52 percentage points among unmarried women.

Delaying marriage is also having economic effects: women aged 25 to 34 are the first generation to start their careers near parity with men, earning 93% of men’s wages. Single women now buy homes at greater rates than single men, a big step in independent wealth-building.

These trends have some conservatives fretting about the decline of the family, but Ms Traister convincingly argues that “independent female adulthood” has been good for marriage. The divorce rate rocketed in the 1970s and 1980s, as women who had rushed into unhappy marriages discovered they could make their own way. The boom in divorce encouraged many in the next generation to abstain from marriage rather than enter a flawed one. Now that marriage is simply one option among many, fewer women are exchanging vows, but those that do tend to be in happier, more co-operative relationships.

The divorce rate, now falling, has plunged fastest among those who stay single longest. Despite the stereotype that high-achieving women are doomed to spinsterhood, the truth is that these women are now the most likely to tie the knot, and can afford to hold out for the right match. Ms Traister says that her own successful work as a journalist in New York made it easy for her to feel fulfilled through her early 30s, until she met and fell in love with the man she would marry: “I wound up happily married because I lived in an era in which I could be happily single.” More demanding women are also making men evolve; the number of stay-at-home dads in America almost doubled in the first decade of this century.

Not all women are celebrating. For some, singlehood is less a choice than bad luck. Outside big cities, women who are unmarried into their late 30s are often pitied. For those who hope to become mothers, biology imposes harsh deadlines—though breakthroughs in fertility treatments have raised the number of women giving birth after age 35 by 64% between 1990 and 2008.

In particular, poor single women face a different landscape. Not all are unmarried by choice: America’s high incarceration rate has shrunk their pool of men. Single parenthood is strongly correlated with poverty. Conservatives duly push marriage as the antidote: the federal government has spent almost a billion dollars on pro-marriage programmes, to little avail. Ms Traister stresses education, housing and child care instead, noting that in northern European countries, marriage rates have plunged without poverty increasing.

Ms Traister is right to cheer the advances that have created this new era. But with choice comes uncertainty, and this is the subject of “Spinster”, Kate Bolick’s often lyrical bestselling memoir about making a life on her own, now in paperback. Some readers will disagree with her opening claim that whom and when to wed are questions that continue to “define every woman’s existence”. But she is right that mentors for the new single life are hard to find. Her own late mother, like so many in her generation, married young and set aside her ambitions to raise children.

Now 43, Ms Bolick has spent around two decades casting about for inspiring templates of modern-day spinsterhood. She offers five “awakeners”, including Edith Wharton, Edna St Vincent Millay and Charlotte Perkins Gilman. They show Ms Bolick “how to think beyond the marriage plot” at pivotal moments of her life, as she cycles in and out of romantic dalliances and writing projects, largely in New York.

Some have carped that for a book about life on her own, Ms Bolick seems to suffer no shortage of boyfriends (her publisher, keen to make clear that she is a “spinster” by choice, put a picture of the beautiful author on the cover). Others have grumbled that her “awakeners” are all relatively fortunate white women who marry at some stage. But this misses the point. Ms Bolick’s is a personal story of the pleasures and challenges of being a woman at a time of changing rules and seemingly endless possibilities. Helen Gurley Brown once promised women that they “could have it all”. Women today know better. But it is surely good to have so many more options to choose from.





Artistic judgment

Everyone’s a critic

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Bloody business, being a critic

Better Living Through Criticism: How to Think about Art, Pleasure, Beauty, and Truth. By A. O. Scott. Jonathan Cape; 277 pages; £12.99. Penguin; $28.

THESE are tough times for the gatekeepers, for those who claim a certain expertise and get paid to pass judgment. The oracular voice of authority is being drowned out by the aggregated voice of the Everyman, the credentialled scholar dethroned by the anonymous Wikipedia contributor. As assessments of quality are increasingly crowd-sourced—through the Facebook “Like” button, the Yelp review, and algorithms predicting preferences based on previous purchases—the professional critic is marginalised as at best irrelevant and at worst the embodiment of an elitist and undemocratic patriarchy.

Few people are in a better position to respond to these slings and arrows than A. O. Scott, a film critic for the New York Times. As he points out in “Better Living Through Criticism”, his new book in defence of his own profession and of the critical faculty in each of us, “critic” has always been ranked somewhere between “undertaker” and “tax collector” in terms of popularity. Artists tend to regard critics as parasites on real creativity, while the general public asks what gives them the right to pronounce on matters that properly belong to everyone. “Criticism is not nice,” Mr Scott admits. “To criticise is to find fault, to accentuate the negative, to spoil the fun and refuse to spare delicate feelings.”

But it is also essential. Without thoughtful and disinterested judges, everyone would be at the mercy of the marketers. “Culture now lives almost entirely under the rubric of consumption,” Mr Scott says, and it is the critic’s job to step in to protect the audience from the hucksters, the frauds and the sell-outs. Criticism, then, “is not an enemy from which art must be defended, but rather another name—the proper name—for the defence of art itself”.

Despite that, it is often the artists who are quickest to condemn. Among the more creative defences Mr Scott mounts is that artists are essentially critics, paying tribute to or improving upon the work of their predecessors. Quentin Tarantino (pictured) and the Coen Brothers, for instance, are not only film-makers themselves but also students of film, their work informed by countless hours spent analysing images on the flickering screen. “A work of art is itself a piece of criticism,” Mr Scott asserts.

One defence he does not offer is that of infallibility, or even great precision. To pass judgment is to risk making a fool of oneself. Getting it wrong, he admits, “is the one job we can actually, reliably do.” Many of the most amusing (and appalling) tales Mr Scott relates involve critics getting it spectacularly wrong, like the reviewers of “Moby Dick” who drove Herman Melville into bitter retirement, or of John Keats’s “Endymion”, who may well have driven him to an early grave. While it’s easy to sneer at the reviewer who wrote of the pharmacist-turned-poet, “Back to the shop Mr John, back to plasters, pills, and ointment boxes,” one also has to acknowledge that Percy Shelley, in calling the critic a “noteless blot on a remembered name”, was also engaging in criticism, albeit of a more perceptive sort.

The persistence of this conflict actually offers some encouragement for a profession under siege. If criticism can survive the catalogue of its own errors, if it has endured for centuries despite more detractors than defenders, it’s likely to survive the current crisis as well.





The Holy Roman Empire

Neither holy nor a failure

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



The Holy Roman Empire: A Thousand Years of Europe’s History. By Peter Wilson. Allen Lane; 941 pages; £35. Belknap; $39.95.

ON A map, the Holy Roman Empire resembles something closer to a Jackson Pollock painting than an empire. Splattered across the lands of central Europe are countless territories overseen by an emperor who shared power with a hierarchy spanning princes, bishops and dukes, down to abbots, knights and city councils. Territory sizes ranged from the vast kingdom of Prussia to the tiny Free Imperial City of Zell am Harmersbach, half the size of San Marino. By its maturity the empire had evolved into a “mixed monarchy” that was neither feudal nor democratic, federal nor unitary. Instead it was a combination of all of them.

To the modern reader, this may seem chaotic to the point of inefficiency. But Peter Wilson of Oxford University argues that we have been conditioned to see the empire this way. From the 19th century, nationalist historians rewrote European state history as a progression towards centralised, ethnic nation-states. Thus the idea of the Holy Roman Empire as a failed nation-state (as opposed to a successful multiethnic empire) has prevailed since—even Hitler condemned this era of his beloved Germany.

In his masterly retelling, Mr Wilson paints a more nuanced picture of the empire as a stable and unique entity that protected the weak. An empire with rulers such as Conrad II—who stopped to hear pleas from a serf, a widow and an orphan despite being late for his coronation in 1027—could only be an empire dedicated to “peace through consensus” between rulers (very much plural) and ruled.

Consensus, achieved by distributing power, made the empire’s decentralised structure an advantage rather than a weakness. The result was multiple strands of governing hierarchies rooted in the feudal system, each level able to make its own decisions while being subservient to those higher up. Local bodies such as peasant communes could make decisions about their land while obeying an imperial prince, who in turn obeyed imperial institutions that acted as a check.

Supreme imperial power was initially vested in the emperor himself, but by the 15th century had evolved into structures never before seen in European history. The imperial parliament (“Reichstag”) sat permanently beginning in 1663 (Britain’s “Mother of Parliaments” was permanently in session only decades later). The Reichstag decided questions affecting the whole empire, and its college of electors chose the emperor. The highest court of appeal displayed remarkable similarities to modern judiciaries, with justices chosen by the court itself, giving independent rulings that could favour the humblest plaintiff against the most regal defendant.

Mr Wilson argues that inhabitants of the empire were loyal to this system—it emphasised local identities and freedoms, with citizenship based on political allegiance rather than culture or creed. Quite astounding paradoxes could result—Counter-Reformation bishops who enjoyed “absolute” rule could only fume quietly over their Jewish or Protestant populations, free to practise their religion under imperial protection.

However, political systems that work on paper do not always work in practice. Serfdom and the rise of princely absolutism are rehabilitated by Mr Wilson as tools for consensus, without discussion of their frequent abuse. Take the prince of Hildburghausen, who was known to keep two pistols and a hunting-knife on his table while listening to advisers. They knew he was within his absolutist rights to use them if they dared “advise” too freely.

Briefly looking to the future, Mr Wilson notes new, post-modern distortions. European Union politicians have celebrated Charlemagne’s empire as an early form of transnational co-operation, despite the fact Charlemagne had no “nations” to make co-operate. Any comparisons with the EU must allow for the fact that the empire treated its subjects and member-states hierarchically, in contrast to EU’s principles of democratic equality. Mr Wilson rightly believes that the empire should be seen as a unique entity, rather than a blueprint for modern Europe.





Seamus Heaney’s “Aeneid”

Music from the underworld

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



Aeneid: Book VI. By Seamus Heaney. Faber; 53 pages; £14.99. To be published in America by Farrar, Straus and Giroux in May; $23.

DO GREAT poets much enjoy translating the work of other poets? Yes and no. Seamus Heaney’s spirited and acclaimed translation of “Beowulf”, published in 1999, made him feel like a man sentenced to hard labour, he later confessed. Now, three years after his death, we can read what he made of a fragment from Virgil’s “Aeneid”, a work by an utterly different kind of maker. The Roman poet, in contrast with the unknown Anglo-Saxon who wrote “Beowulf”, is mellifluous and silver-tongued.

Heaney had been nursing a fascination with the sixth book of the “Aeneid” since his days as a pupil in Father Michael McGlinchey’s Latin class. Its themes haunted him: the miraculous wresting away of the golden bough; Charon’s lugubrious barge; Aeneas’s quest to meet the shade of his talkative father, Anchises, by descending into the underworld. They were made all the more poignant for him by the death of his own father, a taciturn cattle dealer from Northern Ireland, in 1986.

In 2010, Heaney started to deal with this Virgilian fragment obliquely, publishing “Human Chain”, his last full collection before his death in 2013. It contained a sequence of poems entitled “Route 110”, written in celebration of the birth of a grand-daughter and consisting of a series of autobiographically rooted glancings off incidents from the sixth book of Virgil.

Heaney’s Virgil is quite unlike what he called “the physical brunt of the old tongue” of “Beowulf”. Virgil’s decorous Latin gets translated into a language which calls for eloquent Latinate polysyllables: the Sibyl flings the guard-dog Cerberus “a dumpling of soporific honey”. But this “Aeneid” is also driven by the pitch and the rhythms of the characteristic Heaney speaking voice. The words he uses often have a pleasingly home-spun, home-grounding feel to them: “an outlander groom” for a foreigner, for example, or “a payout of thread” that is let slip through the fingers bit by bit. He cleaves beautifully to the concreteness of things, describing, for example, how foolish Salmoneus sought to ape Jupiter’s thunderbolt-throwing by flourishing “smoky guttering pine-brands”. The reader can almost smell them, transported to the world of Aeneas and to Heaneyland too.

This is by no means a faultless translation. Heaney nods from time to time—there is a tiresome instance of needless repetition in “And then they saw him, Misenus, on a dry stretch of beach/they came up and saw the son of Aeolus”—and he would doubtless have continued to polish had he lived. And in the poem’s conclusion, Heaney noted in a preface, “the translator is likely to have moved from inspiration to grim determination,” as Virgil, through Anchises, offers up for admiration a catalogue of the names of great Roman generals to come once Aeneas has gone on to found Rome. Nevertheless, at its best—for example, the sections when he is witnessing, with the Sibyl, the various punishments that the gods have imposed upon those who have fallen short—the book is wonderful; a not entirely great work by Heaney is worth much more than the toilings of many lesser poets.





Chinese contemporary art

Fountainheads

Two exhibitions focus on Chinese creativity

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition

Hands up for creativity

DO WESTERNERS take Chinese artists seriously as artists? Or are they merely illustrations of a changing China? Uli Sigg, a Swiss businessman and former ambassador to Beijing, began buying Chinese contemporary art in the 1970s, when artists, often working alone and in secret, were reacting to the political turmoil of the time. His collection of over 1,000 works forms the backbone of what will be M+, the museum of visual culture in Hong Kong, which is due to open in 2019. Until then the Sigg holdings are gradually being unveiled in a series of small shows around the city. Anyone who missed the latest iteration, at Art Basel Hong Kong in March, can catch up with the M+ app.

Displayed against a timeline of political developments, the works on the app trace the growth of China’s artists from the Cultural Revolution, through the upheaval of 1989, and on to the commercialisation that followed after economic growth began to accelerate. To many viewers, it is not the art that matters here, but what the artists were reacting to—and against. Mr Sigg and M+ have made a choice to present the collection as a historical archive. The format is useful for visitors who are learning about modern China and Chinese art for the first time. It pays little attention, though, to the creativity of Chinese artists themselves.

Two other shows have taken the opposite tack. The first is “What About the Art? Contemporary Art from China”, on until July 16th at Al Riwaq in Qatar’s capital, Doha, part of the Qatar Museums network. The second is a show dedicated to the Chinese contemporary-art scene at the Fondation Louis Vuitton in Paris. One part is an exhibition of works by 12 artists brought together under the headline “Bentu: Chinese artists at a time of turbulence and transformation”, on until May 2nd. The other exhibition consists of Chinese works from the museum’s collection and runs until August 29th.

The show in Qatar, three years in the making, has been curated by Cai Guo-Qiang, internationally known for his installations made with fireworks and explosions. An ascetic who survives on black tea and a ferocious exercise regime, Mr Cai bemoans the fact that Chinese contemporary artists are often judged by just two measures: their take on the one-party system or the record prices their work fetches at auction. In the show he has created in Doha he focuses instead on creativity.

The overwhelming presence of the Qatari royal family as patrons of the country’s nascent art world makes it hard for curators, even those of Mr Cai’s stature, to operate completely independently. Mr Cai salutes his patrons with a huge family portrait by Liu Xiaodong of the former minister of culture, Hamad bin Abdulaziz Al-Kawari, and his children, as well as small panoramas of Doha and the Qatari hinterland. These will be of little interest to international visitors, even if they draw in local audiences.

But three other pieces that Mr Cai has selected are particularly memorable. Acting as a prologue to the show is an installation by Hu Zhijun, a peasant farmer who discovered sculpture in 2013 at the age of 61. A year later Mr Cai commissioned him to make almost 600 figures, all of them crucial in the development of modern art in China. Painters and video-makers, designers and architects, his figures—mounted on terraces that resemble rice paddies—form a powerful choral voice of artists and artisans. Another work inspired by China’s physical environment is by Xu Bing, a doyen of the Central Academy of Fine Arts in Beijing. His “Background Story: Shangfang Temple” seems on the face of it to be a traditional Chinese landscape, a translucent sky with brown hills and trees coloured in yellow and green. Step behind the installation, though, and you realise that the hills are made of mounds of rubbish, the trees coloured with abandoned plastic bags.

The third memorable piece in the show has not been seen since the opening of the Yuz Museum in Shanghai in 2014 and never outside China. “Freedom”, by Sun Yuan and Peng Yu, is a 12-metre-square metal-plate box containing a fire hose and a high-pressure hydraulic pump. The box has round glass windows at eye level for watching the hose in action—a bucking water-cannon that evokes rampant sexuality and vicious crowd control (though that may not have been obvious to the show’s conventional hosts).

If Mr Cai’s “What About the Art?” concentrates on the creativity of individual artists, the show at the Fondation Louis Vuitton in Paris focuses on how artists inspire creativity in one another. On the upper floor, Philip Tinari of Beijing’s Ullens Centre for Contemporary Art and the Fondation’s artistic director, Suzanne Pagé, have grouped together a series of landmark Chinese works from the Vuitton collection. In one impressive room stand both one of Ai Wei Wei’s huge wooden trees linking the heavens and the underworld and one of Huang Yong Ping’s “Fifty Arms of Buddha” series (pictured). Made between 1997 and 2013, and a bridge between past and present, the spiritual and the physical, it pays homage in its shape and conception to Marcel Duchamp’s “Porte-Bouteilles” from over a century earlier.

One floor down and the visitor encounters “Bentu” (“of this earth”), a parallel show highlighting 12 artists returning home to re-examine their roots. They explore not just the anxieties and preoccupations born of four decades of economic transformation, but more existential questions, about hope, anxiety, pleasure and curiosity.

Some are sad, others homesick, still more are confused. Two, in particular, stand out: Qiu Zhijie’s “Map of the Third World”, an exuberant re-depicting of the world with its Lake of the Leaders, its Mount Globalisation and its Plateau of Colonialism all swelling into a global chorus of political narrative. In contrast, “The Woman in Front of the Camera” is a three-minute film by Hu Xiangqian of a middle-aged woman dancing, oblivious to the crowd surrounding her—and utterly entranced. No politics or history; just art for its own sake.





Obituary




Obituary: Joseph Medicine Crow: War songs of the Plains





Obituary: Joseph Medicine Crow

War songs of the Plains

Joseph Medicine Crow, last war chief of the Crow tribe, died on April 3rd, aged 102

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



THEY were on a path over the hills when Joseph Medicine Crow saw the horses: 50 of them. It made him pause, for there was never anything ordinary about these creatures. They were the most precious possession any Indian could have: the gift of the Sky World, with lightning in their limbs and starlight in their eyes. He longed to leap on one, bareback, and ride it away.

He was going ahead of his party, scouting the trail. It was a natural job for him, since from childhood he had been taught to notice bear-scrapes on bark, deer prints in mud, the habits of waterfowl and the distant suggestions of dust. Though his tribe, the Crow, had been confined to a reservation since 1884, he had been trained in the old nomadic ways: to sleep only on the floor, wrapped in a blanket; to be perfectly alert, ready to spring, the moment he woke; to harden his feet, by going barefoot in snow, for endless walking. His people had been employed as scouts by George Armstrong Custer before the battle of the Little Bighorn in 1876, when they had joined the white men against their old Plains enemies, the Lakota Sioux and the Cheyenne. As a very small child, hanging round the fire and the mysterious sweat lodges, he had heard the stories of four of these old-timers—including his maternal step-grandfather, White Man Runs Him—and relived the massacre of the blundering blue-uniformed soldiers through their ancient eyes.

Now, however, the year was 1945. He was no longer on the immense western Plains, but somewhere behind the Siegfried Line; and through his fieldglasses he could see that the men on the horses were German SS officers.

His childhood training had included facing his worst fears. “High Bird” was his Crow name, the imperturbable floating eagle. He had been made to jump into freezing rivers, fight with a Sioux boy, go to the white hospital full of doctors and ghosts, and to the public school where a white girl had stuck pins in him. Not many months back, he had been ordered to lead a squad through enemy machinegun fire to carry out some dynamite: to face death, in other words. His commanding officer had naturally assumed he would be the ideal man to do it.

Yet, along with his native skills, he was highly educated. He had been the first in his tribe to go to college and get a masters degree, and was more than halfway through a doctoral thesis when he was called up. His title was “The Effects of European Culture Contact upon the Economic, Social and Religious Life of the Crow Indians”. He found that influence good, in many ways. As a result of it he could read, write and get well-paid jobs, and he did not mind putting on a suit and tie, just for part of the day, to do them. All his life he was to be a bridge between the two worlds, lecturing on the need to combine the best of old ways and new, and encouraging amity and peace to reign, in particular, round the battlefield at Little Bighorn.

His call-up in 1943 raised typically mixed feelings. He wanted to prove himself in Europe, but in a Crow way. For them, warfare was seldom about killing. Rather it was an endless series of raids and horse-stealing in which young men showed how cunning, noble and resourceful they were, decorating their coup sticks with beads and feathers to prove it. It was, he thought, the finest sport in the world. He went on raids along the Siegfried Line with red war-paint under his uniform and a yellow-daubed eagle feather, symbol of his spirit-helper, tucked inside his helmet. In one village he collided with a German soldier. Rather than simply shooting him, he threw away his rifle and wrestled him into submission, as he had the Sioux boy long ago.

Memories preserved

Now, with the horses, his ancestral instincts definitely got the upper hand. He tracked them to where they were stabled and, at first light, crept past the guards to slip an Indian bridle on the best of them, a thoroughbred with a white blaze on its face. Vaulting on, he stampeded the rest out of the barn and over the hills, shouting a victory song in Crow as he rode. “High Bird! High Bird! You fought the Germans! You great warrior!” Only back in Montana, swapping war stories with the elders, did he realise that he had unconsciously performed—by grabbing the explosives, manhandling the enemy soldier, seizing his rifle and stealing the horses—the four deeds that established him as a war-chief of his people, as his paternal grandfather Medicine Crow had been before him in the buffalo days.

Some might think he had nothing to fight about in the decades that followed. Not so. Struggles multiplied against drugs, alcohol, joblessness and lack of funding on the Crow lands, which covered 3,600 square miles of plain and mountain. When, as war chief, he welcomed Barack Obama in 2008, he urged the presidential candidate to recognise native Americans as first-class citizens, not people “at the bottom of the ladder”. Carefully, in dozens of boxes stacked in his house and garage, he preserved handwritten stories of the old-timers and photographs, captioned in pencil, of their worn, proud, haunted faces. Honours poured down on him, as keeper of the memories of his tribe. At each award ceremony, including the one for his Medal of Freedom in the White House in 2009, he swung his coup stick and chanted a vigorous Crow war song, the only man truly qualified to sing one—and the last.





Economic and financial indicators




Interactive indicators

Output, prices and jobs

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

The Economist commodity-price index

Taxing wages

Markets





Interactive indicators

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition





Output, prices and jobs

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates

Markets

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition





The Economist commodity-price index

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition





Taxing wages

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition



The “tax wedge” is the difference between workers’ take-home pay and the costs of employing them, including income taxes and social-security contributions. At 55.3%, Belgium has the highest tax wedge in the OECD club of rich countries; Chile has the lowest, at 7%. The OECD average stood at 35.9% in 2015, unchanged from the previous year. Although average labour costs are similar in Belgium and Switzerland, Swiss employees take home more pay because the tax wedge there is only 22.2%. Employees in Norway and Australia end up with similar amounts of take-home pay. French employers pay 27.5% of labour costs in social-security contributions, more than any other OECD country.





Markets

Apr 16th 2016 | From the print edition





Table of Contents

The Economist

The world this week

Politics this week





Business this week





KAL's cartoon





Leaders

Dealing with autism: Beautiful minds, wasted





Business in Africa: Making Africa work





Tax transparency: Two rights, wrong policy





The French left: Liberty, equality, seniority





Solar energy: The new sunbathers





Letters

Business in America, regulation, US election, South China sea, the EU, Shakespeare, the semicolon: Letters to the editor





Briefing

The rise of autism: Spectrum shift





United States

Southern Republicans: Going rogue





Activist mayors: Ted versus the machine





Encryption and the law: Scrambled regs





The campaigns: Heard on the trail





New York’s Republican primary: Bronx cheer





Medicare: Fat loss needed





Puerto Rico: News from the colonies





Lexington: Bad vibrations





The Americas

Argentina: Old whines





The FARC’s finances: Unfunny money





Ecuador’s universities: Academic arguments





Bello: How to win an election





Asia

Warming relations between India and America: A suitable boy?





Religion and politics in Pakistan: Bad moon rising





Japan’s gossipy weeklies: Pulp non-fiction





Thailand’s deadly roads: Look both ways





South-East Asian economies: Okay, for now





Banyan: Trawling for trouble





China

Industrial clusters: Bleak times in bra town





Intimate apparel: The little red look





Porters in Chongqing: Bang bang, I hit the ground





Middle East and Africa

Islamic State in Iraq: The last battle





Iraq’s politics: Abadi agonistes





Running in Cairo: Miles by the Nile





Narcotics in Africa: An emerging drug market





Southern Africa’s drought: Too little, too late





China and Africa: A despot’s guide to foreign aid





Europe

Ukraine’s struggle against corruption: Clean-up crew





Abortion in Poland: No exceptions





Germans ridicule Turkey’s president: There once was a prickly sultan





Italy’s migrant route: Opening back up





The Balkan arms trade: Ask not from whom the AK-47s flow





Charlemagne: All quiet on the Aegean front





Britain

David Cameron’s woes: Events, events





Tax transparency: When less is more





Teacher workload: All work and low pay





Railways: Re-coupling





Hospital waiting times: An unhealthy situation





Supermarkets: Dancing in the aisles





Brexit brief: A matter of business





Bagehot: Jeremy Corbyn’s trench warfare





International

The trade in wild-animal parts (1): Last chance to see?





The trade in wild-animal parts (2): Prescription for extinction





The trade in wild-animal parts (2): Internship





Special report: Business in Africa

Business in Africa: 1.2 billion opportunities





The middle class: A matter of definition





Manufacturing: Not making it





Exporting flowers: Coming up roses





Trade: Obstacle course





Diasporas: Settled strangers





Financial technology: On the move





E-commerce: Virtual headaches





Prospects: Fortune favours the brave





Business

Solar energy: Follow the sun





Peabody Energy: The pits





Digital media: Mail’s got you





The music industry: Scales dropped





The Yukos affair: Baiting the bear





Etsy’s growing pains: Knitty gritty





India’s defence industry: Opportunity strikes





Schumpeter: Keeping it under your hat





Finance and economics

Russia’s central-bank governor: Putin’s right-hand woman





After the Panama papers: Who next?





Unlocking Mossack Fonseca: The key’s in Sin City





Italian banks: A heavy load





Rehabilitating Argentina: The green light





The world economy: System says slow





Agriculture and demography: The toll of tariffs





Free exchange: Terms of enlargement





Science and technology

High-definition maps: The autonomous car’s reality check





Space travel: Starchip enterprise





Bird strikes on aircraft: Sonic scarecrow





Surviving inherited diseases: Genetic superheroes





Books and arts

Single women: Why put a ring on it?





Artistic judgment: Everyone’s a critic





The Holy Roman Empire: Neither holy nor a failure





Seamus Heaney’s “Aeneid”: Music from the underworld





Chinese contemporary art: Fountainheads





Obituary

Obituary: Joseph Medicine Crow: War songs of the Plains





Economic and financial indicators

Interactive indicators





Output, prices and jobs





Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates





The Economist commodity-price index





Taxing wages





Markets





